---
title: Beyond Enlightenment 01
series: Beyond Enlightenment
talk_number: 1
url: https://oshoworld.com/beyond-enlightenment-01
language: English
duration: 01:58:32
author: THE WORLD TOUR
scraped_at: 2026-01-03T09:09:43.148864+00:00
---
Question 1
BELOVED OSHO,
WHAT IS BEYOND ENLIGHTENMENT?
Maneesha, beyond enlightenment is only beyondness. Enlightenment is the last host. Beyond it, all boundaries disappear, all experiences disappear. Experience comes to its utmost in enlightenment; it is the very peak of all that is beautiful, of all that is immortal, of all that is blissful -- but it is an experience. Beyond enlightenment there is no experience at all, because the experiencer has disappeared. Enlightenment is not only the peak of experience, it is also the finest definition of your being. Beyond it, there is only nothingness; you will not come again to a point which has to be transcended.
Experience, the experiencer, enlightenment -- all have been left behind. You are part of the tremendous nothingness that is infinite. This is the nothingness out of which the whole existence comes, the womb; and this is the nothingness in which all the existence disappears.
Science has something parallel; there is bound to be something parallel. The spiritual experience is of the interior world, and science is the exploration of the exterior. But both are wings of the same existence -- the inwardness and the outwardness -- they always have similar points.
Scientists have come to a strange conclusion in this century, that a few stars suddenly disappear... and stars are not small things; they are not so small as they look to you. They look small because they are so far away, millions of light years away, but they are huge.
Our sun is a star, but of a mediocre size, medium size. In comparison to the earth it is vast, but in comparison to other stars it is a small, medium-sized star. There are stars which are a thousand times bigger than the sun.
And in this century, for the first time we had the instruments of observation and we were very much puzzled: suddenly a star disappears, not even leaving a trace behind of where it has gone. Such a huge phenomenon, and not even footprints -- in what direction has it gone? It has just moved simply into nothingness. This was happening continually.
It took almost twenty years to figure out this new phenomenon: that in existence there are black holes. You cannot see them, but they have tremendous gravitation. Even the biggest star, if it comes within their radius of magnetism, will be pulled in. And once it is pulled into a black hole, it disappears. It is the ultimate death. We can only see the effect; we cannot see the black hole, we only see that one star is disappearing.
After the black hole was almost an established theory, scientists started thinking that there must be something like a white hole -- there has to be. If it is possible that in a certain gravitation, magnetic force, a big star simply disappears out of existence.... We have been aware that every day stars are born. From where are they coming? -- nobody has asked it before.
In fact, birth we always take for granted; nobody asks from where the babies are coming.
Death we never accept, because we are so much afraid of it.
There is not a single philosophy in the whole history of man which thinks about where the babies come from, but there are philosophies and philosophies thinking about what is dead, where people go on disappearing to, what happens after death.
In my whole life I have come across millions of people, and not a single person has asked what happens before birth -- and thousands have asked what happens after death. I have always been thinking, why is birth taken without any question? Why is death not taken in the same way?
We were aware for centuries, almost three centuries, that stars are being born every day -- big stars, huge stars -- and nobody raised the question, "From where are these stars coming?" But when we came to know about the black holes and we saw the stars disappearing, then the second question became almost an absolute necessity. If black holes can take stars into nothingness, then there must be something like white holes where things... stars come out of nothingness.
I am reminded.... Mulla Nasruddin had applied for a post on a ship. He was interviewed. The captain and the high officials of the ship were sitting in a room. Mulla entered. The captain asked, "If the seas are in a turmoil, winds are strong, waves are huge and mountainous, what are you going to do to save the ship? It is tossed from here to there...."
Mulla Nasruddin said, "It is not much of a problem: I will just drop a huge anchor to keep the ship stable against the winds, against the waves. It is not much of a problem."
The captain again said, "Suppose another mountainous wave comes and the ship is going to be drowned; what are you going to do?"
He said, "Nothing -- another huge anchor."
The captain looked at him and asked a third time, "Suppose it is a great typhoon and it is impossible to save the ship. What are you going to do?"
He said, "Nothing, the same -- a huge anchor."
The captain said, "From where are you getting these huge anchors?"
He said, "From the same place. From where are you getting these great, mountainous waves, strong winds? -- from the same place. You go on getting them, I will go on getting bigger and bigger anchors."
If there are holes in existence where things simply disappear into non-existence, then there must be holes from where things appear from nothingness -- and just a little imagination is needed. Scientists have not worked on it yet.
My suggestion is that a black hole is like a door: from one side it is a black door, a black hole -- things go into it and disappear into nothingness. And from the other side of the tunnel -- it is the same door, just from the other side -- it is a white hole; things are born again, renewed. It is the same womb.
Beyond enlightenment you enter into nothingness.
Experience disappears, experiencer disappears.
Just pure nothingness remains, utter silence.
Perhaps this is the destiny of every human being, sooner or later to be achieved.
We don't know yet whether there is a white hole or not -- there must be.
Just as you enter beyond enlightenment into nothingness, there must be a possibility of coming out of nothingness back into form, back into existence -- renewed, refreshed, luminous -- on a totally different plane. Because nothing is destroyed, things can only go into a dormant state; things can go only into deep sleep. Then in the morning they wake up again. This is how the existence goes on.
In the West, this idea has never happened in the two thousand years' history of philosophy. They only think of this creation: "Who created this?" and they get into troubles because whatever the answer is, it is going to create more questions.
In the East we have a conception of circles of existence and non-existence, just like day and night. Creation is followed by de-creation, everything goes into nothingness, just as day is followed by night and everything goes into darkness. And the period is going to be the same: as long as the creation is, so is the resting period going to be; and again there will be a creation of a higher order.
And this will go on from eternity to eternity -- creation, de-creation, creation, again de-creation -- but each time the morning is more beautiful. Each dawn is more colorful, more alive; the birds are singing better, the flowers are bigger, with more fragrance.
And the East has a tremendous courage of accepting the idea that this will go on forever and forever. There has never been any beginning, and there will be no end.
After enlightenment, you have to disappear. The world is left behind, the body is left behind, the mind is left behind; just your consciousness, as individuality, is still there.
To go beyond enlightenment is to go beyond individuality and to become universal. This way, each individual will go on moving into nothingness. And one day, the whole existence moves into nothingness and a great peace, a great night, a deep, dark womb, a great awaiting for the dawn.... And it has been happening always, and each time you are always born on a higher level of consciousness.
Enlightenment is the goal of human beings. But those who are enlightened cannot remain static; they will have to move, they will have to change. And now they have only one thing to lose -- themselves.
They have enjoyed everything. They have enjoyed the purity of individuality; now they have to enjoy the disappearing of individuality. They have seen the beauty of individuality; now they have to see the disappearance and its beauty, and the silence that follows, that abysmal serenity that follows.

Question 2
BELOVED OSHO,
THE OTHER NIGHT WHEN YOU TALKED ABOUT THE EGO AND HOW, WITH AWARENESS, ONE CAN SEE THAT IT DOES NOT EXIST, I REALIZED THAT I NEVER PUT MUCH EMPHASIS ON AWARENESS. FOR ME, BEING WITH YOU ALWAYS MEANT LOVING YOU AS MUCH AS I CAN, LONGING FOR YOU AND TRYING TO BE AS CLOSE TO YOU AS POSSIBLE.
BELOVED OSHO, CAN YOU PLEASE SHOW THE WAY FOR A FEMALE GERMAN LOVER TO BECOME MORE AWARE?
Latifa, love is enough unto itself.
If your love is not the ordinary, biological instinctive love, if it is not part of your ego, if it is not a power trip to dominate someone; if your love is just a pure joy, rejoicing in the being of the other for no reason at all, a sheer joy, awareness will follow this pure love just like a shadow. You need not worry about awareness.
There are only two ways: either you become aware, then love follows as a shadow; or you become so loving that awareness comes on its own accord. They are two sides of the same coin. You need not bother about the other side; just keep one side, the other side cannot escape. The other side is bound to come.
And the path of love is easier, rosier, innocent, simple.
The path of awareness is a little arduous.
Those who cannot love, for them I suggest the path of awareness. There are people who cannot love -- their hearts have become stones. Their upbringing, their culture, their society has killed the very capacity to love -- because this whole world is not run by love, it is run by cunningness. To succeed in this world you don't need love, you need a hard heart and a sharp mind. In fact, you don't need the heart at all.
I have heard about one great politician who was in the hospital and who had some great complications with his heart. So they put him on a plastic heart and took out his real heart, because it was going to take hours to clean it. And certainly a politician's heart -- even if you can clean it in hours, it is too soon. The surgeons were working in the other room -- it was a disgusting job -- and the politician was lying down.
A man came into the room and shook the politician; he opened his eyes and the man said, "What are you doing here? You have been chosen the prime minister of the country."
He jumped out of the bed. The doctors looked from the other room, "What is happening?" The politician was going out. They said, "Wait! Your heart, we are cleaning it."
The politician said, "Now, at least for five years I won't need it. You can clean it as much as you want. Take your time. What does a prime minister need a heart for? But keep it safe in case something goes wrong; then I will come back. But if things go well, I may perhaps never need it."
In this world the heart is not needed. The people of the heart are crushed, exploited, oppressed. This world is run by the cunning, by the clever, by the heartless and the cruel. So the whole society is managed in such a way that every child starts losing his heart, and his energy starts moving directly towards the head. The heart is ignored.
I have heard an ancient parable from Tibet, that in the beginning of time the heart used to be exactly in the middle part of the body. But because of continuously being pushed aside, out of the way, now it is no more in the middle of the body. The poor fellow waits by the side of the road: "If some day you need, I am here" -- but it gets no nourishment, no encouragement. It gets all kinds of condemnation.
If you do something and you say, "I did it because I felt like doing it," everybody is going to laugh: "Felt? Have you lost your head? Give your reason, logic. Feeling is no logic."
Even if you fall in love, you have to find reasons why you have fallen in love -- because the woman's nose is very beautiful, her eyes have such depth, her body is so proportionate. These are not the reasons. You have never calculated all these reasons on your calculator and then found that this woman seems to be worthy of falling in love with: "Fall in love with this woman -- exactly the right length of nose, the right kind of hair, the right color, the right proportion of the body. What more do you want?"
But this is not the way that anybody ever falls in love. You fall in love. Then just to satisfy the idiots around you that you are not a fool, you have calculated everything and only then you have taken the step. It is a reasonable, rational, logical step.
Nobody hears the heart.
And the mind is so chattering, so continuously chattering -- yakkety-yak, yakkety-yak -- that even if the heart sometimes says something, it never reaches to you. It cannot reach. The bazaar in your head is buzzing so much that it is impossible, absolutely impossible for the heart.
Slowly slowly, the heart stops saying anything. Not heard again and again, ignored again and again, it falls silent.
The head runs the show in the society; otherwise, we would have lived in a totally different world -- more loving, less hate, less war, no possibility of nuclear weapons. The heart will never give support for any destructive methods to be evolved. The heart will never be in the service of death. It is life -- it throbs for life, it beats for life.
Because of the whole conditioning of the society, the method of awareness has to be chosen, because awareness appears to be very logical, rational.
But if you can love, then there is no need to go on a long, arduous route unnecessarily.
Love is the most shortcut way, the most natural -- so easy that it is possible even for a small child. It needs no training. You are born with the quality of it, if it is not corrupted by others.
But love should be pure. It should not be impure.
You will be surprised to know that the English word `love' comes from a very ugly root in Sanskrit. It comes from lobh. Lobh means greed.
And as far as ordinary love is concerned, it is a kind of greed.
That's why there are people who love money, there are people who love houses, there are people who love this, who love that. Even if they love a woman or a man, it is simply their greed; they want to possess everything beautiful.
It is a power trip. Hence, you will find lovers continuously fighting, fighting about such trivia that they both feel ashamed, "About what things we go on fighting!" In their silent moments when they are alone, they feel, "Do I become possessed by some evil spirit? -- such trivia, so meaningless." But it is not a question of trivia; it is a question of who has power, who is more dominant, whose voice is heard.
Love cannot exist in such circumstances.
I have heard a story.... In the life of one of the great emperors of India, Akbar, there is a small story. He was very much interested in all kinds of talented people, and from all over India he had collected nine people, the most talented geniuses, who were known as the "nine jewels of Akbar's court."
One day, just gossiping with his vice-councillors, he said, "Last night I was discussing with my wife. She is very insistent that every husband is henpecked. I tried hard, but she says, `I know many families, but I have never found any husband who is not henpecked.' What do you think?" he asked the councillors.
One of the councillors, Birbal said, "Perhaps she is right, because you could not prove it. You yourself are a henpecked husband; otherwise, you could have given her a good beating, then and there proving that, `Look, here is a husband!'"
He said, "That I cannot do, because I have to live with her. It is easy to advise somebody else to beat his wife. Can you beat your wife?"
Birbal said, "No, I cannot. I simply accept that I am a henpecked husband, and your wife is right."
But Akbar said, "It has to be found.... In the capital there must be at least one husband who is not henpecked. There is no rule in the world which has no exception, and this is not a rule at all."
So he said to Birbal, "You take my two beautiful Arabian horses" -- one was black, one was white -- "and go around the capital. And if you can find a man who is not henpecked, you can give him the choice: whichever horse he wants is a present from me." They were valuable. In those days horses were very valuable, and those were the most beautiful horses.
Birbal said, "It is useless, but if you say, I will go."
He went, and everybody was found to be henpecked. It was very ordinary: He would just call the person and call his wife, and ask, "Are you henpecked or not?"
The man would look at the wife and say, "You should have asked when I was alone. This is not right. You will create unnecessary trouble. Just for a horse I am not going to destroy my life. You take your horses, I don't want any."
But one man was sitting in front of his house and two persons were massaging him. He was a wrestler, a champion wrestler, a very strong man. Birbal thought, "Perhaps this man... he can kill anybody without any weapons. If he can hold your neck, you are finished!" Birbal said, "Can I ask you a question?"
He said, "Question? What question?"
Birbal said, "Are you henpecked?"
That man said, "First, let us greet each other, a handshake." And he crushed Birbal's hand and said, "Unless you start crying and tears start coming from your eyes, I will not leave your hand. Your hand is finished. You dared to ask me such a question?"
And Birbal was dying -- he was almost a man of steel -- and tears started coming, and he said, "Just leave me. You are not henpecked. I have just come to a wrong place. But where is your wife?"
He said, "Look, she is there, cooking my breakfast." A very small woman was cooking his breakfast.
The woman was so small and the man was so big that Birbal said, "There is a possibility that perhaps this man is not henpecked. He will kill this woman."
So he said, "Now there is no need to go further into investigation. You can choose either horse from these two, black and white, a reward from the king for the one who is not henpecked.
And at that time that small woman said, "Don't choose the black! Otherwise I will make your life a hell!"
The man said, "No, no, I will choose the white. You just keep quiet."
Birbal said, "You don't get either, neither white nor black. It is all finished, you lost the game. You are a henpecked husband."
There is a continuous fight for domination. Love cannot blossom in such an atmosphere.
The man is fighting in the world for all kinds of ambitions. The woman is fighting the man because she is afraid: he is out of the house the whole day -- "Who knows? He may be having affairs with other women." She is jealous, suspicious; she wants to be sure that this man remains controlled. So in the house he is fighting with the wife, in the outside he is fighting with the world. Where do you think the flower of love can blossom?
Latifa, the flower of love can blossom only when there is no ego, when there is no effort to dominate, when one is humble, when one is trying not to be somebody but is ready to be nobody.
Naturally, in the ordinary world it cannot happen, but with a master it is a possibility. The love for the master is not biological. Biology has nothing to do with masters and disciples. The love for the master has nothing to do with domination.
The flower can blossom because love is pure of ego.
You are simply rejoicing in the presence, in the fulfillment of the master, in the contentment of the master. You are rejoicing as if it is your contentment, it is your fulfillment. In the radiation of the master you are feeling it is your radiation. You are part of the master; you have become so harmonious with him that his heart and your heart are no more two.
Awareness will come on its own accord, and this is the most beautiful way, the most innocent way -- a path full of flowers, a path that passes through beautiful lakes, rivers, groves, greenery.
The path of awareness is the path that passes through a desert. It is only for those who cannot manage to get back into their hearts.
If you can easily be heartful, forget all about awareness; it will come on its own accord. Each step of love will bring its own awareness. This love will not be falling in love; I call it rising in love.

Question 3
BELOVED OSHO,
THERE ARE ALWAYS TWO PARTS IN ME RELATED TO YOU. ONE PART OF ME HAS THE DRIVE TO WORK, RUN AROUND, ORGANIZE, JUMP UP AND DOWN, FIGHT, TALK TO PRESS AND POLITICIANS, JUST SHOUT FROM THE ROOFTOPS. THE OTHER PART, WHICH HAS BECOME SO MUCH STRONGER OVER THE LAST YEARS, JUST WANTS TO SIT AT YOUR SIDE AND ABSORB EVERYTHING -- YOU, YOUR SILENCE AND YOUR WORDS.
WAS IT THAT I HAD TO BE SO ACTIVE JUST TO BE ABLE TO SIT SILENTLY NOW?
OSHO, PLEASE CAN YOU SAY SOMETHING ABOUT YOUR OUTER AND YOUR INNER WORK?
There is no split in you.
If a part fights in the outer world for my message to be spread to all nooks and corners, and the other part simply wants to sit close to me, drinking my silence, my presence, my peace, rejoicing in my blissfulness, being ecstatic just without doing anything....
Ordinarily it may seem that these two parts are against each other. They are not. The more you shout from the housetops, the more you will be able to sit silently, close to me; and the more you can sit silently, close to me, the more you will have something to share with the world, something to fight for.
Man is both the inner and the outer, and it has been a fallacy, a very ancient fallacy, to condemn one in favor of the other.
In the East, people renounce the outer in favor of the inner. They escape from the world into the caves in the Himalayas so that they can devote their whole life and their whole time and their whole energy to the inner journey -- but they don't understand the dialectics of life.
In the West, just the opposite has been done. They have renounced the inner so that they can put their whole energy into the outer world and the conquest of the outer world.
Both have been wrong, and both have been right.
Both have been wrong because both remained halves; one part grew bigger and bigger, and the other part remained retarded. You can see it.
In the East there is so much poverty, so much disease, so much sickness, so much death. Still, there is a certain contentment. With all this, there seems to be no revolutionary approach that "We should change the whole world. We cannot go on living in this poverty, and we have lived in this poverty for centuries, in slavery for centuries. And we have accepted everything -- poverty, slavery, disease, death -- without any resistance, because these are outer things. Our whole effort has been inner."
In the West they have destroyed poverty, they have destroyed much disease, they have made man's life longer. They have made man's body more beautiful, they have made man's existence more comfortable, but the man himself -- for whom all these comforts, all these conquests of science and technology have been done -- is missing. They have completely forgotten for whom it was done. The inside is hollow. Everything is there, all around, and in the middle there is a retarded consciousness, almost non-existential.
So both have succeeded in what they were doing, and both have failed -- because they have chosen only half of man's life.
My attitude is that of accepting man in his totality, in his wholeness.
And it has to be understood that once you accept the totality of man, you have to understand the law of dialectics.
For example, the whole day you work hard -- in the fields, in the garden -- you perspire. In the night you will have a beautiful sleep. Don't think that because the whole day you have been working so hard, how can you sleep in the night? -- it is so against your whole day's work. It is not against. The whole day's hard work has prepared you to relax; the night will be deep relaxation.
Beggars sleep the best. Emperors cannot sleep because the emperor has forgotten the dialectics of life. You need two legs to walk, you need two hands, you need two hemispheres in your brain.
It has now become an accepted psychological truth that you can do hard mathematical work -- because it is done by one part of the mind -- and then you can do the same hard work on your musical instrument, and because it is done by another part of the mind, it is not continuous labor. In fact, when you are working hard on mathematics, the musical part of your mind is resting; and when you are working hard on the musical part, your mathematical mind is resting.
In the universities, in the colleges all over the world, we change the class period every forty minutes because it has been found that after each forty minutes, the part that you have been working with gets tired. Just change the subject; that part goes into rest.
Sitting with me, fill your cup with as much juice as possible. Feel silence to its uttermost depth, so that you can shout from the housetops.
And there is no contradiction: your shouting from the housetops is simply part of a dialectical process. Your silence and your shouting are just like two hands, your two legs, your day and night, your work and rest period. Don't divide them as antagonistic to each other; that's how the whole world has suffered.
The East has created great geniuses, but we are still living in the bullock cart age because our geniuses simply meditated. Their meditation never came into action. If they had meditated for a few hours and used their silence and peace and meditativeness for scientific research, this country would have been the richest in the world -- outer and inner, both.
The same is true about the West: they created great geniuses, but they were all involved with things, objects. They forgot themselves completely. Once in a while a genius remembered, but it was too late.
Albert Einstein, at the time of death, said his last words -- and remember, the last words are the most important a person has ever spoken in his life, because they are a conclusion, the essential experience. His last words were, "If there is another life, I would like to be a plumber. I don't want to be a physicist. I want to be something very simple -- a plumber."
A tired brain, a burned brain... and what was his achievement? -- Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
This man was capable of becoming a Gautam Buddha. If he had looked inwards, he had such an insight that perhaps he would have gone deeper than any Gautam Buddha, because he looked towards the stars and went further than any astronomer has ever done. It is the same power; it is only a question of direction.
But why get fixed? Why not keep yourself available to both dimensions? What is the need of getting fixed? -- "I can only see outwardly, I cannot see inwardly, or vice-versa." One should only learn how to see deeply, and then use that insight in both dimensions. Then he can give better science and better technology to the world and he can give better human beings, a better humanity, at the same time.
And remember, only in a better human being's hands is a better technology right; otherwise, it is dangerous.
The East is dying with poverty. The West is dying with power. Strange.... They have created so much power that they can only kill. They don't know anything about life because they have never looked in.
The East knows everything about life, but without food you cannot meditate. When you are hungry and you close your eyes, you can see only chappattis just floating all around.
It has happened in the life of a poet, Heinrich Heine. He was lost in a jungle for three days, hungry, tired. Out of fear, he could not sleep; wild animals were staying in the tops of the trees in the night. And for three days continuously he did not come across a single human being to ask whether he was moving right or wrong, where he was going or if he was moving in a roundabout. Three days continuously... and then came the full moon night.
Hungry, tired, hanging onto a tree, he looked at the full moon. He was a great poet, and he was surprised, he could not believe it. He himself had written about the moon, he had read about the moon. So much is written about the moon -- so much poetry, so much painting, so much art is around the moon. But Heinrich Heine had a revelation: before, he used to see his beloved's face in the moon; today he saw only a bread floating in the sky. He tried hard, but the beloved's face did not appear.
It is perfectly good to be dialectical. And always remember to try the opposites as complementaries. Use all the opposites as complementaries and your life will be fuller, your life will be whole.
To me, this is the only holy life: a whole life is the only holy life.

Question 4
BELOVED OSHO,
TODAY I OBSERVED A TIGHTROPE WALKER AND HOW HE TRAINED A YOUNG GIRL PARTNER TO WALK ON THE ROPE. HE WAS SOMETIMES HITTING HER, SOMETIMES PERSUADING HER, BUT IT SEEMED TO ME THAT SHE WAS MAINLY ENCOURAGED TO TRY IT AGAIN AND AGAIN BECAUSE SHE FELT HIS TRUST IN HER POTENTIAL TO BE ABLE TO WALK THE ROPE ALONE.
CAN YOU PLEASE SAY SOMETHING ABOUT THE MASTER'S TRUST IN THE DISCIPLE?
The very fact that the master accepts a disciple shows his trust in the potential of the disciple. Otherwise, he would not have been accepted.
Every man has the potential, but the right time, the right place, the right experience make all the difference. Otherwise, every human being is capable of being enlightened, will be enlightened, but when, at what time -- whether in this life or in another life -- depends on many things: how much your experience is, your experience of being frustrated in the world, how much you are in misery.
Are you still hoping that tomorrow things will be better, or have you lost all hope? Is your despair ultimate, or only momentary? Have you come to the master because you have fought with your wife today, but after fifteen minutes things will be different -- anger will be gone?
I used to live on a university campus. The first day, I entered into my bungalow. I was alone, and the attached bungalow was occupied by a Bengali professor. And the walls were so thin that even if you plugged your ears, still you would be able to hear what was going on on the other side of the wall.
Because the husband and wife were fighting so badly, I thought that there was going to be some blood. I could not sleep. It was one o'clock in the night and they were fighting and fighting and fighting. And I could not understand what they were saying either, but things must have been serious because finally the professor said, "I am going to commit suicide" -- that he said in English.
I said, "This is something good; at least I can understand this much." So I came out of my house to prevent him -- "Just wait. In the middle of the night, where will you go to commit suicide? In the morning it will be better" -- but by the time I was out he was gone, fast.
I asked his wife -- who had not come out even to say goodbye! I said, "What am I supposed to do? Should I go to the police station? Somebody has to be informed by phone? What has to be done?"
She said, "Nothing has to be done. Do you see his umbrella is here? Without his umbrella he cannot go anywhere. He will be coming soon -- the moment he remembers the umbrella. In anger, he has forgotten the umbrella. A Bengali without an umbrella?"
I said, "But suicide is such a serious matter, and an umbrella is not needed at all."
She said, "You just wait. You sit here. I will make coffee for you because you have been... I knew that you must be hearing all this."
And within fifteen minutes he was back.
And I said, "What happened?"
He said, "What happened? I forgot my umbrella! And now it must be at least two o'clock in the morning."
I said, "That's the right thing to do. In the morning, take your umbrella and go out, find a right place." But who goes in the morning?
In the morning I reminded him, "You are still here? The sun has risen. You should go now and search for the right place."
He said, "I was thinking to go, but when I opened the umbrella it was not repaired because the rains have not come."
I said, "I see you with that umbrella every day, going to the university."
He said, "That is just habitual. Because there are no rains, nothing, so there is no question of opening it; one just carries it. Now I tried and opened it -- it is not repaired. And I have been telling my wife that my umbrella should be kept repaired in case some emergency arises. Now I wanted to commit suicide and the umbrella is not ready."
I thought, "This is really great of you, and every person who commits suicide should learn something from you."
One day, it must have been afternoon, three o'clock or something, I again heard that he is going to commit suicide. But this time I was not so much excited, because I thought that this is the usual business. Still, I came out to say goodbye.
He looked at me with a very strange face. He said, "What do you mean by goodbye?"
I said, "You are going to commit suicide, and I don't think that we will be meeting again so I am saying goodbye. But what are you carrying?" He was carrying a tiffin.
I said, "Where are you taking the tiffin?"
He said, "You know these Indian railway trains -- sometimes they are ten hours late, twelve hours late. And I cannot tolerate hunger at all, so I will lie down by the line and wait for the train. If it comes, good; otherwise, I am taking my supper with me."
I said, "You are a clever and intelligent person -- anybody looking at you would think you are going on some picnic."
And when he was gone, his wife came. She said, "Has he gone?"
I said, "He has gone."
She said, "He will be coming soon. This idiot," she said, "whenever he wants to go for a picnic.... But he is such a miser that he will not take even me with him, so he says that he is going to commit suicide. He must be eating just near the railway station; you can go and see right now."
The railway station was not very far away, so I went and I saw him. He was enjoying all Bengali sweets and things.
I said, "Chatterji, the train is standing on the platform. Leave your tiffin, run! Just lie down ahead of the train!"
He said, "It is too late. First I have to finish everything that I brought, and today I have missed. And the train comes to this station only once in twenty-four hours" -- because it was not a big station, it was a small station, and the train used to stop only once for the university because the university was outside the city. So he said, "Today it is finished."
But I said, "You were first saying, `I am going to wait.' And this is not suppertime; it is only three o'clock."
He said, "When you have such sweets in your hand, you cannot wait. And I am just coming back home with you."
There are people who would like to become sannyasins, who would like to become disciples. It may be just an emotional, sentimental, temporal thing, and within two minutes it has come and it is gone. They had the potential, but it was not the right time.
Even if they take sannyas, even if they become disciples -- because no master is so unkind as to say no to somebody who wants to become a disciple -- they are going to betray. They are going to leave sooner or later because it was not something very deep, coming from their very heart. It was something very superficial, something so superficial that if they had waited for a few minutes more, they would have changed their minds. It was a mind thing, and mind is never stable, it is continuously changing.
You cannot stay with one thought in the mind even for a few seconds. Sometimes, try: just one thought, and you try to stay with it, and you will be surprised that in not more than thirty seconds you have forgotten about it and your mind has moved somewhere else. And then suddenly you remember that you were trying to stay with one thought, and you could remain only thirty seconds.
Gurdjieff used to give this experiment to everyone who had come to become a disciple. He would give him his own pocket watch and tell him, "Keep it in front of you, watch the second hand and choose any word -- your name. Keep just that name in your mind, and just tell me how long you can keep it" -- fifteen seconds, thirty seconds, at the most, forty seconds, not even one whole minute.
Mind is in a flux.
So those who want to become disciples because of some mind thing are not going to stay. There is no need to say no to them, they will be going themselves.
But the master knows perfectly well when somebody comes with an urge from the heart, with an urge that he can stake his whole life for but he will not turn back. Only these few people attain to the fulfillment.
Everybody has the potential, but everybody is not ripe at this moment -- perhaps at some other time, in some other life, with some other master.
But one day is going to come in everybody's life that becomes a turning point, a 180 degree turn, and then disciplehood is a beautiful growth.
Then the whole energy is moving in one direction, with one intention, with no diversions. Then the distance from the goal is less.
The more intense is your urge, the smaller is the distance. If your intention is total, then there is no distance at all.
Then you need not go to the goal, the goal comes to you.

============================================================

Question 1
BELOVED OSHO,
I HAVE QUESTIONS, BUT THEY ARE NEVER COMPLETE, AND I DON'T KNOW HOW TO ASK.
No question is ever complete, because the completion of a question will mean it has its answer in itself.
A question by its very nature is incomplete. It is a desire, a longing, an inquiry, because something needs to be completed.
It is part of human consciousness that it demands completion. Leave anything incomplete and it becomes an obsession; complete it and you are free of it. Completion brings freedom.
Hence, it is not only your questions that are incomplete. You are more alert that you have seen the incompleteness of each question.
Secondly, you don't know what to ask. Nobody knows. All of our questions are out of our ignorance, out of our unconscious, out of our dark soul. Nobody knows exactly what his question is, what is essential to be asked -- because the moment you know what your question is, you will immediately find the answer within yourself.
To be absolutely confident about the question means the answer is not very far. It is very close, because confidence comes from the answer, not from the question.
But still, man has to ask.
Although all questions are incomplete and you do not know what to ask, still man has to ask because man cannot remain silent. It is possible not to ask -- that does not mean you don't have questions, that simply means you are not bringing them out. Perhaps you are afraid to be exposed, because each question will indicate towards your ignorance.
There are millions of people who never ask for the simple reason that to be silent at least appears to be wise. To ask the question is to show your wounds, is to show all the dark spots in your being. It needs courage.
Secondly, there are questions which are not out of your ignorance but out of your borrowed knowledge -- which are the worst questions possible.
A question that comes out of ignorance is innocent, has purity. It is unpolluted, uncorrupted; it shows your courage, your trust.
But there are questions which come out of your borrowed knowledge. You have heard much, you have read much, you have been informed from the parents, teachers, priests, politicians, all kinds of demogogues, all kinds of pretenders to knowledge -- and you have been collecting their whole garbage.
Purna has sent me a beautiful present: a very artistic, beautiful wastepaper basket with a note -- "Osho, if you feel my questions are just garbage, throw them in this wastepaper basket. You need not answer them."
Questions coming out of knowledge are garbage.
You don't know anything about God, the universe; you don't know anything about the soul, reincarnation, future lives, past lives. All that you know is simply hearsay. People have been chattering around you and you are collecting all kinds of information that seems to be important to you. Why does it seem important? -- it seems important because it covers your ignorance. It helps you to feel as if you know. But remember, it is a very big `as if.' You do not know, it is only as if.
All holy scriptures, all books on philosophy, theology should be categorized into one category: as if. They are talking about every possible impossible thing they know nothing of, but they are articulate, imaginative intellectuals who can create systems out of nothing.
That's why no philosopher agrees with any other philosopher. And every philosopher thinks that he has found the whole system that explains everything in the world -- and all other philosophers laugh at him; they find thousands of loopholes in his system. But as far as they themselves are concerned, they commit the same mistake: they claim that their system is complete and now there is no question of further inquiry.
And the strangest thing is that these are the people who are very insightful in seeing the loopholes of others, but they cannot see the loopholes of their own system. Perhaps they don't want to see. They are there, everybody else can see them; it is impossible that they themselves are not seeing them. They are ignoring them, hoping that nobody sees them.
Every philosophy has failed.
Every religion has failed.
You are carrying the ruins of all the philosophies and all the religions in your mind, and out of those ruins, questions arise. Those questions are meaningless; you should not ask them. They really show your stupidity.
But questions arising out of your ignorance -- just like a child asking -- those questions are incomplete, not very great questions, but tremendously important.
One day a small child was walking with D.H. Lawrence in a garden, and was continuously asking questions of all kinds. And D.H. Lawrence was one of the most sincere men of this century, condemned by governments, by priests because of his sincerity, because he would say only the truth, because he was not ready to be diplomatic, a hypocrite, because he would not compromise. Even before this small child he showed such authentic sincerity, which even your great saints have not shown.
The child asked, "Why are the trees green?" -- a very simple question, but very profound. All the trees are green -- why? What is the matter with the trees? When there are so many colors, when the whole rainbow of colors is available -- some tree can be yellow, some tree can be red, some tree can be blue -- why have all the trees chosen to be green?
In D. H. Lawrence's place, any parent, any teacher, any priest, anybody -- x, y, z -- would have told some lie, that "God made them green because green is very soothing to the eyes." But this would have been deceptive, a lie, because D.H. Lawrence does not know anything about God, does not know why the trees are green.
In fact, no scientist who has been working with the trees knows, although he can show that it is because of a certain element, chlorophyl, that trees are green. But that is not the answer for the child. He will simply ask, "Why have they chosen chlorophyl -- all the trees?" It is not a satisfactory answer.
D.H. Lawrence closed his eyes, waited for a moment in silence... what to say to this child? He did not want to be a deceiving person to an innocent child -- although the question is ordinary, any answer would do. But the question has come from innocence; hence it is very profound.
And D. H. Lawrence opened his eyes, looked at the trees and said to the child, "The trees are green because they are green."
The child said, "Right. I was also thinking that."
But D.H. Lawrence remembered it in his memoirs: "To me it was a great experience -- the love and the trust the child showed towards me because of sheer sincerity. My answer was not an answer; according to logicians, it was a tautology. `The trees are green because they are green' -- is this an answer?"
In fact, D.H. Lawrence is accepting that: My child, I am as much ignorant as you are. Just because there is a difference of age does not mean that I know and you do not know. The difference of age is not the difference between ignorance and knowledge.
Trees being green is part of the mystery of the whole existence.
Things are what they are.
A woman is a woman, a man is a man. A rose is a rose; call it by any name, it still remains the rose.
That morning, in that small incident, something tremendously beautiful is hidden.
Ask questions -- not out of knowledge because all that knowledge is borrowed, unfounded, pure rubbish.
Ask out of your ignorance.
Remember, the ignorance is yours -- be proud of it.
The knowledge is not yours. How can you be proud of it?
And the question is not to cover the ignorance. The question is to bring some light, so that the ignorance, the darkness, disappears.
I cannot give you any better answer than D.H. Lawrence, but I can give you something else which Lawrence has no insight about.
I can give you a space, a silence in which you can realize the mystery on your own.
You ask the question, whatever the question is. Just remember: don't ask out of knowledge, ask out of your own authentic ignorance.
And my answers are not answers, in fact. My answers are killers -- they simply kill the question, they take away the question, they don't give you any answer to hold on to.
And that is the difference between a teacher and a master: the teacher gives you answers so that you can hold those answers and remain ignorant -- beautifully decorated on the surface, libraries full of answers, but underneath, below the surface, an abysmal ignorance.
The master simply kills your questions.
He does not give you an answer, he takes away the question.
If all your questions can be taken away... listen carefully to what I am saying:
If all your questions can be taken away, your ignorance is bound to disappear, and what remains is innocence.
And innocence is a light unto itself.
In that innocence you don't know any question, any answer, because the whole realm of questions and answers is left behind. It has become irrelevant, you have transcended it.
You are pure of questions and pure of answers.
This state is enlightenment. And if you are courageous enough, you can go even beyond it.
This will give you all the beautiful experiences described by the mystics down the ages: Your heart will dance with ecstasy, your whole being will become a beautiful sunrise... thousands of lotuses blossoming in you.
If you want, you can make your home here.
In the past, people have stopped here, because where can you find a better place? Gautam Buddha has called this place the "Lotus Paradise."
But if you are a born seeker....
I will suggest: have a little rest, enjoy all the beauties of enlightenment but don't make it a full-stop.
Go beyond, because life, its journey, is unending and much more is going to happen which is absolutely indescribable.
The experience of enlightenment is also beyond description, but it has been described by all who have experienced it. They all say it is beyond description and still they describe it -- that it is full of light, that it is full of joy, that it is the ultimate in blissfulness. If this is not description then what is description?
I am saying it for the first time: for thousands of years the people who have become enlightened have been saying that it cannot be described, and at the same time have been describing it, have been their whole lives singing it.
But beyond enlightenment you certainly enter into a world which is indescribable. Because in enlightenment you still are; otherwise who is feeling the blissfulness, who is seeing the light? Kabir says, "... as if thousands of suns have risen." Who is seeing it?
Enlightenment is the ultimate experience -- but still it is experience, and the experiencer is there.
Going beyond it, there is no experiencer.
You dissolve.
First you were trying to dissolve your problems; now you dissolve -- because existentially you are the problem. Your separation from existence is the only question which has to be solved.
You lose your boundaries, you are no more. Who is there to experience?
You need tremendous courage to drop the ego to achieve enlightenment.
You will need a million times more courage to drop yourself to attain the beyond -- and the beyond is the real.

Question 2
BELOVED OSHO,
I AM FAMILIAR WITH THE MASTER-DISCIPLE RELATIONSHIP AFTER YEARS OF BEING AROUND YOU.
COULD YOU PLEASE COMMENT ON THE DISCIPLE-DISCIPLE RELATIONSHIP?
There is no such thing.
Disciples in the past have created organizations. That was their relationship, that "we are Christians," that "we are Mohammedans," that "we belong to one religion, to one faith and because we belong to one faith, we are brothers and sisters. We will live for the faith and we will die for the faith."
All organizations have arisen out of the relationships between disciples.
In fact, two disciples are not connected with each other at all.
Each disciple is connected with the master in his individual capacity.
A master can be connected with millions of disciples, but the connection is personal, not organizational.
Disciples don't have any relationship. Yes, they have a certain friendliness, a certain lovingness.
I am avoiding the word `relationship' because that is binding. I am not calling it friendship even, but `friendliness' -- because they are all fellow travelers walking on the same path, in love with the same master, but they are related to each other through the master.
They are not related to each other directly.
That has been the most unfortunate thing in the past: that disciples became organized, related amongst themselves, and they were all ignorant.
And ignorant people can only create more nuisance in the world than anything else. All the religions have done exactly that.
My people are related to me individually. And because they are on the same path, certainly they become acquainted with each other. A friendliness arises, a loving atmosphere, but I don't want to call it any kind of relationship.
We have suffered too much because of disciples getting directly related to each other, creating religions, sects, cults, and then fighting. They cannot do anything else.
At least with me, remember it: you are not related to each other in any way at all.
Just a liquid friendliness, not a solid friendship, is enough -- and far more beautiful, and without any possibility of harming humanity in the future.

Question 3
BELOVED OSHO,
SINCE I HAVE BEEN HERE, I HAVE BEEN TORN APART BETWEEN WANTING TO ASK YOU A QUESTION -- WANTING TO EXPOSE MYSELF -- AND TRYING EVERYTHING TO AVOID THAT. IT FEELS AS IF I HAVE BEEN STUCK IN THIS POSITION FOR YEARS.
WHAT IS THIS FEAR, OSHO?
There is only one basic fear.
All other small fears are byproducts of the one main fear that every human being carries with himself.
The fear is of losing yourself. It may be in death, it may be in love, but the fear is the same: You are afraid of losing yourself.
And the strangest thing is that only those people are afraid of losing themselves who don't have themselves. Those who have themselves are not afraid.
So it is really a question of exposure.
You don't have anything to lose; you just believe that you have something to lose.
I was traveling with Mulla Nasruddin... and the ticket checker came. I showed him my ticket, and Mulla started searching for his ticket. He opened one of his suitcases, then another suitcase, went through all his pockets -- coat, pants, shirt -- but I saw that he was avoiding one pocket.
Watching him, even the ticket checker said, "Don't be worried. You are a well-known person. You can't travel without a ticket, it must be somewhere. You have so much luggage," he said, "I will be coming back in the second round. By that time you may have found it."
He went away, and Mulla was still perspiring and searching for the ticket.
I said, "Mulla, I can see only one thing -- that you are looking into everything but you are not looking into one pocket."
He said, "Just don't raise that question, because I am already in such trouble."
But I said, "What has that pocket to do with trouble?"
He said, "It has everything to do with it. That is the only place I am hoping that the ticket may be, and I don't want to lose that hope. First let me look in everything else. That is my last resort; I also know that I am avoiding it. The ticket checker was looking at that pocket, you are also looking at that pocket. It is not that I am not aware. Fully consciously I am avoiding it, because if it is not there then the ticket is nowhere."
The fear of coming close is the fear of exposure.
Who knows? -- as you come close to the master, in his presence, in his light you may find that you don't exist. And that will be almost a death... bigger than death. So people keep at a certain distance.
Watching the wild animals in the jungles, in the mountains, scientists have come to discover a certain idea: that they have a territorial imperative, that each animal has his own territory. If you don't enter his territory, he will not bother you, but if you enter his territory you are in danger, he can attack you. In fact, he feels the danger: you are in his territory, coming too close, and who knows if you are a friend or a foe?
And they have a very strange way of creating the demarcation line of their territory. You see the dogs pissing? -- they are creating their territory. Each dog has his own territory; he creates it not by visible walls and fences but by the smell. Other dogs immediately smell it: "This territory belongs to some dog -- be careful."
And the same is done even by lions; they will go pissing around a large territory. And their urine has a very strong smell; no animal is so insensitive that he will not sense it. And once he senses the smell, he will avoid that place -- that is a prohibited area.
The scientists studying the whole thing came to a conclusion: Why are these animals so much interested in keeping a certain space of their own and not allowing anybody else to enter? -- they found that it is fear. The other animal can be death. It is better to warn him, and before he attacks the best way to defend yourself is to attack. So if anybody enters your territory, you attack him before he attacks you; and whoever attacks first has more chances to be victorious.
In zoos, where man has kept animals in small spaces...
Psychologists have been shocked to learn that in the wild, animals never go mad, never commit suicide, never become homosexuals, never attack their own species. But in a zoo they start doing strange things: they become homosexuals, they start attacking their own species. Otherwise, except man, no animal attacks his own species. It is a prerogative of humanity -- only a man kills another man. No lion kills another lion.
But in a zoo it happens that they lose all their natural instinctive intelligence; they start becoming crazy, mad. And strangely enough, they even start committing suicide, and the reason is that their territory has been taken away and they are living in constant fear. So many animals so close -- they cannot sleep, they cannot relax, the other animal may attack.
They have lost their freedom, they have lost their sleep, they have lost their sanity. And to live in such conditions, a point comes when it is better to commit suicide rather than live in such torture. You don't see the torture because you don't know that they are suffering from a special cause: they need space.
And as humanity has grown in population, murders have grown, crimes have grown, homosexuality has grown, lesbianism has grown. People are committing suicide like anything. War seems to be the only thing we are preparing for; it seems war is the only thing we are born for.
Perhaps it is the territorial imperative. Perhaps man has lost his feeling of space.
Just see what territorial imperative is possible in a local train. Look at what territorial imperative is possible on the road. Still, if you watch carefully, even in a local train people are standing in such a way that nobody touches them, still making their last effort to keep a certain distance. It may be just inches, but just a little distance will give them breathing space.
Psychologically, man is afraid to come close to anybody whose presence can become an exposure, whose eyes can be so penetrative, like x-rays, who can see you through and through.
And you are afraid that perhaps nothing will be found -- there is nobody, the house is empty.
The same is true about questions: you are afraid to ask authentic questions coming out of your ignorance because you will be allowing yourself to be exposed as an ignorant person.
Everybody is pretending to be knowledgeable.
In my village there was a certain man... a little loose in the head, so I was very much interested in him. I am always interested in people who are a little loose; they are special people.
His name was Sunderlal, but I used to call him Doctor Sunderlal. At first he could not believe it -- why am I calling him doctor? He asked me, "You said DOCTOR?"
I said, "You are `doctor'. In this village, nobody is more knowledgeable than you are."
He said, "That's true."
I said, "In this village, you are a D.Litt., a doctor."
He said, "Are you joking?"
I said, "Why should I joke? A fact is a fact. If you want, I can bring a few people as witnesses."
He said, "No, no, there is no need. I trust in you; if you are saying it, then it must be so."
The next day I saw that he had hung a board on his house: Doctor Sunderlal, D.Litt.
The whole town was agog... suddenly this crazy man... "Which university has given him a D.Litt.?"
I reached his home and I said, "You have done the right thing. It is not a question of any university -- what rights do they have to give you a D.Litt.? -- it is your declaration."
He said, "That's right. Because my father was saying, `You idiot, you are writing Doctor Sunderlal, D.Litt. -- the police will come! You will be caught in some trouble; don't listen to that man.'"
I said, "There is no question; it is your declaration that `In this village I am the most knowledgeable person. If anybody has any doubts... open challenge!'"
He said, "Should it be written underneath the board?"
I said, "It should be written underneath the board."
So a certain board was made on which he wrote, "This is a declaration that in this village I am the most knowledgeable person. And if somebody has any doubts, that means an open challenge for a discussion."
Now, who wanted to discuss with that fellow? He was so crazy; nobody turned up. And he was sitting in a chair just by the side of the board waiting for somebody to come.
I inquired two or three times, "Has anybody turned up?"
He said, "Nobody... people come, they read and they go again! Even my father said that there seems to be something in it, because nobody is making any objection. Even the police inspector came, read the whole thing and went away: `If it is a declaration....'"
Just a few years ago the man died, and he died as "Doctor Sunderlal, D.Litt." In the newspapers it was printed, "Doctor Sunderlal, D.Litt. has died." And nobody ever asked or bothered, because nobody was ready to accept the challenge. Everybody was afraid, because to discuss with that crazy fellow... he could say anything. He could raise questions that you could not answer, he could criticize anything.
And they all knew that I was supporting him. I had told him, "Don't be worried. If somebody accepts the challenge I will be there by your side to help you."
He said, "I am not worried. I have defeated my wife, my cousin, my brother. I have defeated my family completely, and I know that in this village they are the average people, so I have defeated the village. Should I try to make the territory a little bigger?"
I said, "No, you should keep the territory just as the village. It is enough -- because you have the D.Litt., you have declared it. Now, no need to make the territory bigger, because that may create trouble. In this village you are the only one whose head is loose. In other villages there may be somebody who has the same kind of loose head -- unnecessary trouble will arise. You just remain silent."
And people started calling him "Doctor Sunderlal." And by and by, people forgot all about... he was accepted as Doctor Sunderlal, D.Litt. That almost became his name.
Your knowledge... whether you have declared it or not, deep down you believe that you know so much. And all that you know is not yours.
Coming closer to a person in whose light your knowledge will start melting, disappearing, evaporating, leaving you naked in your ignorance, you are afraid even to ask a question.
I have seen people, thousands of people in my life, asking me questions and saying that "This is a question from one of my friends." And when I used to see people personally, I would tell them, "The best way will be that you send your friend. And he can say the same thing: `This is a question from one of my friends.'"
He said, "What do you mean?"
I said, "You have understood... this is your question. But you don't even have guts to say `This is my question.' Knowledge, which you claim as yours, is all from others. And the question -- which you are saying is some friend's question -- is yours." I said, "Bring your friend. Tomorrow, come with your friend. I would like to see the friend, because the question is very important."
He said, "The question is important?"
I said, "It is a very important question, and I would like to see the person."
He said, "Forgive me... really it is my question."
People are afraid to expose themselves.
But to be with a master, one of the basic rules is that you will drop your fears and you will stand naked in your ignorance, because from that ignorance your innocence can be achieved.
From your knowledge, no route goes to innocence.
Only from your ignorance is there a pathway to innocence.
Hence I repeat again: a vast knowledge which is borrowed is of no meaning. But a small ignorance that is yours is a treasure, because from that ignorance opens the door to your innocence.
And it is innocence that becomes the light, that becomes the incense and the fragrance.

Question 4
BELOVED OSHO,
ONCE YOU TOLD ME THAT THE SPRING HAD COME, BUT MY ANXIETY IS THAT I HAVE LOST EVERYTHING, THAT THE GARBAGE HAS TAKEN OVER COMPLETELY, AND THAT I CANNOT KEEP MYSELF OPEN TO YOU AS A DISCIPLE UNLESS I AM CONTINUALLY IN YOUR PRESENCE.
CAN YOU SAY SOMETHING ABOUT THE SEED OF SPIRITUAL GROWTH WHICH YOU PLANT IN US AND WHETHER IT CAN DIE?
Pankaja, the seed is immortal, it cannot die.
But it can remain dormant; it can remain dormant for lives.
If the right soil is not provided, if the right water is not provided, if the right exposure to the sunlight is not provided, it will remain dormant, a potentiality, a waiting -- but it cannot die. You may die many times, but the seed, once planted in you, will go on following your consciousness wherever you are.
Unless you give it your attention, nourishment, your care, your love, it cannot become a living sprout. Small, fresh green leaves cannot come out of it.
Only your love and your consciousness can create the miracle... and the day will not be far away when there will be flowers.
There are people here who have been carrying seeds from other masters. I do not need to sow new seeds in them; all that I need is to help their dormant seeds to open up.
You are not here for the first time. You have been here always -- perhaps with Zarathustra, perhaps with Pythagoras, perhaps with Heraclitus, perhaps with Gautam Buddha.
It is very rare that a person comes to me who needs a new seed -- because you are all ancient people. It is almost impossible not to have come in contact with one of the magicians of the soul; those people are magnets. So in some life, somewhere, you may have met al-Hillaj Mansoor, Jalaluddin Rumi, Kabir or Nanak.
Very rarely do I find a person who is not already pregnant -- but the seed has remained the seed, you have not been a gardener to it. Somebody, with great compassion, must have sown the seed, but you have not been kind enough to yourself.
The seed never dies.
And Pankaja, you understand perfectly well that your mind is full of garbage. This very understanding is enough to get rid of it.
But it seems the problem is that this garbage is paying you; it is in some way fulfilling your ego.
Pankaja is a novelist, is well known as a novelist.
I have worked with many kinds of celebrities; they are the most third-rate people to work with for the simple that their celebrity has become part of their ego. They cannot drop the ego, because if they drop the ego the celebrity disappears. And the celebrity, the famousness, their name, has become so important to them... it has become their identity in the world. Where millions of people are without any identity, they have an identity. For them, to drop the ego is very difficult -- and understandably; it is arduous.
A person who is not a celebrity has a small ego. In fact, to have it or not to have it does not make much difference; he is already nobody. He can drop it, and by dropping it he can gain the whole beautiful existence and all its benediction. By becoming nobody, he can open the doors to the universe and its blessings.
But all the celebrities that have come to me from different fields, have all proved to be failures. They take the most time, but they have a problem because their ego is involved with their name and fame. Even if they understand that it is garbage, the garbage is paying them so much that they want to cling to it a little more -- perhaps tomorrow or the day after tomorrow they will drop it. They have understood the point, but just to drop it right now seems too much.
I am reminded of a very great thinker, Voltaire. He was famous in his country, and it was a convention in the country that if you could get a small piece of cloth from a famous man like Voltaire, you could make a beautiful locket out of it. It was a great security, safety against dangers, disease, sickness, death.
When Voltaire used to go out of his house, he would come home almost naked, because crowds would follow him, tearing his clothes -- and not only his clothes, he would get scratched on the body. He had to ask for police protection if he wanted to go to the railway station or to go to some other place. Without police protection it was impossible, because to reach the railway station naked, scratched all over, blood all over, would not look right... although he deeply enjoyed it, because he was the only man in the whole country who was so much respected. This was a respect given by people.
But in the world, everything goes on changing. The name and the fame is just a soap bubble. It may become very big -- the bigger it becomes, the more dangerous, because it is going to burst soon.
And the day came when Voltaire was forgotten; somebody else had become the celebrity. Now there was no need for police protection. People even forgot that he was alive. In his notebooks he has written, "I enjoyed those days. But at that time I used to think that it would be better not to be known at all, just to be a nobody, to live silently, because life had become a nightmare. But when I became nobody, then I started feeling great despair that I had lost my respect, my name, my fame."
And he does not say in his notes that this was what he wanted, to be nobody. He had become nobody now, but it was not a joy, it was a defeat.
He wrote, "I'm dying a defeated man." And the day he died, only four persons carried his body to the graveyard. Of the four persons, one was his dog and three were his neighbors -- and those three had to carry the body because otherwise it would start rotting and the neighborhood would become a hell to live in. Somehow he had to be thrown into a grave. So in fact the only person who lovingly followed was the dog.
And this was the man who was followed by thousands of people wherever he went.
Pankaja, your garbage is paying you. You can choose it, there is no problem. But choose consciously, that you choose garbage because it is paying you. Consciously chosen, it won't last long. Don't fight with it; fighting will not help.
Or if you are courageous enough, see a simple point: even if you write hundreds of novels and inside you remain just a wound which is hurting twenty-four hours a day, your whole life is wasted in misery just to fulfill a non-existential ego. Tomorrow you will die, and the day after tomorrow nobody will remember you. How many novelists have been in this world? And who cares about them today? And they all must have suffered in the same way, because what they were doing was garbage.
You may be a big garbage truck. It does not matter -- big or small -- if you can have a little courage and throw away all this garbage and clean yourself, perhaps something beautiful may come out of you which may be helpful to humanity, which may be remembered for centuries; not only remembered, but may have a certain transforming effect on people.
But the garbage that you are writing is just journalistic. Nobody bothers tomorrow about today's newspaper.
I used to live in a place where a retired man, who was a little eccentric.... Retired people become eccentric, having nothing to do. And nobody wants to become useless -- it hurts. Nobody wants to be just a burden.
And in the family, nobody cares about the old man. In fact, they want to get rid of these people because they are unnecessarily a nuisance. Young people have their own life, their own enjoyment, their own entertainment, and these old fellows are continually interrupting, condemning, making them feel guilty or constantly irritable. And they have nothing to do; twenty-four hours a day they are sitting there. Naturally, they need some work; they become great critics about everything.
He used to come to me. I was in the university -- for just one or two hours I was teaching in the university and then I was back. He used to come to me, and I loved to listen to him. He was very happy with me, because he said "You are the only man who has patience to listen; otherwise, nobody bothers. I am saying such significant things and nobody cares." But how long could I tolerate him?
So I used to give him the newspapers, magazines, so he would read them and he would get into them and leave me alone. Sometimes it would happen that I would give him an old newspaper just by mistake. He would start reading it -- so deeply engrossed -- and then I would look at the date. I would say, "My God, I have given him an old newspaper." And I would tell him, "This is an old newspaper. I will give you the new, the fresh."
He said, "It doesn't matter -- almost ninety percent of it is the same news. Just for ten percent, who cares? To me, it is all the same. When you are not in the house I come and ask the gardener. He does not allow me into your study, but he brings newspapers and I sit in the garden. And sometimes he brings one-year-old newspapers! But I say it does not matter; the same things go on happening, so I read. Even your gardener says to me, `My God, this is one year old. You wait, my master will be coming soon; then I will bring the fresh newspapers.' And I say, `Don't be worried, I just enjoy reading.' And it is the same -- somebody has been killed, somebody has been murdered, somebody has committed suicide, somebody has been assassinated, somewhere some government is changed. It does not matter to me who rules in Brazil -- what does it matter?"
My gardener told me, "That old fellow is a philosopher."
I said, "How have you discovered that he is a philosopher?"
He said, "He has a very philosophical attitude; he reads a year-old newspaper and he reads it with such concentration. And when I ask, he says, `What does it matter? Time passes on. Just one year ago this was new, and what is new today will be old one year afterwards. And as far as I am concerned, it is only a question of passing time, so what I am reading does not matter.'"
Pankaja, I would like you first to be clean, innocent, silent. And then if out of that silence something is born, that will be a contribution to the universe. Otherwise, out of the garbage you can go on writing novels, and they will sell, because people need something to read and throw away. But they don't know that somebody has put his life, wasted his life in writing these novels. Somebody has missed his buddhahood.
It is up to you to choose.
It cannot be forced upon anybody.
I can just give you a hint -- that it is time.
And you are mature enough: you have written your novels, and you know all that is garbage.
It shows, because people love to read anything. Railway bookstalls need garbage, airport bookstalls need garbage; everywhere garbage is also needed because people need garbage. But why should you waste your life?
And you have the possibility to give birth to something really significant -- but a breakthrough is needed. You need a discontinuity.
You forget what you have been doing, forget the name and the fame and anything that it brings to you.
Just be a nobody, enjoy being nobody.
And I tell you that in being nobody there is a freedom.
And then one day you will find that the seed that is within you has started growing. And then if something out of your own experience comes to be written by you, it will be significant for you, it will be significant for others. Anything that can really make life a little more beautiful, a little more musical, a little more poetic, is going to help you too. It is possible only because of your growth.
You can collect all kinds of information -- read ten novels, and the eleventh is born -- that is one way that is being followed by all writers, poets, painters. But they are third-rate, and they will be forgotten.
Something meaningful only comes from your very innermost being.
But before that, you have to throw all the rubbish off; otherwise, the rubbish is so much and the seed is so small, it is lost in the rubbish.
I hope that you will be able to do what I am saying; otherwise, I would not have said it.

============================================================

Question 1
BELOVED OSHO,
HOW COME EVERYTHING IS GOING SO WELL?
Gandharaj, the question is not a laughing matter.
It touches something of tremendous value in human misery, in human anguish, in human reality. It creates laughter because it looks absurd to ask why things are going so well.
We have become accustomed to things never going so well.
We are well acquainted with the misery, the pain, the darkness, the meaninglessness, the whole tragedy of human existence. It has gone to our very bones, blood and marrow; we accept it as if it is our nature.
If things are going wrong, it seems natural.
If things are not going wrong, then something must be wrong -- how come things are going so well? We have forgotten the language of well-being, we have forgotten the taste of blissfulness.
We have forgotten our own nature.
The natural thing is that things should go well; for their going well, no reason is needed.
You are healthy -- you don't go to the doctor to ask him, "What is the matter with me? I am healthy." You go to the doctor when you are not healthy, when you are sick.
When people are young, they don't ask, "What is the meaning of life?" Their youth, their overflowing energy, is enough meaning, is enough significance. They are still capable of love. They are still capable of a dance, a song, a celebration. Death has not overshadowed their lives yet.
The moment a person starts asking, "What is the meaning of life?" it means he has become old -- it does not matter at what age. His question emphatically shows that he has lost touch with life, lost touch with love, lost touch with vitality, and wherever he looks it is all emptiness. The question has become significant to him -- why is he living? In fact, he has died; his life is posthumous.
The moment a person asks, "What is the meaning of life?" it is the question of a dead man -- who still breathes, whose heart still beats, but it is all like a robot. All poetry, all rainbows have disappeared ... no sunrises at all. It seems the night is eternal. It seems that he must have dreamt about the days when he had seen the light; they were not real.
Old age, when death is just standing close to you, creates the question, "What is the meaning of life?"
But when you are alive, when death is far away beyond the horizon of your vision, who cares about the meaning of life? -- you live it, you have it, you sing it, you dance it. It is in every breath, it is in every beat of your heart.
One thing has to be understood clearly: that the people who have asked so-called great questions about the meaning of life, about the meaning of the very existence, about the meaning of love, about the meaning of beauty, are thought to be great philosophers but they have one foot in the grave. Just before slipping into their graves, they are raising all these questions.
One of the great aestheticians, a great philosopher of aesthetics, Croce, devoted his whole life to a single question: What is beauty? In this century he stands alone as a high peak, incomparable to anybody else. His dedication to the question of beauty is total. He wrote about it, he talked about it, he taught about it, he dreamt about it; his whole life was woven around the question: What is beauty?
I have gone through his writings, and on each step I have felt that this man must have been blind -- only a blind person can ask, "What is beauty?"
And for almost one century, nobody has raised the question of whether Croce was blind or not. I say he was definitely blind. He may have had eyes, just as you have, but he had no perception, no sensitivity. He was asking the question what is beauty? and went on inquiring about it -- and the whole existence is full of beauty.
Even the smallest blade of grass is beautiful. All around there are flowers and stars, birds and trees and rivers and mountains, and beautiful human beings.
Why could a man of the intelligence of Croce not see a simple thing -- that beauty has to be felt, not thought about? You have to see it, you have to experience it. You are capable of creating it.
But it is such a mystery that it is beyond explanation.
You cannot confine it in a definition.
But his whole lifelong effort shows only one thing: the poor man never experienced even a single moment of beauty; otherwise, his whole questioning would have changed. He would rather have devoted his life to creating beauty, to experiencing beauty, to rejoicing with the stars and with the moon and with the flowers and with the birds. But he wasted his whole life.
And to what conclusion did he come in the end? -- that beauty is indefinable. This could have been told to him by anybody in the very beginning. There was no need to waste a beautiful life, a precious gift of existence.
And one cannot be certain that it will be given to you again; you cannot even be certain why it has been given to you this time. Do you deserve it? Have you earned it? Does the existence owe it to you? It seems to be a sheer gift, a gift of an abundant existence, not bothering about whether you deserve it or not. Not asking for your qualifications, not inquiring about your character, your morality ... making no demands on you, just giving it without any conditions attached to it. Giving it not as a business, but without any expectations from you in return; giving it and allowing you total freedom to do whatever you want to do with it.
Gandharaj, everything should go beautifully, easily, with a well-being. It is natural.
If something is not going well that means something is sick, something is ill.
But all the great moralists of the world, all the theologians, all the prophets and messengers of God have really messed you up. They have made such demands on you. They have taken away all your freedom. They have asked you to do impossible things, and naturally you have failed in doing them. It has left wounds in you -- wounds of failure, inferiority, wounds of unworthiness -- and you are living with all those wounds. Naturally, everything goes wrong.
It is not nature, it is your great benefactors -- the people who have been promising you that "We are the saviors." In fact, they are the people who have created a sick humanity, a diseased human mind, a psychology that is not sane.
Demanding anything unnatural is bound to create guilt. If you do not do it, you feel guilty that you are not really a human being, that you are behaving like subhuman beings, animals; that you are a sinner, that you are doing things against the prophets and the messengers who represent God.
And if you try to follow them, you get into a trap. If you follow them you have to go against nature, and nature is all that you are.
You cannot go against yourself, so on each step there is failure.
On each step you become more and more schizophrenic: a small part becomes the priest, condemning your whole nature.
Whatever you do is wrong.
Life becomes a nightmare.
And that's how man has lived for thousands of years: a life which could have been a beautiful experience has been turned into an unbearable torture, a nightmare.
Even if you want to wake up you cannot. The nightmare is heavy and long -- it is not only yours, it is coming from your forefathers; generation after generation has cultivated it. It has roots as ancient as man; you cannot fight with it.
You are torn apart. You cannot fight with your nature, you cannot fight with your sick heritage.
And I say that on the whole earth every man is living under the burden of a sick heritage. It does not matter whether he is Christian or Hindu or Mohammedan -- those are different names for the same sickness.
If you follow your nature, you yourself condemn yourself. The whole society condemns you. The whole world is against you, and you are also against yourself.
But you have to live your nature.
Friedrich Nietzsche has a beautiful insight. He says that all the religions of the world have been against sex, but they have not been successful in destroying sex; otherwise, from where do these people go on coming? This whole population explosion ... if your priests had succeeded, churches would be empty. But there are seven hundred million Catholics -- certainly the Catholic priests have failed utterly.
Nietzsche is right. The religions have not succeeded in destroying sex. But they have succeeded in one thing: they have made sex poison, poisonous. It is no more a joy, it is no more a thing of beauty, it is no more sacred. They have been able to create a great guilt out of it. And what is right about sex is right about all your natural instincts, but everything has been poisoned.
So when things are not going right, you are perfectly at ease.
When things are going right, you start feeling uneasy: "What is the matter?"
If there are wars, it is perfectly right. If there are riots between Hindus and Mohammedans, if Mohammedans and Jews are killing each other, it is perfectly right. But if suddenly Jews and Mohammedans start dancing and singing and rejoicing together, the whole world will be shocked: "What is going on? Have these people gone mad?"
We are suffering a wrong heritage, and unless we get ourselves free from the past we cannot live peacefully.
Gandharaj, the people who are gathered here with me and the people around the earth who are with me have dropped the past. They are no more Hindus, no more Christians, no more Buddhists; they are simply human beings. And they are trying to live their nature fully, authentically, without any guilt and without any feeling of sin.
Things are going beautifully well.
They are living in freedom.
The past is our slavery, and if the past is too much, then it is going to create our future. We are crushed between past and future, and the future is nothing but a reproduction of the past.
And a small moment of present is almost powerless against two eternities pressing it from both sides.
Once you are free of past a tremendous realization happens: you are free of future also.
And your being free of future means that now you are free to make your future, it will not be made by the past. It will be made by your nature, by your intelligence, by your meditation, by your silence, by your love.
Gandharaj, around my sannyasins things are bound to go easy, because there is no sin, no guilt, no imposed morality.
I corrupt people so much that they become innocent.
People are living innocently. They don't have any moral codes, any ten commandments, any holy bibles. They have only their own insight and a freedom to create their future, to live according to their nature without any fear. Because there is no hell, and there is no God to decide whether you are right or wrong.
If you are right, your life will be a life of joy; if you are wrong, your life will be a life of misery.
There is no need for any God. Each act is decisive, intrinsically.
So you can feel your way: if you are moving rightly, your life will go on growing more and more flowers, will go on growing bigger and bigger wings. Your reach towards the stars will become easier.
And if you are doing something wrong, your very nature will say it is wrong because you will be suffering the consequences of your wrong acts here and now. You will not have to wait for the last judgment day.
What a stupid kind of hypothesis, `the last judgment day' -- one day everybody will be awakened from his grave. Just visualize what will happen: all skeletons, and there is going to be such a crowd. At the place where you are sitting there are at least ten skeletons underneath you. When all the skeletons stand up there is not going to be elbow room, and there is going to be such shrieking, shouting, moaning. Even for poor God, it is going to be very difficult to recognize who is who -- because there will only be skeletons.
Then to judge who is going to heaven and who is going to hell ... and do you think in just one day? Each person has millions of acts, good and bad, which have to be balanced, and there is only one God -- and not very intelligent either.
George Bernard Shaw used to say, "Just the very crowd makes me feel that it will be difficult to make judgments. Moreover, half of the crowd will be women ... who will make it almost impossible!"
Perhaps that's why the last judgment day has not happened and is not going to happen. Because Jesus used to say to his disciples, "Soon, in your life, you will see the last judgment day happen" -- in his disciples' lives. That means, at the most, seventy years.
Two thousand years have passed, and as the days go by the skeletons go on growing.
I think God has changed his mind.
Judgment is not possible anymore.
As far as I am concerned each act brings its own judgment, and that is more scientific. Why go on collecting acts for a certain day and then deciding? And why decide from outside when there is a possibility to decide from inside? Each act has its intrinsic consequence.
You can figure it out: if your life is miserable then you are doing something wrong; and if your life is a merry-go-round then you are doing everything else that should be done perfectly. So it is up to you whether you make your life a merry-go-round or a sorry-go-round; there is nobody to decide it. You are the act and you are the judge. And this seems to be more scientific, simple.
Gandharaj, if everything is going well, be happy. And remember why things are going well so they can continue to go more and more well, because wellness also has depth. Just find out what it is that is making your life blissful, peaceful, silent, happy -- simple arithmetic -- and your life can become a holy life.
According to me, if you are living joyously, you are a holy man.
Only one thing you have to do: die to the past so that you can be reborn in a fresh present and a free future.

Question 2
BELOVED OSHO,
IS THERE ANOTHER WAY WITHOUT DEATH AND INSECURITY?
There is no death in the first place.
Death is an illusion.
It is always somebody else who dies; you never die. It means death has always been seen from the outside, it is the outsider's view.
Those who have seen their inner world are unanimous in saying that there is no death. Because you don't know what constitutes your consciousness; it is not constituted of breathing, it is not constituted of heartbeats, it is not constituted of blood circulation. So when the doctor says that a man is dead, it is an outsider's conclusion; all that he is saying is, "This man is no longer breathing, his pulse has stopped, his heart is not beating." Are these three things equivalent to death? They are not.
Consciousness is not your body, nor your mind, nor your heart.
So when a person dies, he dies for you, not for himself. For himself he simply changes the house, perhaps moves into a better apartment. But because the old apartment is left, and you are searching for him in the old apartment and you don't find him there, you think the poor guy is dead. All that you should say is, "The poor guy escaped. Now where he has gone, we don't know."
In fact, medical science is going beyond its limits when it says that some person is dead. Medical science has no right yet, because it has no definition yet of what constitutes death. It can simply say that "This man is no longer breathing. His heart has stopped. His pulse is no longer functioning." To conclude that he is dead is going beyond what you are seeing. But because science does not have any idea of consciousness, the death of the body becomes the death of the being.
Those who have known the being ... and it is not necessary for it that you should die and then you know; you can just go inside. That's what I call meditation -- just go inside and find out what is your center, and at your center there is no breathing, there is no heartbeat, there is no thought, no mind, no heart, no body, and still you are.
Once a person has experienced himself -- that he is not the body, not the mind, not the heart, but pure awareness -- he knows there is no death for him, because he does not depend on the body.
Awareness has no dependence on blood circulation. It does not depend on whether the heart beats or not, it does not depend on whether the mind functions or not. It is a totally different world; it is not constituted of any material thing, it is immaterial.
So the first thing to understand is that there is no death -- it has never been found.
And if there is no death, what insecurity can there be?
For an immortal life there can be no insecurity. Your immortality is not dependent on your bank balance; the beggar is as immortal as the emperor.
As far as people's consciousnesses are concerned, that is the only world where true communism exists: they all have equal qualities, and they don't have anything that can be lost or taken away. They don't have anything that can be destroyed, burned.
There is no insecurity.
All insecurity is a shadow of death.
If you look deeply, then every insecure feeling is rooted in the fear of death. But I am saying to you that there is no death; hence there cannot be any insecurity. You are immortal beings, amritasya putrah.
That's what the seers in the ancient East have said: You are the sons of immortality.
And they were not misers like Jesus Christ, that "I am the only begotten son of God." A strange idea ... even to say it one should feel ashamed. "I am the only begotten son of God" ... what about others? Are they all bastards? Jesus is condemning the whole world! He is the son of God, and whose sons and daughters are all these people? And it is strange -- why should God stop by giving birth to only one child? Is he spent just with one child? Or was he a believer in birth control?
I have been asking the pope and Mother Teresa, "Your God must be a believer in birth control, must be using things which you are prohibiting to people -- condoms and all; otherwise, how is it possible? Once he created a son, then at least one daughter -- that's a natural tendency."
And in the whole eternity ... having no fun.
The psychologists say that poor people create more children for the simple reason that they don't have any other fun. To go to the cinema you need money, to go to the circus you need money, to go to Chowpatty Beach you need money. Wherever there is fun, you need money. So just go to bed -- that is the only fun without money, nobody asks for money.
What is God doing? -- neither can he go to Chowpatty nor can he go to a circus nor to a cinema hall. Sitting eternally bored.... Just created one son? It has many implications: perhaps he was so frustrated with this one son that he became a celibate -- "I am not going to create any more idiots."
Jesus was teaching on the earth for just three years. His age was only thirty-three, and he was crucified -- a great savior who could not save himself. God must have felt tremendously let down: "Be finished! No more sons, no more daughters."
But the reality is that there is a certain element of egoism in being the only one, with no competitors.
Krishna may be the incarnation of God but he is not the son -- just a photocopy.
Mohammed may be a messenger -- just a postman.
But Jesus is special, he is the only begotten son of God. There is a certain egoism in it.
The ancient seers were not so egoistic. They called the whole humanity -- past, present, future -- amritasya putrah: You are all sons of immortality. They are not putting themselves higher than you, they are not pretending to be holier than you. They are making every human being, as far as consciousness is concerned, absolutely equal, eternal.
There is no insecurity.
There is no need for any other path -- and anyway, there is no other path.
Life is the path which passes through the illusory gate of death.
You can pass the gate consciously. If you are meditative enough, then you can go through death knowing perfectly that you are changing the house; you can enter another womb knowing perfectly that you are entering the new apartment -- and it is always better, because life is always evolving. And if you can die consciously, then certainly your new life will be on a very high level, from the very beginning.
And I don't see any insecurity.
You come into the world without anything, so one thing is certain: nothing belongs to you.
You come absolutely naked, but with illusions. That's why every child is born with closed hands, fists, believing that he is bringing treasures -- and those fists are just empty. And everybody dies with open hands. Try to die with fists -- nobody has been successful up to now. Or try to be born with open hands -- nobody has been successful in that either.
The child is born with fists, with illusions that he is bringing treasures into the world, but there is nothing in the fist. Nothing belongs to you, so what insecurity? Nothing can be stolen, nothing can be taken away from you.
Everything that you are using belongs to the world.
And one day, you have to leave everything here.
You will not be able to take anything with you.
I have heard about a rich man in a village who was such a miser that he had never given anything to any beggar. The whole community of beggars knew about it, so whenever they saw some beggar standing before his house they knew -- "This man seems to be new, from some other village. Tell him, `You won't get anything from there.'"
The man's wife was dying, but he wouldn't call the doctor. He had one friend only, because to have many friends means unnecessary insecurity -- somebody may ask for money, somebody may ask for something. He had only one friend, and that one was also such a miser that there was no problem between them. They both understood each other's psychology -- no conflict, no asking, no question of creating any embarrassment.
The friend said, "But this is the time that the doctor should be called -- your wife is dying."
The man said, "It is all in the hands of God. What can a doctor do? If she is going to die, she is going to die. You will unnecessarily put me in trouble ... paying the fee to the doctor for the medicine, this and that. I am a religious man, and if she is not going to die she will recover without any doctor. The real doctor is God, nobody else. And I believe in God because he never asks for a fee or anything."
The wife died.
His friend said, "Look, just for a little money you didn't call a doctor."
He said, "Little money? Money is money; it is never a question of a little. And death comes to everybody."
The friend was a little angry. He said, "This is too much. I am also a miser, but if my wife is dying at least I will call a pharmacist -- but I will call somebody. But you are really hard. What are you going to do with all this money?"
He said, "I am going to take it with me."
The friend said, "Nobody has ever heard of it."
He said, "But nobody has ever tried." That too was true. He said, "Just see. I have my own plan -- I will take everything with me."
The friend said, "Just tell me your secret, because some day I will have to die also, and you are such a friend."
He said, "Friendship is one thing, but this secret I cannot tell. And the secret is such that you cannot use it when you are dying -- it has to be used before, because you have to carry all your money and all your gold and diamonds and everything to the river."
He said, "What do you mean?"
He said, "Yes, and go into a small boat in the middle of the river and jump with all your money and be drowned -- so you have taken it. Try! Nobody has tried. If you don't succeed there is no harm, because everybody goes without it. If you succeed, then you will be the pioneer, the first one who reaches paradise with his whole bag of money. And all those saints will be looking with wide-open eyes -- `This man has done something!'"
But the friend said, "That means you have to die."
He said, "Naturally, and you have to be in good health. When you are dying, then it will be very difficult to carry that heavy load. I am going to do it soon, because my wife is gone, now nobody is there."
But even if you jump in the ocean with all your money, the money will remain in the ocean, your body will remain in the ocean.
You will have to go alone, alone just as consciousness.
Nothing belongs to you, because you bring nothing here and you can take nothing from here.
Life is the only way.
Death is the only illusion to be understood.
If you can live fully, totally, understanding death as an illusion -- not because I am saying it, but by your own experience in deep meditation -- then live life fully, as totally as possible, without any fear. There is no insecurity, because even death is illusory.
Only the living being in you is real.
Clean it, sharpen it, make it fully aware so that not even a small part of it is drowned in darkness, so that you are luminous all over, you become aflame.
This is the only way; there is no other alternative.
And there is no need.

Question 3
BELOVED OSHO,
TO BE OPEN AND TO BE WITNESSING ARE TWO DIFFERENT THINGS. IS IT SO, OR IS THIS A DUALITY CREATED BY MY MIND?
Mind always creates duality; otherwise, to be open or to be witnessing are not two things.
If you are open, you will be witnessing.
Without being a witness, you cannot be open; or if you are a witness, you will be open -- because being a witness and yet remaining closed is impossible. So those are only two words.
You can either start with witnessing -- then opening will come on its own accord; or you can start by opening your heart, all windows, all doors -- then witnessing will be found, coming on its own. But if you are simply thinking, without doing anything, then they look separate.
Mind cannot think without duality. Duality is the way of thinking.
In silence, all dualities disappear.
Oneness is the experience of silence.
For example, day and night are very clear dualities, but they are not two. There are animals who see in the night. Their eyes are more sensitive, capable of seeing in darkness. For them, there is no darkness. Those animals cannot open their eyes in the day, because their eyes are so delicate that the sun hurts. So while it is day for you, for those animals it is night; the eyes are closed, all is darkness. When it is night for you, it is day for them. The whole day they sleep, the whole night they are awake.
And if you ask a scientist and a logician, you will see the difference. If you ask the logician, "What is day?" he will say, "That which is not night." And what is not night? It is a circular game. If you ask, "What is night?" the logician is going to say, "What is not day."
You need day to define night, you need night to define day. Strange duality, strange opposition.... If there is no day, can you think of night? If there is no night, can you think of day? It is impossible.
Ask the scientist, who is closer to reality than the logician. For the scientist darkness is less light, light is less darkness. Now it is one phenomenon, just like a thermometer. Somebody has a temperature of 110 degrees, just ready to move out of the house. Somebody has a temperature of 98 degrees, the normal temperature for human beings, but somebody falls below 96 degrees, again ready for a move.
Your existence is not very big, just between 96 and 110 degrees. Sixteen degrees ... below is death, above is death; just a small slit in between, a small window of life.
If we could have a thermometer for light and darkness, the situation would be the same, just as it is between heat and cold -- the same thermometer will do for both. The cold is less hot and the hot is less cold, but it is one phenomenon; there is no duality.
It is the same with darkness and light.
And the same is true about all oppositions that mind creates. Openness, witnessing ... if you think intellectually, they look very different. They seem to be unrelated, how can they be one? But in experience they are one.

Question 4
BELOVED OSHO,
I HAVE BEEN YOUR DISCIPLE FOR TWO AND A HALF YEARS NOW, AND ALL THE TIME I HAVE LONGED TO BE IN YOUR PRESENCE. NOW I HAVE MET YOU FOR THE FIRST TIME, AND EVERYTHING HAS CHANGED. I WANT TO RUN AWAY FROM YOU. I AM TOTALLY CONFUSED.
PLEASE COMMENT.
It is almost normal.
You fall in love with me. Just hearing my words, it appeals to your intellect. Your reason feels satisfied, and then a desire arises to be, at least for some time, with me.
And then a great shock ... because I am not a man of words. Although I have spoken more words than anybody else in the whole world, but still I say I am not a man of words.
My words are just like nets thrown to catch fish.
My message is wordless.
When you come close to me, then you see the point: that I am not a reasonable, rational, logical person; that you have come to an irrational mystic.
You had come with a certain rational conviction, and here you find that reason has to be abandoned. You have to take a jump into the unknown, for which I cannot provide any logic, any evidence ... except my own presence.
Anybody who has come here, caught by my words, will feel like escaping. Because he had come for a different reason, and here he finds a totally different situation -- not only different, but diametrically opposite.
I am not a teacher. I am not a philosopher. I am not interested in creating systems and hypotheses.
My interest is in destroying you as you are, so that you can be reborn in your existential potential.
I am here to destroy your personality, to give birth to your individuality.
It is a natural reaction, it happens to everybody. But you cannot escape either. At the most, you may go up to Dardar Station and come back again. You can try, and exactly from Dardar you will come back; that is the radius.
Once you are caught up with me, you cannot escape.
But I will not prevent you; trying to escape will be helpful. If you try to escape and then you have to come back, the next time the desire will arise but it will not have any effect on you. You will simply drop it, because it does not work.
Now you have to go the whole way, whatever it means. It may mean the death of the ego, of the personality; then you have to take the risk.
If you had not come to me you would have continued to enjoy my words, because it was just borrowed knowledge for you. And here I want you to drop all borrowed knowledge, including that which you have gathered from me.
I want you to become a knower, a seer.
Certainly, you have to pass through fire. But the fire only looks like fire from afar. The closer you come, the cooler you will find it. And the moment you pass through the fire you will be surprised that fire can also be so cool, so refreshing.
There is a story in Moses' life that Jews have not been able to explain in four thousand years.
On Mount Sinai, Moses encountered a strange phenomenon that he thought was God. Certainly, it was very mysterious: a bush was afire but it was not burning; it was as green as any bush. Its flowers were as juicy and young as any flowers, and yet there was fire in the bush. Naturally attracted, curious, he wanted to look from close quarters at what was happening. He had never thought that fire could be there, flames were rising above the bush -- and the bush was green!
He came close, and just as he was coming very close a voice shouted, "Leave your shoes behind, Moses! You are entering into the holy land, into a sacred place." Trembling, he left his shoes. He could not see anybody, but it was certainly a miraculous experience. He thought it was God's voice.
My own explanation of the story is that everybody who goes through a transformation comes to the same bush which is afire, but the fire is cool. It is nourishing the bush, not destroying it. It only looks like fire; it is cool flames of life. For life, Moses' word is `God' -- that's the only difference. That is a difference of language, nothing much.
You have come here, you have seen the flames. And the first idea will be, "Escape as quickly as possible; otherwise you will be burned."
Don't be worried. If I am not burned, if all these people here are not burned, you also are not going to be burned.
The fire is cool; it transforms.
It takes away your mask and helps you to discover your original face.
But still, freedom is available to you up to Dardar Station.

Question 5
BELOVED OSHO,
I HEARD YOU TALKING ABOUT THE SRI LANKAN MYSTIC ASKING HIS FOLLOWERS TO STAND UP IF THEY WANTED TO GO THE SHORTCUT TOWARDS ENLIGHTENMENT.
I WANT YOU TO KNOW THAT I'M WAITING FOR THE CHANCE TO STAND UP AS SOON AS I HEAR YOU ASKING -- KNOWING THAT MY LEGS WILL MOST LIKELY BE TREMBLING, MY BODY PERSPIRING, AND MY HEART BEATING LIKE MAD.
Deva Prem, it is necessary that I should repeat the story first:
A mystic in Sri Lanka is dying. He has thousands of followers; they have all gathered. Just before closing his eyes he says, "If anybody wants to come with me, I can take him with me -- and this is the most shortcut way. You will not have to do anything. I don't have much time. Anybody wanting to go the most shortcut way ... otherwise, it takes so many lives to achieve enlightenment. I can take you with me from the back door. Just stand up!"
There was absolute silence, pin-drop silence. People looked at each other thinking, "This man has been listening to him for forty years, perhaps he may be ready." But he was looking at somebody else, because he had so many problems still to solve -- "Business is not good."
Everybody has problems: somebody has a girl to marry, somebody has a boy who is a troublemaker; somebody has a case in the court and this is not a time to become enlightened, first the court case has to be finished, and so on, so forth.
But one man raised one hand. He said, "I cannot stand up because I am not ready to go yet, but I cannot resist the temptation to know where the back door is -- because if sometime I am ready, I can follow the shortcut. Right now, I am not ready -- let it be completely clear to you that I am not coming with you -- but just tell us where the back door is."
The old man said, "The back door is such that you can enter only with your master, not alone. It is a very narrow gate; only one can enter at a time. If you are ready to dissolve yourself in the being of the master, then there is no problem -- one or one thousand, they will all enter through the door as one being. Alone, you will not be able to find it."
Now, Deva Prem wants me to ask him some day to come along from the back door. And he thinks he is ready and he will stand up -- although even thinking, he perspires and his legs tremble and his heart beats faster.
My feeling is, Deva Prem, you are the man who had raised his hand!
And one day I will ask, and I know that this time also you will only raise your hand ... or perhaps you may not even raise your hand. Because I am a different type of man. That old man was very compassionate.
I would have taken even this man -- at least he has raised his hand. That is enough -- what is the need of making him stand up? Just raising the hand is enough.
So when I will ask, remember: I will ask you to simply raise the hand. This time be alert, and get prepared -- because with trembling legs and perspiring it will be difficult to enter that back door.
That back door needs people who can disappear into nothingness dancing, singing, celebrating.
So learn to sing, learn to dance, learn to celebrate.
Any day, I can ask.
And I hate perspiration. I am very allergic -- perspiration you will have to stop.
And trembling, that gate won't allow you in; it will immediately see that there are two persons. You have to be absolutely still and one with me ... no trembling.
And this time I will not ask you to stand up. The last time, it was my fault.

============================================================

Question 1
BELOVED OSHO,
SITTING BEFORE YOU, FEELING YOUR WORDS FLOWING TOWARDS ME FROM YOUR GREAT HEART, I FOUND MY OWN HEART BURSTING OPEN AND RECEIVING THE SUN AND MOON OF YOUR BEING. SOON A GREAT PEACE FELL OVER ME, FOLLOWED BY A NEVER-KNOWN CALMNESS SO THAT I FEEL THAT I AM RESTING IN THE ARMS OF EXISTENCE ITSELF.
I BOW DOWN BEFORE YOU IN GRATEFULNESS TO KISS THE EARTH THAT GAVE YOU LIFE. I LIFT MY ARMS TO THE STARS AND SING HALLELUJAH, HALLELUJAH, HALLELUJAH. BELOVED MASTER, BECAUSE OF YOU I AM ALIVE TO REALIZE THE BEAUTY, THE JOY, THE PURITY OF LOVE THAT IS THE VERY EXPANSE OF EXISTENCE. THESE WORDS SEEM UNABLE TO EXPRESS THE TRUEST FEELINGS THAT ARISE FROM THE DEPTH OF MY BEING. BUT I BOW DOWN BEFORE YOU NOW, AND AGAIN AND AGAIN AND AGAIN TO DANCE, TO SING, TO SHOUT: THANK YOU, BELOVED MASTER, THANK YOU, THANK YOU, THANK YOU. HALLELUJAH! HALLELUJAH! HALLELUJAH!
Jivan Mary, there is much more yet to happen.
What has happened to you is immense.
What will happen to you will be greater, but remember one thing: it is never enough.
Existence is such an abundance -- we cannot exhaust it. It is inexhaustible in its beauty, in its blissfulness, in its benediction.
You are feeling difficulties to express what is happening to you. And this is only the beginning -- just think of the difficulties of those who have gone far ahead of you. There comes a moment when even to say that this cannot be said is not possible -- because to say that this cannot be said is still saying something about it. It is still defining it in a very negative way.
There comes a moment when only silence, utter silence, remains your expression.
That is your thankfulness, that is your gratitude, that is your hallelujah... a dance which is invisible, a song which is not heard, a beauty which cannot be painted, described.
And only when we have come to the point where words are to be left behind does what I call `religiousness' begin.
I do not say renounce the world, but I certainly say move towards the moment when you will have to renounce the word.
THE BIBLE says, "In the beginning was the word." Nobody knows about the beginning. Nobody can know about the beginning, because nobody can be the witness about the beginning. If somebody had been witnessing the beginning then it would not have been the beginning, because somebody was already there.
THE BIBLE may be right, may be wrong about the beginning, but I say unto you: In the end there is no word, and that has been witnessed by thousands of mystics in thousands of years past.
And the moment you come to realize that words are slipping out of your hands, that the boundary line of language is crossed... a tremendous innocence, a new childhood. For the first time you can understand that which cannot be spoken. You can understand the message of the wind blowing through the pine trees, you can understand the poetry of the sound of running water.
To be freed from language is to be freed from all human limitations.
Language is the greatest imprisonment.
I am happy that you are feeling a great difficulty to express something that you are experiencing. Slowly, it will become more and more clear that there is no word, no language, no concept to explain it, to express it.
Just silence is the only answer to all your questions, the only meeting with existence without any barrier, any wall.
As the language disappears, the mind is no more of any use. For the first time you contact existence directly, without the mediation of the mind -- and that experience is enlightenment. And nobody is far away from it, it is within everybody's reach.
But people are searching for their happiness where it does not exist. They are looking for living waters in deserts. And when frustration comes, failure comes, despair comes, they are angry at life, not angry at themselves.
What can life do? It is available, but somehow you manage to search in the wrong direction. Perhaps you are afraid, deep down, that life may be too much, love may be too much, existence may drown you.
And in a way, your fear is right: the closer you come to reality, the less you will be. The moment you encounter reality face to face, you will not be at all.
I have said many times that nobody has seen God -- neither Moses nor Jesus nor Krishna. And naturally, people have misunderstood me. Whenever I have said that nobody has seen God, I was not saying there is no God; I was simply saying the moment you come close enough to God to see, you are no more. Who is going to see God? As long as you are -- to see, to feel, to say, to question, to inquire -- God is not.
And God is another name of reality. It is not a person, it is only a quality, a fragrance, a sweetness, a music.
Jivan Mary, one day will come when you will be in the state of hallelujah but you will not be able to say the word, because the word will fall short of the experience.

Question 2
BELOVED OSHO,
IN THESE FIVE YEARS OF RELATIONSHIP WITH YOU, I HAVE NEVER FELT THINGS GOING AS FAST AS NOW! WHEN I FINISH WRITING A LETTER OR A QUESTION TO YOU, I IMMEDIATELY KEEP IT, FEELING IT TO BE RIDICULOUS.
SOMETIMES I ACCEPT THE CHALLENGE AND DELIVER IT, AND THEN I FEEL AS IF I HAVE AN IDIOTIC FACE: WORRY, REPENTENCE, SHYNESS... I FEEL THAT IT IS NOT WORTH COMING TO YOU BEING "DRESSED UP" WITH INTELLIGENCE, HUMBLENESS, MEDITATIVENESS, OR WHATSOEVER I COULD DRESS IN TO SHOW TO YOU. IN SPITE OF ALL MY EFFORTS, I STILL HAVE THE FEELING OF DRESSING UP, OF USING A KIND OF MASK.
PLEASE TELL ME, MASTER: HOW TO BE TOTALLY SINCERE TO YOU AND "UNDRESSED"?
The problem is not only of one person -- everybody is dressed up.
Everybody is showing his best side to the world.
The heart may be full of tears, but people are smiling.
This is how we have been brought up by a hypocritical society. We are children of a hypocritical society. Rather than teaching every child to be just himself -- sincere, honest, naked -- we are helping every child to be exactly the opposite.
Just two days ago, one of my old friends had come to see me. He has a son who is thought by everybody to be crazy, insane, except by me. So the first thing I inquired about was his son, and he said, "Leave that subject. It makes me so sad, because now he is eighteen years old and he still goes naked all over the town. He is such a shame to the family."
I said, "In what way is he hurting anybody? He is not violent. He simply enjoys being naked."
They force clothes on him, and he throws them away on the street and goes towards the market. And they are running after him -- "Please, at least take the underwear."
And he says, "No underwear... the breeze is so cool."
And the boy is very intelligent. Of course, he is in a crowd which cannot accept him. He never lies; he is always utterly honest. Whatever he does, he does with totality. He has never gone to school because he asks those who have gone what they have gained. His father is a post-graduate; he asks him, "What have you gained? -- just a certificate." He says, "I want to live my life. I don't want to be dictated to by anybody, wrong or right. I simply want to be myself."
He is a hard worker. He will be working in the garden, and you can see how hard he works, but he works at only what he feels like working at. He plays beautiful flute, but the whole town thinks that he is mad.
And I have tried my best to find where his madness is. I have not been able to find his madness anywhere. He is just not willing to be part of the mob psychology. The crowd cannot accept that he is sane, because if he is sane, then what about the whole crowd?
Even his parents, my friend his father, cannot accept him. He said, "Except for you, nobody accepts that he is sane."
I said, "You are his father, you love him. Have you seen any madness in him?"
He said, "What more do you want? You want more madness? -- going naked in the streets. And he is now eighteen years old, and he will approach a woman and he will say `You are so beautiful. Can I kiss you?'"
Naturally, the society cannot accept such a person -- although he is absolutely honest. And he has honored the woman, he has praised her beauty, he has asked her permission. Otherwise he is very strong -- living naked, doing hard work, never going to school; he is really strong -- he could have kissed any woman without any permission.
But a crowd gathers, and the woman starts shouting that he is being nasty to her, misbehaving with her.
Many times when I was there, I had to go inside the crowd and tell them, "You are making unnecessary fuss. The boy is alone, that's true, but he is not insane. He is a minority of one, and you are the majority of many -- but just because you are many, do you think you are right?"
Nobody has been ever able to point out to me that something is wrong with him. And he is being dragged to this doctor and to that doctor.
And he says, "What is wrong with me? I am not sick. The doctor cannot make any difference in me."
The truth is, the doctor is sick. The doctor is not honest.
The boy is very intelligent in seeing things. He has a strange clarity. He says, "I have been watching this doctor" -- because the doctor lives just in front of his house; his dispensary is there -- "and seeing that poor people get well quickly, and rich people linger on for months. And I am sitting there outside and enjoying the whole scene -- what kind of society is this? The poor man gets well because the doctor wants to get rid of him; you cannot get much money out of him. Instead the poor man starts asking, `Give me some money; I will return later on for the medicine. You are suggesting fruits and milk, but you will have to give me some money.'
"But the rich man, once he falls sick, is kept sick; he is sent to this expert for x-rays, to that expert for something else. It seems to be almost a conspiracy of experts exploiting the rich sick man."
I asked him how the boy is doing. He said, "Because of him, I feel so ashamed to go out of the house. And I always wanted you to help me, but you think he is right and we are wrong. You want me also to go naked, so I cannot raise the question, `What should be done with him?'"
I said, "He needs nothing to be done, he is no harm to anybody. Give him work; he is always ready to work, he enjoys working. But he is not ready to have a mask. He is not ready to be continuously an actor, dressed up."
But the whole society that we have created is almost a drama. Here, everybody is repeating dialogues from books, from films, from stories. Nobody is opening his own heart.
I can understand your problem: you are afraid to ask authentic questions because they will expose you.
People ask questions which make them feel very knowledgeable. They want to ask questions not to get the answer, but just to show their knowledge.
Whenever you ask a knowledgeable question, you will not feel guilty, you will feel great.
But I am a crazy person: I never answer those questions which come out of your knowledge. I simply throw them away.
I only answer questions which open up your wounds, because once your wounds are open there is a possibility of healing. Once you expose yourself, you are on the way of transformation.
Once you are sincere in asking a question, you will listen to the answer because it is your need, it is your food. Your question was your thirst, and the answer can quench it.
So always remember: this is not a philosophical association, not a theosophical society where everybody is trying to prove that he knows more than you know. This is a place of transformation, of going through a revolution. And unless you show your real face, it is impossible to make any changes in your life, any transformations in your consciousness.
At the most, I can paint your mask, but I cannot change your real face by painting the mask. The mask has to be put aside. Hence, a love and a trust is needed -- that you can be utterly nude, without any fear.
You are not going to be condemned here. You will be accepted as you are, and we will begin from that acceptance to reach for a higher stage, for growth.
But that growth is not a condemnation of your present state. That growth is based on your present state of being; it has to be accepted.
But the religions of the world have really poisoned people's minds. Nobody is ready to open up and show who he is, because for centuries things have been condemned, you have to hide them. Nobody wants to be condemned. And there are things which have been praised, so you have to show them -- whether you have them or not does not matter.
It is very human and very natural; you want to be loved and to be accepted.
And the society has made the rules of the game, that these are the things to be condemned, so if you have those things hide them, repress them so deeply that even you become unaware of them. And if you don't have those things which society praises, honors, then pretend, and pretend so cleverly that it seems almost real.
Sometimes it is possible that the pretender may look more real than the real person, because the real person never goes through rehearsals. The pretender practices, disciplines himself.
I have always liked a beautiful incident in the life of Charlie Chaplin. It was his birthday, perhaps the fiftieth birthday, and all his fans and friends wanted to celebrate it in a special way. And they found a special way -- all over England, in every place, there would be competitions, and people would be invited to play the part of Charlie Chaplin. And in those competitions there would be selections, and then there would be other competitions from district to district. Then the semi-finals would be in London and there would be the final decision about who gets the first prize.
Just to give his friends a great surprise, Charlie Chaplin himself entered into the competition from a nearby district. He came to the semi-finals, but rather than surprising his friends he was surprised himself: he got second prize. Somebody played his act better than him; he had never thought about the possibility.
But it happened because the other person was practicing it, rehearsing it, and Charlie Chaplin simply appeared as he was. There was no need for him to rehearse -- he WAS Charlie Chaplin. But getting the second prize....
And when the people came to know that he had got the second prize, he was so ashamed of himself. He said, "I have been such an idiot to enter into it in the first place. I entered because I thought that I was going to be the first, without question."
So you have the possibility of pretenders posing qualities, values, characters, which are not real. Inside they are just the opposite kind of people. Criminals become saints -- it is easy: you just have to practice certain values, certain disciplines which are expected from a saint. Who cares that you are carrying a thousand and one criminal tendencies within you? People only see your face, nobody dives deep in you.
So the whole society has become a very strange phenomenon, almost weird, and everybody is suffering.
The person who is pretending to be a saint cannot enjoy it because his whole being is against it, his whole nature is against it. He is continuously fighting a battle with himself, and there is no greater misery than to be continuously in a fight with yourself. So those who are honored, respected citizens, you will never see them joyful, cheerful, rejoicing. They are always sad, and to hide the fact of sadness they call it `seriousness' -- that they take life very seriously.
And the other part of humanity which has decided to go with its natural feelings is condemned; they become criminals. In the eyes of the religions they are sinners; they will fill the space in hell reserved for them. In life nobody will respect them, and after life also. Even their God is not capable of accepting his own creation.
If anybody is responsible, God is responsible.
Only one person is responsible for all the sinners. There is no need to send everybody into hell -- just throw God into hell and that will do, because he is the sole cause.
And these hypocrites, these phony people who are showing something but are not what they are showing, can they cheat existence also? Can they cheat God also? Here they will be respectable, but will they also be in paradise after life, enjoying all the pleasures?
We have put such tremendous pressure on poor human beings to destroy their integrity, to create a split in them.
My approach is totally different.
First, I want you to accept yourself as you are.
That's how existence wanted you to be. You have not created yourself; naturally the whole responsibility goes to existence. And there must be a need for a person like you; otherwise, you would not exist.
Existence needs you as you are.
The first principle of an authentic religious man is to accept himself as he is, without any judgment -- and only from there does your authentic pilgrimage begin.
Ask me questions without any fear, because I have never condemned anybody.
My whole love and respect is for the person who accepts himself totally, as he is. He has courage. He has courage to face the whole pressure of the society which is bent upon splitting him into divisions -- into good and bad, into saint and sinner. He is really a brave, courageous being who stands against the whole history of man, of morality, and declares to the skies his reality, whatever it is.
And at least with the master, the disciple has to be absolutely clean and clear so the master can start working with your reality, not with your phoniness. Because everything done with your phoniness is a sheer wastage.
Only the real you is capable of growing, of coming to a flowering.

Question 3
BELOVED OSHO,
I ALWAYS WANT A TOTAL CHANGE IN MY LIFE BECAUSE I FEEL SO DISCONTENTED, SO LIMITED, SO FRUSTRATED.
WHEN I HEARD YOU SAYING, "COME CLOSER," IT TOUCHED MY HEART DEEPLY. I SAW THAT I AM ALWAYS MANAGING MY LIFE REASONABLY AND OUT OF MY MIND, THAT I LIVE A LIFE FULL OF LIES AND GO ON POSTPONING BEING REALLY ALIVE.
I DECIDED TO STAY HERE WITH YOU LONGER THAN I INTENDED TO, IN SPITE OF ALL REASONS AND PROBLEMS THAT MAY COME. BUT I DON'T FEEL AT EASE, AND I DON'T KNOW IF IT IS NOT AGAIN SOMETHING COMING FROM MY MIND.
WILL YOU PLEASE SAY SOMETHING ABOUT THE MIRACLE OF TRANSFORMATION AND HOW TO LIVE MORE OUT OF THE HEART?
The first thing to remember is, never ask for the impossible.
Begin slowly, bit by bit, step by step.
Just by walking step by step, you can cover ten thousand miles easily. But if you start thinking from the very beginning that "I want to cross ten thousand miles" your legs may start wavering, your heart may start feeling tremendously afraid.
Your mind will say, "You are asking too much; it is unreasonable. You are a small human being. Ten thousand miles... just walking one step each time -- because nobody can walk two steps at one time. Ten thousand miles looks too big."
Make small goals.
You are asking for total change. You don't see the impossibility of it at this point. At some other point it will not be impossible, but at this point it will be impossible to ask for a total change, because there will be so many implications in it.
Why not go a little slowly? Why not take one part of your being and clean it? Put your total energy into cleaning one part of your being, then move to the second part. And of course, finally you will be able to have a total change.
But mind is very cunning: whatever it wants to avoid, from the very beginning it creates such a situation -- it asks for the impossible. So you remain where you are, more frustrated, more in despair because the total change is not happening.
The mind has given you a goal and deceived you.
Total change certainly is the goal, but don't try to have it in a single step.
Go in a more human way, changing small parts.
I used to live with a man for many years. He was a rich man, and he loved me very much. I had a bungalow in the university but he wouldn't allow me to live there. He had a beautiful mansion in the city. He said, "If you want, you can have the whole mansion. I will move to another house." He had many houses.
I said, "No, there is no need. What will I do? I need only one room. You can live and take care of the whole mansion and the garden and my room, because I am a lazy man. This big mansion -- who is going to clean it?"
In my university days I used to keep my bed just near the door and all my books around my bed, so I had not to enter into the room -- because there was such thick dust gathering, for two years. I had never entered -- why unnecessarily disturb settled things? So from the door I would directly jump into my bed, and all my books were around my bed so I could find them. This was a perfect arrangement: neither did the dust disturb me nor did I disturb the dust.
So I told him, "I don't need the whole mansion. Just one room is enough for me."
So he lived with me.
He was very rich but very miserly. Perhaps the word `miserly' is not enough to describe it.
He used to go for a walk in the morning with me, and anything he would find by the side of the road here and there, he would grab it. I said, "What will you do with it? -- just a handle of a bicycle; somebody had thrown it away.
He said, "You don't know. Just come with me, I will show you."
So I went into his house, in his part of the mansion, and he showed me. And I was really amazed! He said, "All these parts of the cycle I have found on the street. Just a few things are missing... and I hope I have enough life left; I have not yet found a chain. Two wheels are there, the seat is there, the handlebars I have found today. Mud guards are not necessary, just a chain. And I am not asking for too much. What do you think I go walking with you for?"
I said, "I never thought that you were going in search of a chain!"
He said, "A chain, or anything...."
His house was full of strange things... just one shoe. I said, "Where is the other?"
He said, "Some day I will find it, because the other one must be somewhere."
And he himself was so clever that he would go to the temple and he would put one shoe in one corner, the other shoe in another corner so nobody could steal them -- because who will steal one shoe? And in a crowd of shoes who is going to search for the other? Where is the other? -- because a thief is in a hurry.
He said, "I am the only progressive person who, when he is worshipping never looks back. Otherwise, everybody is looking back: What is happening to the shoes? Their worship is false! Are they bowing down to God or to their shoes? I am the only person who does not look back at all. I have figured it out -- that this way nobody can and nobody has ever been able.... And I go every day to the temple because I am looking for the other shoe. This shoe... the other must be somewhere."
And there were many things that he had found; people had thrown them and he would collect them.
But when I saw his bicycle, I was really amazed that he had managed... ALMOST managed; just a chain was missing. That could even be purchased. But he was such a miser, he was not going to purchase it; he was waiting. He said, "Just as you say... trust! -- I trust that the chain will be found one day."
Jabalpur had the largest number of cycles in India. So he said, "This is the place where it is impossible to miss a chain. I will find it." And one day he found it.
In the middle of the night he woke me. I said, "What is the matter? Has something gone wrong?"
He said, "No, I have found the chain!"
"In the middle of the night? Where have you been?"
He said, "I was just not feeling sleepy, so I thought why not have a look for the chain around the park? And it is a miracle -- I found it. Perhaps that's why I was not feeling sleepy. Now I can sleep with ease. One tension was always there on my mind, that death might come before the chain comes."
And I saw him within three days sitting on the bicycle without mud guards, without any carrier, going to his shop. I said, "I have been telling people to trust -- but it seems that trust works! You have proved me right."
And he said, "One thing more is good about this: there are no brakes on it. And it makes so much noise that you can hear it from almost half a mile away. So when I am coming home my wife knows that I am coming, so she starts preparing things for me. By the time I reach the house everything is ready; no need for wasting time in waiting. And nobody else can sit on my bicycle."
I said, "Why?"
He said, "Its seat is such -- it hurts so much. So there is no question of its ever being stolen. I leave it anywhere, and I go and do my work and I always find it in its place. People have tried -- I have come to know that people have tried to steal it -- but they come back and put it in its place, because it is unnecessary trouble. First, it makes so much noise that everybody will know who has stolen it. Secondly, it hurts so much, and thirdly, it has no brakes, so any time, any accident...."
I said, "But how do you manage?"
He said, "There is no problem. Just in front of my shop there is a big mango tree. I just go there; it needs a tree to stop."
And in the mansion where I was living with him there were very big trees, ancient trees all around, so there was no question, no need. He said, "There is no need -- I go to my shop, there is a tree; I go to my home, there is a tree. Unless you have a very ancient tree, you cannot have my bicycle."
Just go slowly... part by part... and trust. Total change will also happen, but don't ask too much from the very beginning.
Always be alert that mind is cunning and gives you impossible goals, so you go on running after them.
Nothing is impossible if you go slowly, if you make many stopovers and you are not in a hurry. Whether the total change happens or not is not important. Even small changes in life are precious, because the total change will be simply the accumulated effect of all the small changes. Total change is not one whole; it is simply the effect of all the small changes, the accumulated revolution that happens in you.
So always remain human.
The past of man has been concentrated on giving you goals which are impossible. That is just to make you humiliated, because you cannot fulfill them -- you feel too tiny, too small, too fragile, with so many weaknesses.
I don't want you to think about impossible things. I want you to go very slowly, changing small parts of your life -- which is not difficult.
One day, you will suddenly find that total change has happened.

Question 4
BELOVED OSHO,
I USED TO BE SO SCARED OF BEING HIT OR EXPOSED. SINCE I HAVE BEEN HERE WITH YOU AND MELTING INTO YOU, I'M LONGING FOR IT WITH AN UNKNOWN IMPATIENCE. I LONG TO GET THE OBSTACLES OUT OF THE WAY, TO BE OVER AND DONE WITH `THIS ONE' SO THAT I CAN MOVE ON THE JOURNEY TO THE NEXT ROCK ON MY PATH. FEAR SEEMS TO BE JUST A QUITE UNIMPORTANT, OLD HABIT.
I AM EXPERIENCING YOU AS A BOUNDLESS INVITATION. NO BARRIERS ARE THERE WHICH I COULD USE TO RATIONALIZE A LACK OF COURAGE. I FEEL THANKFUL ABOUT THE LACK OF ORGANIZATION AROUND YOU; THERE IS NO MORE FEAR THAT GETTING A HIT FROM YOU MAY BE USED BY PEOPLE WHO ARE IN POWER TO FEED THEIR OWN JUDGMENTS, TO PUT ME DOWN OR TO MAKE ME FEEL GUILTY.
BELOVED OSHO, I AM SO TIRED OF ME AND ME AND ME.
IS THIS A HEALTHY OR UNHEALTHY IMPATIENCE?
It is the case with most of the sannyasins: if they get a hit they feel bad about it, their ego feels hurt. Rather than understanding the hit, they become resentful, angry.
If they are not hit, then they start feeling that I am not taking care of them, that I am not paying attention to them, that while others are being hit, they are being left out. They feel as if they are not important enough.
This is how human mind creates misery out of every situation. If you get the hit, you are hurt; if you don't get the hit, you are hurt all the same.
But as far as I am concerned, I am not interested in hitting you or hurting you or ignoring anybody.
To me, all are equally important.
A same longing has brought them to me, a same thirst has brought them to me.
It will be very kind of you all to leave it to me that whenever a hit is necessary you will get it -- because a hit is medicinal, it is a kind of surgery.
But don't feel that because surgery is not being done on you, you are being ignored. If somebody else is hospitalized and nobody is taking care of you.... No, whenever you need to be hospitalized you will be hospitalized, each according to his need.
Whenever a hit is necessary to help your growth, you will not miss it. And whenever it is not necessary, then unnecessarily hitting you will only make your skull thick. Then when the time comes to hit you, you will have already been so disciplined in getting hits....
In my high school days, I was almost always late because I was interested in so many things on the way. I always started from home to reach the school at the right time, but I never reached because so much was going on along the way -- some magician was doing his tricks, and it was irresistible. Just to leave that magician and go to study... some stupid teacher talking about geography....
So I was punished continually, but soon my teachers realized that it was useless to punish me. Their first punishment was to tell me to go around the high school building seven times. I would ask, "If I go eleven times will it do?"
They would say, "Are you mad? This is a punishment."
I said, "I know this is a punishment, but I have missed my morning exercise. So if I make it my morning exercise, you are not losing anything. Your punishment is covered, my morning exercise is complete; nobody is losing anything, both are gaining."
So they stopped that, because this wouldn't do. They would tell me to stand outside the class. I said, "That's good, because I love the open air. The class is dark and dirty, and outside it is so beautiful. And in fact, sitting inside I am always looking outside. Who cares what you are teaching? -- the birds are singing, the trees are blossoming... it is so beautiful outside."
The headmaster would come on his round, and every day he would find me standing outside. And he would say, "What is the matter?"
I said, "Nothing is the matter. I love to stand outside; it is healthier, hygienic. And you can see how beautiful it is."
But he said, "I will see your teacher. How is it that he allows you to stand outside?"
I said, "I don't know, but he tells me himself, every day, `Stand outside.' So now I don't even ask him. It has become a routine, so I simply come and stand here."
He asked the teacher. The teacher said, "It must have been thirty days ago! I told him only once to stand outside -- since then he has not entered the class. I was thinking it was a punishment, and he is enjoying it. Not only that, he is spreading the rumor among the students that it is hygienic, it is healthy. And they are asking me, `Sir, can we also stand outside?' Then what am I to do here? Then I will also go and stand outside."
It is a question of how you take things.
So first, don't be worried. If you are not getting a hit, perhaps you don't need it, or perhaps it is not the right time. Or if you are getting the hit then don't feel hurt, because I am not hitting you, I am always hitting your ego -- something that is your disease, something that has to be dropped.
But leave it to me. I will not follow your expectations that because you want a hit -- the biggest hit, so you can show everybody, "Look, I have got the biggest hit".... Then the ego has used the hit. Rather than destroying the ego, the ego has taken the hit as a nourishment.
So leave it completely to me. It is none of your business.
Whenever I feel that you need a hit, you will get it -- and you will get it in the right quantity that you need. Don't brag about it, and don't feel sorry for it; just try to understand it.
It is a school of understanding.

Question 5
BELOVED OSHO,
TWENTY-FIVE YEARS TO GET TO YOU, THREE YEARS TO HANG AROUND YOU, FOUR YEARS TO RUN AWAY FROM YOU IN A ROLLER-COASTER RELATIONSHIP. FOUR YEARS TO STAGGER BACK TOWARDS YOU, ELEVEN YEARS TO GET A QUESTION THROUGH TO YOU -- AND YOU GIVE THE ANSWER TO THIS GERMAN FELLOW, GUNAKAR AND WANT TO SEND ME BACK TO HELL AND SOME DIFFICULT WOMAN. AND IN TWENTY-EIGHT YEARS' TIME, MAYBE YOU HAVE ESCAPED WHEN I CRAWL BACK TO ASK YOU, "WHAT'S NEXT?"
OSHO, DO YOU WANT TO KILL ME OR SOMETHING?
Gunateet, you are right.
The question was yours -- at least written by you -- but Gunakar needed the answer more. There has not been any misunderstanding.
He was also surprised, because he had not asked the question. But it was his question. And he could not believe how somebody else had written exactly the question that he was going to ask.
And it was not time for you, for that question. Perhaps you got the vibration of the German Gunakar, and wrote down the question; it was not your question.
And I can understand your difficulty: it took eleven years for you to ask the question and now you are worried that I am sending you back to your old life and the hard woman.
About that you are wrong. Once you get a woman, it is always hard. If you miss a woman, it is just ice cream. Once you get a woman, suddenly she is steel hard.
But without women there would have been no enlightenment in this world.
Just think... a world without women. Then you cannot find any Gautam Buddha, because there is nobody to run away from. If there is no woman, there is no problem. Women are the real incentive.
They say that behind every great man there is a woman; it may be true, it may not be true. But behind every enlightened man there are many women -- one won't do.
Enlightenment is a little difficult subject. When many women go on making a football of you, then at last you become enlightened. You will say, "Enough! Stop the game, I am going home."
Women are a blessing in the world. Without them, there is nothing.
So just be thankful to your hard woman; perhaps you are here because of her.
And you are saying that next time you come it will be in twenty-eight years, and you will ask, "What next?"
I am reminded of two stories.
Mulla Nasruddin was on Chowpatty Beach with his wife, and suddenly he said, "Would you like bhelpuri once more?"
The wife said, "Once more? But we have not had any bhelpuri."
He said, "Beloved, it seems you are losing your memory. Just fifty years ago when we got married and we had come here for the first time, we had bhelpuri. That's why I am saying, `Would you like it once more?'"
Going back to your life, to your wife, to your work... but you will not be the same man. You will be taking something of me with you. I may not have answered you, but you have felt me.
Answers and questions are superficial.
You have tasted my love, my presence.
So if by chance, after twenty-eight years, we meet again I will ask, "Do you want it once more?"
Most probably, you will not need to ask me again because the seed is sown. You know exactly what has to be done -- you have to slip your energies from the mind towards the heart. Those energies falling towards the heart are just like rain falling, and the seed will start sprouting.
Perhaps after twenty-eight years, if existence allows it, it will not be you who asks what is next. I will ask you, "What is next?" You will have come to flowering. You will have come just to show your gratitude.
It is good that you are not German.
The German soil is a little hard. It has its negative points and its positive points, its pros and cons. It is hard, it is very difficult for the seed to settle in it -- but once a seed settles in it, then it is very hard not to grow.
Your question was a mind question, and Gunakar needed it.
You don't need it. You have a soft heart. And the seed is already in your heart, and you know it is growing.
It is almost like a pregnant woman: when the child starts growing she knows that the child is growing. An experienced mother of two or three children even knows whether the child is a boy or a girl -- because the boy starts kicking, and the girl remains very centered, calm and quiet.
Boys are, after all, boys. From the very beginning, they are trouble.
An experienced mother can say after the third or fourth month whether the child will be a boy or a girl because the boy is doing all kinds of gymnastics, and the girl is simply sitting silently, waiting for her own chance. Later on, she will do the gymnastics and the boy will sit and read the newspaper. Everybody has his own chance.
The second story I was going to tell you is about a very rich American, a billionaire. He becomes fed up with money, fed up with all kinds of luxuries, fed up with all pleasures. And naturally he starts searching -- is there something more, or is this all? Because if this is all then there is no point anymore for him to live; he has had enough of it. It is a question of life and death.
And he moves, and goes from one master to another -- some Tibetan lamas, some Sufi mystic, some Zen master. And then he comes to India and meets many saints. They all say, "There is one very wise old man in the Himalayas; only he can help you."
So he travels to the Himalayas, then by foot carries his luggage. He has never carried luggage in his life. He has never walked uphill in the mountains. It is too cold, but somehow he manages. Tired, he falls at the feet of the old man, who looks very ancient, and he says, "I have found you after all! I want to know -- what is the meaning of life?"
The old man said, "First things first. Have you got a Havana cigar?"
The man said, "What kind of question... Havana cigar? Yes, I have got one. In fact, I am a chain smoker, and I have been keeping one in case you make me enlightened. Before enlightenment, the last Havana cigar... I would like just a few minutes more to enjoy it, and then make me enlightened and do whatsoever you want. After enlightenment, I was thinking Havana cigars would not be allowed, because I have not seen Buddha smoking, or...."
He said, "Forget all about those old fellows. Bring the Havana cigar." And the old man started smoking.
The tired American watched, and said, "But what about my question?"
He said, "The time is not right. You go back. Come again after few years."
The man said, "This is strange. Any message?"
He said, "When you come, bring as many Havana cigars as you can because once you are enlightened we will both be smoking. On this hill there is nothing else to do. Just go fast and come back -- but bring them. I am sending you especially for Havana cigars. Enlightenment is a very simple thing, but to get Havana cigars in the Himalayas is very difficult."
Don't be worried, I am not a smoker! You need not bring any Havana cigars; just come. Don't wait for twenty-eight years. Whenever you feel the flower has opened its petals in you, come back.
I would just like to see you luminous, radiant, ecstatic.
And I say it is possible because you have a heart, Gunateet, that is ripe to grow any moment. No hard woman can prevent it; she can only help it.
So just go back, and whenever the spring comes and the flower is there, come back so I can see that the flower has lived to its potentiality and you have become fragrant.
And meanwhile, you can smoke as many Havana cigars as you want.

============================================================

Question 1
BELOVED OSHO,
THE FIRST TIME I MET YOU, I SAID "NO" TO YOUR QUESTION AS TO WHETHER I HAD A QUESTION, AND IN ALL THESE EIGHT YEARS I HAVE NEVER ASKED ANY.
NOW MY MIND SEEMS TO BE EXPLODING WITH QUESTIONS, OUT OF WHICH IT IS HARD TO CHOOSE ANY SATISFYING TO A GERMAN PERFECTIONIST; YET I FEEL ALMOST IN PANIC -- I DON'T WANT TO MISS THAT CHANCE.
OSHO, WHY IS THERE THAT CONSTANT FEAR OF MISSING THE TRAIN?
There are people who really do not have questions.
They have a quest, but not questions. They have a thirst, a deep hunger for being and more being, but no desire for gathering and accumulating knowledge. Hence they don't have any questions.
They are the best kind of disciples.
There are other people who do not ask questions, but that does not mean that they don't have questions. They do not ask because asking a question goes against their ego.
And if the ego is German, then the problem becomes more difficult.
It is not coincidental that Germany has produced great philosophers, philosophers who are ready to give answers to every question. But Germany has not produced sincere inquirers, seekers, who are thirsty for the answer. It has not created disciples; it creates only masters, and these masters are only great intellectuals, not mystics.
Germany has contributed much as far as knowledge is concerned -- Hegel, Kant, Feuerbach, Karl Marx -- but it has not contributed a single mystic. In the whole of history, not a single Kabir, not a single Nanak, not a single Farid -- very strange, but it is not coincidental.
The German ego is ready to give the answer, whether it knows or not; but it is very reluctant to ask the question, whether it has the question or not.
The same is your situation. For eight years you have been repressing, perhaps unconsciously, and there is a limit to everything. You can repress only so much, and then a point comes when you are sitting on a volcano. Now your mind is exploding with questions. From where they have come? For eight years they were not there, and suddenly out of nowhere they are creating in you almost a state of insanity -- so many questions that you cannot even find which one is worthy to be asked.
You will have to look backwards: those eight years that you kept them repressed are your responsibility. If you had allowed them to come, in those eight years you might have been completely cleansed of all questions; you might have become a tabula rasa, an innocent child.
But because to ask is to show one's ignorance, you went on repressing. And there is always a hope: somebody else here may ask it, so why expose yourself?
But remember, each person's question has a personality of its own. Even though the words may be the same, the language exactly the same, the phrasing of the question not a bit different, but because the questioner is different, it makes such a difference that it is almost unbridgeable. Each person has grown in a different way, has lived a different life, has passed through different ups and downs. You cannot find another person who has gone through the same experiences. Hence, the question may appear to be the same, but it cannot be the same.
So never wait, thinking that somebody is bound to ask the question and save you the trouble of exposing yourself as ignorant, so you can remain silent, looking wise.
Just not asking the question does not mean that you know. It only means that you are not courageous enough, it only means that you are afraid to show your darker side. But unless you show your disease, unless you say something about it, the physician cannot do anything.
I had a professor friend. He was a great scholar of ancient Sanskrit. Not only was he a scholar of ancient Sanskrit, his mind was also very old and rotten.
He was feeling sick, and as I was coming out of my classroom he told me, "I am feeling very weak and very sick. I don't know what the problem is, but you have to give me a lift and take me to the nearby doctor." So I took him to a friend who was one of the best doctors near the university campus.
Now, in the ancient Indian medicine the patient does not say anything to the physician; that is thought to be insulting. The physician takes the wrist of the patient, checks his pulse; that's all. And he decides what the disease is and he decides what the medicine is going to be.
And the Indian medicine ayurveda has been very proud about it.
So this ancient Sanskrit scholar would not say to the doctor what the problem was. He said, "You are a doctor, you have studied in England, you have got the best education -- you have to find out what my disease is."
The doctor said, "This is strange. I am not a doctor of animals, I am a doctor of human beings. Of course as far as animals are concerned they cannot say what the problem is, so the vet has to find out, to figure out what the donkey is suffering from...."
And sometimes things go very wrong.
I remember one case. One of my neighbors in my village had a donkey, a very good donkey. And suddenly there was some epidemic among donkeys and many donkeys in the town died. The veterinary hospital and its doctors were at a loss what to do because the donkeys could not say what was happening. And they were unable to find out. The disease seemed to be something very new.
My friend was very much afraid for his donkey. He said, "Before anything happens, I want to take all the precautions."
So we both took his donkey -- because I used to sit on his donkey; he was the best in the town -- to the doctor. And the doctor said, "He is not sick at all."
We said, "We know -- and he knows too -- because he was not willing to come this way; we have brought him forcibly. But we want to take precautions. Other donkeys are dying, and this is such a beautiful fellow. So if you can just help; as a precaution give him some medicine so that he is not affected by the epidemic."
He gave us some solution, and also a small bamboo pipe, and he told the man whose donkey it was, "You have to put this medicine in your mouth."
The man said, "What are you saying? A donkey's medicine? -- should I put it in my mouth?"
The vet said, "This is the way it has to be given to the donkey, because the donkey will create a thousand and one troubles. Put the other end of the pipe in the donkey's mouth and blow the medicine into his mouth."
He said, "Strange way...."
But the vet said, "You don't know how to deal with animals."
But an accident happened. When he was about to give the medicine, the donkey did such a great job.... He blew such a forceful breath from his mouth that the man drank all the medicine! And he said, "Now what is going to happen? This was a freak accident, and this idiot... at the right time, just as I was going to give the medicine, he managed to force it into my body. Now let us go back to the doctor. It may have some bad effects on me -- it was a precaution for the donkey, not a precaution for me."
I said, "Now I cannot go, you can go."
This Sanskrit scholar wanted to be told by the doctor what was wrong just by having his pulse checked.
The doctor said, "I know that in ayurveda this has been the ancient method, but at that time there were no other instruments. At that time people were not so intelligent and aware and sensitive to their own bodies, feelings. They were coming almost from the world of animals. When ayurveda was born, human beings were just emerging out of the animal kingdom; that's why feeling the pulse was the only way."
But the scholar was not satisfied. He said, "The reality is that you are not so proficient in the subtle vibrations of the pulse rate. You are not ready to acknowledge your ignorance."
I said to him, "You have not come here to discuss whether ayurveda is a better medical system than modern medicine. You have come here for your own sickness. Don't waste my time, and don't waste the time of the doctor -- he is not ignorant. No modern medical practitioner is going to tell you your disease, you have to tell him. And man has come of age."
You can sit here silently for eight years without asking a question, just hiding yourself behind silence -- which is not true silence, because inside the questions are boiling.
But the German mind is not ready to accept easily that it is ignorant.
It is good that now you are ready -- because your mind is exploring its questions -- that you are not afraid you will be understood as ignorant.
Nobody is going to understand you as ignorant.
Ignorance is our natural state, there is nothing wrong with it. Just as everybody is naked behind the clothes -- however thick your clothes are, however many layers of clothes you have, your nakedness is still there. There is nothing in it to be ashamed of.
Naked we are born, ignorant we are born.
And it will be helpful to recognize the fact of ignorance sooner, so that you will not die ignorant.
Ignorant we are born, but if we can die innocent, life has been a successful journey.
And the only way to be innocent is to get rid of all your questions.
Don't hide anything, because whatever you are hiding will come up sooner or later, will surface. It is better to bring it out yourself into the open, into the light.
And the function of a master is not to give you an answer, but to destroy your question.
Nobody can give you the answer.
The answer will arise in you, will grow in you. It will be your growth, your enlightenment. It cannot be given from outside.
But questions can be destroyed.
So it is good that you have started, even though you have wasted eight years unnecessarily. And that's why your mind is continuously worried and scared of only one thing: Am I going to miss the train this time? Eight years you have been missing, every day, every moment.
But there are a few people who are very expert in missing trains.
I have heard that three persons, all professors of a university, were standing on the platform. The train was getting ready to leave -- two had come to see one off -- and they were involved in deep discussion.
Suddenly, the conductor shows the flag and the train starts, and they are so absorbed that they don't notice. They notice only when the train has almost left the platform. So they all three run to catch it -- two succeed, and one fails. And the one who fails starts laughing.
A crowd gathers; they say, "What is the matter?"
But he is laughing so much, a belly laughter, that he cannot contain himself.
He says, "Just wait a minute.... I have missed the train."
They say, "But missing a train does not mean that you have to laugh."
He said, "You don't know the whole story -- just wait: the two who have caught the train came to see me off! But in a hurry...."
There are people who are always missing. Missing becomes their habit for their whole life.
Each moment -- you have to be alert not to miss it.
But you are not there, you are somewhere else. Naturally you go on missing.
You will think of this moment when it is gone. You will say, "My God, I missed that opportunity."
Henry Ford was asked by a journalist, "What is the secret of your success?" -- because he was a poor man, born poor, and became the richest man in the world.
Ford said, "My secret is simple, it is an open secret: I never miss an opportunity."
But the journalist said, "It still remains a mystery. Nobody wants to miss an opportunity, but people go on missing. So tell me just in a little detail how you manage -- because people become aware of an opportunity only when it is gone, but by that time it is too late."
Henry Ford said, "The way not to miss an opportunity is just to keep jumping. So whenever it comes, it doesn't matter, you will jump and ride on it. Don't stand and wait; otherwise you will get engaged in other thoughts and other things.
"I keep on jumping. Let the opportunity come whenever it comes -- I am not going to miss it."
In a London museum there is a beautiful painting titled "Opportunity." A very strange painting.... When for the first time, a century ago, it was acquired by the museum, the painter himself was alive and he was present there for the opening ceremony. The museum had asked him to be there to explain it to people -- because it is a beautiful painting but a little difficult, a little strange.
There is the face of a man, but you have never come across such a face: all the hairs are growing not on the head but on the forehead, and the head is clean-shaven. And the title is "Opportunity."
"What kind of man... where have you found this man?"
He said, "This is the opportunity. When it comes you cannot see it, because the face is covered with hair. When it is just passing by, you cannot see it because the face is covered and by the time you recognize it and say, `Jesus!'... your hand slips! -- because the head is clean-shaven. It has gone. And no moment comes back; once gone, it is gone forever."
You are afraid of missing the train.
Whether you are afraid or not, everybody is missing the train. It is good that you are afraid, because that may help you to understand why you are missing.
You are not in the moment. You are either in the past or in the future -- both are non-existent. Neither can you do anything with the past, nor can you do anything with the future. All that you can do is with the present, and the present is such a small, split second that if you are engaged somewhere else, it simply slips by and you have missed the train.
Learn to be in the present.
Withdraw your energy from the past. Don't waste your time in memories; what is gone is gone -- say goodbye to it and close the chapter.
What has not come yet has not come yet; don't unnecessarily waste your time and energy in imagination, because no imagination is ever fulfilled. It is because of this that the proverb exists in every language: "Man proposes, and God disposes" -- because you imagine a certain thing in the future, and it is never so.
Withdrawing yourself from past and future, you will become a tremendously intense energy, focused in the present, concentrated in the present like an arrow. No train could manage to leave the platform without you.
Each moment being aware, alert, watchful, in the herenow, is the way not to miss the train. Every experience needs your presence here, this moment.
And this is a simple secret, but it opens the doors of existence, of all the mysteries, of all that is worth knowing, worth tasting, worth feeling, worth being.

Question 2
BELOVED OSHO,
IT IS SUCH A JOY SEEKING OUT A QUESTION -- IT COMES WORD BY WORD AND SURPRISES ME AS IT APPEARS ON THE PAPER.
BEING HERE WITH YOU HAS BEEN MORE MOMENT-TO-MOMENT AND LESS PLAN-FILLED THAN ANY OTHER TIME IN MY LIFE.
THE QUESTION IS: WHERE DO THESE QUESTIONS COME FROM? HOW DOES SEEKING THEM OUT EMPTY OUR MINDS AND CLEANSE OUR BEINGS?
I LOVE YOU BEYOND MY UNDERSTANDING. THANK YOU AGAIN AND AGAIN.
We are born not knowing anything.
Questions don't come from outside.
As you grow, as you face different situations, as you move into different moments, encountering different circumstances, your ignorance goes on and on becoming questions.
These are the right questions.
And if you insist on asking only the right questions, which come out of your ignorance in encountering existence, you will be able to get rid of them without any difficulty.
The problem arises because you have many questions which are not right questions, which have not arisen out of your ignorance but which have arisen out of your borrowed knowledge. You read something in a book and a question arises; if you had not read the book, the question would have never arisen, you may have lived from eternity to eternity.
For example, I have been around the world, but except for a follower of Jainism -- who are not many, only three and a half million, and confined only to India -- nobody can ask a question that a Jaina can ask. Only a Jaina can ask it, because his scriptures give him the question. The question is not a right question; otherwise, if it was a natural question, it would arise in every human being.
For example, you may never have wondered what nigod is. Only a Jaina will ask what nigod is. And for Jainism it is a very important question; it is as important as God is to other religions -- in fact, it is a replacement for God, because Jainism does not believe in God. Then the question arises: from where does this universe come?
Jainism has a simple, scientific answer to it: the universe does not come from anywhere, it is always here. But one problem gets them into trouble, because the population goes on growing: From where do these people come if nobody is creating them?
In Mahavira's time, there were only two million people in India -- just in India. Now there are seven hundred million people in India. From where are these people coming? Where have they been hiding all this time? Who is managing the whole circus? -- when they should come and not come, why they should come at a particular time and not come at a particular time.
Jainism has to invent a hypothesis. The hypothesis is called nigod; nigod is a dormant state of human souls. Just as you go to sleep and in the morning you wake up, there are millions of souls who are sleeping for eternity; from those dormant souls a few wake up and start moving into existence.
But all such hypotheses are as dubitable as God.
I have asked Jaina monks how many souls are dormant -- because there will be one day when nigod is empty, all souls will have awakened. Then the population will remain static; there will be no need for any birth control. Whatever you do, you cannot produce a child. But they don't have any answer. They say, "We don't know. The scriptures say an infinite number of souls."
I said, "This is just befooling people. Who has counted them? Who has the right to say that they are infinite? This can be said only when they have been counted. If they have been counted, they are not infinite. Do you see a simple logic? If you say they have been counted, then they may be many but they cannot be infinite. And if you say they have not been counted, you cannot say they are infinite."
But nobody in the whole world is ever going to ask, "What is nigod?" This is a false question, it is a bookish question.
Now, Jainas never ask about God. All over the world, every other religion will ask about God because they have been told about God from their very childhood. And naturally, curiosity arises: What is God? How does he look?
Strangely enough, different religions have different ideas of God, and nobody bothers that God cannot have so many appearances unless he has many masks. He shows one face to the Christians, another face to the Jews, another face to the Hindus... but why should he take such trouble? And none of these fellows who are talking about God have seen him.
But centuries have passed, and people are discussing and inquiring and questioning, and all questions concerned with such things are absolutely futile.
"How many hands does God have?" Now, is this a question that really means anything to you? -- whether he has two hands or four hands or one thousand hands? What does it matter to you? But there are people who believe that God has one thousand hands, because to take care of this big world, two hands are not enough. But who says to you that one thousand hands will be enough? The world is still big. If two hands are too few, one thousand hands are also too few.
And just think of a god who has one thousand hands....
I think two hands can do things in a better way than a person who has one thousand hands. He is bound to get confused.
And to carry one thousand hands... the weight of one thousand hands will be too much.
There was one very famous Hindu monk, Swami Shivananda, who became world famous. Seeing him, I dropped the idea of one thousand hands -- because he was not able even to carry his two hands. His hands became so fat that he was not able to raise them. Two persons used to raise his hands, then he would be able to move; otherwise those hands were so much of a weight.... And nobody even thinks -- because he was a medical doctor before he became a mahatma -- first, medically he is living a wrong life; otherwise how have these hands become so heavy? Secondly -- he is thought to be a great yogi -- according to yoga he is living a wrong life; otherwise how have these hands gone out of proportion? And still he is worshipped as a great saint.
When I saw him, I said to him, "One thing is settled in my mind, that God cannot have one thousand hands. Seeing you... you need two persons to carry you from one place to another place. If you had one thousand hands, it would really be a great trouble."
Perhaps trucks would have been needed; Suraj Prakash would have to be called -- "Bring all your transport, Swami Shivananda is going to the bathroom" -- because how would he go? One hand in one truck... at least one thousand trucks would be needed. And for the transport company it would be a problem: how to manage one thousand trucks around him? There would be a parking problem....
But just hypotheses... and there are thousands of things which have kept human beings engaged in creating questions.
And there are always so-called wise people who are ready to answer them. They are the enemies of humanity. Rather than saying that your question is wrong because it has no relevance to your growth, it has no relevance to your own spirituality, that whether God exists or not does not matter, or how many heads he has....
The Hindu god has three heads. No other god in the world has three heads; naturally he is superior. He can look in three dimensions; a three-dimensional god, in all dimensions he is looking. Other gods are one-dimensional.
You cannot cheat a Hindu god, but a Mohammedan god or a Christian god -- you can hit him from the back, he cannot see. The Hindu god you cannot hit. Three heads, one thousand hands... if you got caught in his hands, it would take eternity to get out of the jungle.
All useless, fictitious, meaningless things are in the air, and they have been there for centuries. They create many questions in you.
So you have to remember one very basic thing: that any question that is not concerned with your individual growth has no meaning, no substance for you. Only then can you sort out those few questions which can be of help.
And then ask them, then expose yourself. Then don't wait a single moment -- and don't hesitate, don't feel embarrassed. It is your right to ask the question. It is nature demanding that you ask the question, because once the question is solved -- or better, DISsolved -- you will feel light, your heaviness will be gone.
The day you don't have any question will be a day of great celebration, because you will be as light as you can conceive.
And then existence becomes just a pure dance -- no more questions.
Existence becomes a trust -- no more questions.
There are no more tensions in the mind -- life becomes a let-go, a tremendous relaxation.
You become part of the trees and the mountains and the ocean and the river and the stars; you are no longer separate -- your questions keep you separate.
Your unquestionable trust in existence allows you to merge into it.

Question 3
BELOVED OSHO,
GOVIND SIDDHARTH'S ENLIGHTENMENT SHOWED ME THAT I AM NOT CONNECTED WITH ENLIGHTENMENT AT ALL. I CANNOT IMAGINE HOW I WOULD FEEL BEING ENLIGHTENED. I REALIZED HOW FAR AWAY IT IS FOR ME, AND THAT I AM NOT REALLY SEEKING IT.
CONCERNING MYSELF, I HAVE MOSTLY FORGOTTEN ABOUT THE STATE CALLED ENLIGHTENMENT. I SEE THAT I AM ONLY LONGING FOR IT WHEN I AM IN A STATE OF PAIN, AND FEEL LOST, AND DON'T KNOW ANY MORE WHAT TO DO. BUT IN MOMENTS OF HAPPINESS AND FULFILLMENT, ENLIGHTENMENT DOES NOT EXIST AT ALL.
WOULD YOU PLEASE COMMENT ON THIS?
Lokita, enlightenment is absolutely un-Germanic.
I have gone through all the great philosophers of Germany; nobody has any idea of enlightenment.
So you need not be worried. It simply shows you are a pure Nordic German, stuck with another German, Niskriya. One German is enough of a hindrance towards enlightenment, and two Germans together... it is impossible. You both will tug at each other's legs and will not allow anybody to become enlightened!
And the idea of enlightenment has arisen because of Govind Siddharth's enlightenment. It is not your longing or your search.
This is what I have been calling borrowed.
If it is not nature that is desiring something in you, a longing coming out of your very soul, out of your very roots, then don't waste time on it.
That's why when you are in pain, in misery, in anguish, you think of enlightenment and when you are happy and contented and enjoying yourself, you never think about it.
In fact, if you are contented, happy and pleasurable and I offer you enlightenment, you will refuse it. You will say, "Bhagwan, when I am in pain I will come myself. Don't disturb my happiness at this moment. It is so difficult to be happy with Niskriya, and now you have come with enlightenment...."
Remember: anything that comes out of pain and anguish and anxiety is at the most an effort to escape from all these painful experiences.
Hearing again and again that enlightenment is blissful, you think that rather than suffering pain it is better to be enlightened. But when you are contented and feeling happy, joyful, no fight with Niskriya -- because I know perfectly well that two Germans in one room must be fighting twenty-three hours a day at least. For one hour, naturally, they need rest and contentment. At that time if somebody comes and says, "Come on -- and this is enlightenment," you will say, "No, not at this time; I have hardly got one hour of peace and you have come to disturb that peace also."
You have to understand one thing: that enlightenment is not an escape from pain but an understanding of pain, an understanding of your anguish, an understanding of your misery -- not a cover-up, not a substitute, but a deep insight: "Why am I miserable, why is there so much anxiety, why is there so much anguish, what are the causes in me that are creating it?" And to see those causes clearly is to be free from them.
Just an insight into your misery brings a freedom from misery. And what remains is enlightenment.
Enlightenment is not something that comes to you. It is when pain and misery and anguish and anxiety have been understood perfectly well and they have evaporated because now they have no cause to exist in you -- that state is enlightenment.
It will bring you, for the first time, real contentment, real blissfulness, authentic ecstasy. And only then can you compare.
What you used to call `contentment' before was not contentment. What you used to call `happiness' before was not happiness.
But right now you don't have anything to compare it with.
Once enlightenment gives you a taste of the real, you will see that all your pleasures, all your happinesses were simply the stuff dreams are made of; they were not real. And what has come now, has come forever.
That is the definition of the real: a contentment that comes and never leaves you again is real contentment. A contentment that comes and goes again is not contentment, it is simply a gap between two miseries.
Just as we call a gap between two wars `peace time' -- it is not a peaceful time, it is simply preparation for another war. If the war is a positive war, the time between two wars is a negative war, a cold war. It goes on underground, you are getting ready for a hot war.
Anything that comes and goes is a dream.
Let that be the definition.
Anything that comes and never goes is reality.
Don't be bothered about the word `enlightenment.' What you call it does not matter; you can call it illumination, you can call it blissfulness, you can call it self-realization, you can call it actualization of all your potentials -- whatever you want to call it.
But remember one quality: that it knows only a beginning, it knows no end. Anything that comes and goes, beware -- that is simply illusory, it is only a gap, because one gets tired.
Niskriya also gets tired, and when one is tired one thinks, "Just be loving, be peaceful." So for an hour or two hours there is love, but it does not last long; just a small thing, anything, and the quarrel begins. And every other day you are ready to separate. Just look in one week how many times you decide to separate.
You don't know, I have been keeping you together. Niskriya is a very obedient follower. I tell him, "Niskriya, just let things be as they are. One woman is absolutely needed for your enlightenment; just remain...."
And the same is true for you: he is needed for your enlightenment.
Separately -- because there will be no fight, no anxiety, no pain -- you may start thinking that life is perfectly peaceful, what is the need of enlightenment? And it will not be peace; it will be the peace of the graveyard.
I want the peace of the garden, not of the graveyard. The birds should be singing, because their songs deepen the peace. The flowers should be blossoming because their colors, their fragrance make the peace alive -- the foliage, the greenery, everything is overflowing with life.
In a graveyard also there is silence and there is peace, because everybody is dead. They are waiting for the last judgment day; then they will come out of their graves and you will see such a quarrel as you have never seen, not imagined. Because lying in their graveyards, they are repressing everything, and when they come out... just skeletons hitting each other!
You will see the scene, the last judgment day: nobody will bother who is hitting whom, just hitting will be such a joy. So much is repressed -- because somebody has been in the grave for thousands of years. Just think of yourself in a grave for thousands of years: how much anger you must be gathering! -- it will explode in just one day, in twenty-four hours. More time is not given; perhaps God is afraid to give more time. Because if you give more time, that quarrel will never end; it will continue. So finish it in twenty-four hours.
And in twenty-four hours in that crowd you cannot find your enemy or where your wife is, where your neighbor is. So don't waste time -- whoever you meet, hit him hard! Somebody must be hitting your wife, so you hit somebody else's wife; it does not matter, the question is of hitting.
There is a peace in the graveyard. If people live separately.... And that's what religions have thought: renounce the world and go into the caves, and there will be peace. It will be the peace of the graveyard, your cave will be your grave. Because there is nobody to provoke you, nobody to insult you. Just being alone, what can you do except be silent? But that is not the peace that passeth understanding, that is a deadness, a suicide.
Try to understand your misery. Live it, go to the very depth of it, find out the cause, why it is there.
Let understanding be your meditation.
And try to understand your contentment also, your happiness also, and you will see their superficiality.
Once you know that your happiness is superficial and your anguish is very deep -- and it is in your hands -- you can change your whole style of consciousness.
Your contentment can become your whole being; not even a small space is left for discontentment.
Your love becomes your very life. And it remains. Time passes, but what you have achieved goes on deepening. More and more flowers, more and more songs are born out of it.
That's what we call enlightenment.
The word is Eastern, but the experience has nothing to do with East or West.

Question 4
BELOVED OSHO,
I HAVE A STORY TO TELL:
IT HAPPENED IN THE EARLY SECOND HALF OF THE MONTH OF JUNE, 1985, WHEN I WAS LIVING IN RAJNEESHPURAM.
ONE MORNING, SOON AFTER I WOKE, I TOOK A PEE IN THE BATHROOM, AND FELT A TIDAL WAVE OF RELAXATION DESCENDING ON ME AS IT SOMETIMES HAPPENS IN THE LAST STAGE OF YOUR MEDITATION TECHNIQUES. THE RELAXATION WAS ALL OVER ME, AND MY EYELIDS CLOSED GENTLY AND INSTANTLY. I COULDN'T MOVE OR STOP THIS TIDAL WAVE FEELING.
AS MY EYES CLOSED, YOU APPEARED IN ALL YOUR BEAUTY. YOUR PHYSICAL PRESENCE WAS SO REAL AND INTOXICATING -- AS ONE SEES AND FEELS YOU IN A DARSHAN, SITTING IN THE FIRST ROW. BUT IN A MOMENT YOU STARTED DISAPPEARING, BEGINNING FROM ALL SIDES OF YOUR BODY, AND A DEEP BLACKNESS STARTED TAKING YOUR PLACE. SOON ALL THAT WAS LEFT WAS A DEEP, DEEP BLACKNESS OF A KIND I HAVE NEVER SEEN BEFORE. IT GAVE A FEELING OF TERROR, AND LASTED FOR A COUPLE OF MINUTES.
AS I CAME OUT OF THIS EXPERIENCE I WAS STUNNED, DAZED, ALMOST DRAINED. I WAS FULL OF A DEEP INNER PAIN; I WAS VERY SHAKY AND UPSET, AS THE MEANING THAT SOMEHOW HAD REVEALED ITSELF TO ME WAS IN THE IMPACT OF THE EXPERIENCE. IT MEANT PHYSICAL DEATH TO YOUR BODY, OR AT LEAST A DEATH-LIKE CALAMITY.
I TRIED TO FORCE MYSELF TO BE NORMAL, BUT COULDN'T TALK TO PEOPLE. WHEN MY FRIEND NOTICED I WAS DISTURBED, AND ASKED ME THE REASON, I TOLD HER OF THE INCIDENT. I CONTINUED TO FEEL THAT SOMETHING GRAVE WAS PEEPING OVER THE HORIZON.
IN THE LATE AFTERNOON WHEN I WAS WORKING, SUDDENLY OUT OF NOWHERE A DEEP TIDAL WAVE OF RELAXATION OVERPOWERED ME AGAIN. MY EYES CLOSED AND A BRIGHT PURPLE COLOR APPEARED ALL OVER IN FRONT OF ME, AMIDST WHICH YOU APPEARED AGAIN IN YOUR FULLEST GLORY, BEAMING. BEAUTIFUL FLOWERS WERE POPPING OPEN ALL AROUND YOU LIKE BUBBLES -- IT WAS PSYCHEDELIC! I FELT NOW FULLY ASSURED THAT NO REAL HARM WAS GOING TO COME TO YOUR BODY. WHATEVER CALAMITIES CAME WOULD PASS AWAY, AND A MORE-GLORIOUS-THAN-EVER PHASE FOR YOU AND YOUR PEOPLE WOULD FOLLOW.
IN THE LATER MONTHS A GREAT CALAMITY DID COME TO YOUR BODY IN THE FORM OF YOUR ILLEGAL ARREST BY THE POWER-BLINDED U.S. GOVERNMENT -- WHICH WAS A PHYSICAL THREAT TO YOUR LIFE. NOW, IN THE LIGHT OF THE FIRST PART OF MY STORY TURNING INTO A REALITY, IT IS QUITE NATURAL FOR ME TO FEEL THAT THE SECOND PART OF THE STORY HAS ALREADY STARTED TURNING INTO A REALITY, SLOWLY SLOWLY.
BELOVED MASTER, WOULD YOU LIKE TO COMMENT?
Pratap, you have related your story with absolutely the right interpretation.
It needs no comment.
This is a good sign. Slowly slowly, to other sannyasins also, the same is going to happen. They will come to feel an experience, and they will also be able to interpret it correctly.
I can only say you are blessed that your mind has not interfered, has not misled you, and your heart has been in complete control seeing the experience and interpreting it.

Question 5
BELOVED OSHO,
A GLIMPSE OF YOUR EYES, A FLASH OF TOTAL LOVE -- IT HAPPENS IN A SECOND BUT STAYS FOREVER.
OSHO, HOW COULD THIS HAPPEN?
It is a simple phenomenon.
A moment of love is a moment of eternity. The depth of it is so great that time cannot erase it.
Although the happening was in a single moment, it is like a woman becoming pregnant: the happening is in a single moment, but it gives birth to a child who may live seventy, eighty years, who may give birth to many more children. It may become a tree: many branches, and each branch bifurcating into new branches.
I am reminded.... If you go to Bodh Gaya, where Gautam Buddha became enlightened, the tree under which he was sitting is still there, although it is not the same tree but the continuity of the same tree, a child of the same tree.
When Ashoka was the emperor of India, he sent his daughter Sanghamitra, who had become a sannyasin, to Sri Lanka with a branch of the original tree. Sri Lanka was converted by Sanghamitra to the ideology of Gautam Buddha, and the branch was planted there and became a big tree.
Here, after Gautam Buddha, a strange tragedy happened: Buddhism disappeared from India, and Hindus burned the tree under which Gautam Buddha had become enlightened. It was only when India became independent just forty years ago that a branch from Sri Lanka was brought back.
Now you see a beautiful tree again flourishing in Bodh Gaya -- although it is not the same tree, but it is the same tree.
A moment of deep love goes so deep in your being that time cannot erase it. It goes on and on giving birth to itself within you.
Hence I say that a moment of love is a moment of eternity.

Question 6
BELOVED OSHO,
MOST OF HUMANITY LIVES TO EAT AND SLEEP, WORK, ACCUMULATE POWER AND MONEY, OR TO PROPOGATE ITSELF.
BELOVED MASTER, WHAT DO YOU LIVE FOR?
Milarepa, I will tell you a real historical fact:
In Greece, there was a great philosopher, Xeno. He lived a long life -- in those days it was really very long, because the average life in those days was not more than twenty-five years. Xeno lived ninety years.
And he is a strange philosopher, unique in a sense, because his teaching is that life is meaningless; so meaningless that any man of intelligence would commit suicide, that is the only intelligent act you can do.
So many of his disciples committed suicide, went on committing suicide. Ninety years long, thousands of disciples -- and he was a very convincing man. What he was saying was so accurate, because ordinary life is certainly so meaningless -- unless you know to change it into a divine phenomenon, it is meaningless.
And he was a great logician; he argued and convinced people, and people committed suicide, young people committed suicide.
When he was dying, somebody asked, "Xeno, one thing has always disturbed us. According to your philosophy, thousands of people have committed suicide. Why have you gone on living?"
He said, "It was just to teach people to commit suicide; otherwise who will do my job? I had to live."
Milarepa, people are living absolutely meaningless lives.
I also teach them a kind of suicide -- not exactly the same as Xeno. I teach them a suicide in which they are reborn in a more luminous life, of a greater glory, of a divine ecstasy.
I have to live because it would be absolutely unkind, knowing the path of transformation and not telling it to the people who need it.

============================================================

Question 1
BELOVED OSHO,
I AM REQUESTING YOUR GUIDANCE ON MY ANSWER TO SOMETHING I HEARD YOU SAY TO ME -- WHICH YOU NEVER ACTUALLY SAID.
DURING MY SANNYAS DARSHAN YOU SPOKE TO ME AT LENGTH ABOUT WHAT HAPPENED TO BUDDHA'S TEACHINGS AFTER BUDDHA LEFT HIS BODY. I HEARD YOU SAY THAT BUDDHA'S DISCIPLES COMPROMISED BUDDHA'S TEACHING. THEY CREATED SAFE RELIGIONS, AND THUS COMPROMISED. YOU TOLD ME, "DO NOT COMPROMISE."
WHILE YOU WERE SPEAKING THESE WORDS TO ME, I HEARD ANOTHER COMMUNICATION. THE REQUEST THAT I SILENTLY HEARD SPOKEN WAS, "DO NOT LET IT HAPPEN TO ME."
SINCE THAT DAY I HAVE CONTINUALLY LOOKED FOR WHAT I MIGHT BE ABLE TO DO TO FULFILL THIS REQUEST. MUCH TO MY WONDER, I KNOW WHAT TO DO, I KNOW HOW TO FULFILL THE UNSPOKEN REQUEST -- BUT I WANT YOUR GUIDANCE.
WILL YOU PLEASE GIVE ME YOUR SPECIFIC GUIDANCE?
What happened to Gautam Buddha and his teachings is almost the rule, not the exception.
The moment the master leaves his body, the disciples start compromising with the surrounding world to survive, to continue to exist.
And truth is something that cannot be compromised.
Just Gautam Buddha's teachings... five hundred years afterwards, there was not a single Buddhist in the whole of India. The greatest man who has ever walked on the earth, and the most refined teaching and the most clear perception of truth simply disappeared like a dream.
One wonders -- it has not happened to Christianity, it has not happened to Mohammedanism, it has not happened to Jainism. So the complexity of the phenomenon has to be understood.
The people who had followed Gautam Buddha refused to compromise. That was the cause of the disappearance of Buddhism from India. The Buddhists were either killed, burned alive or forcibly converted into Hinduism, or the fortunate ones escaped to the neighboring countries.
In a way, it was a blessing in disguise because the Buddhists who escaped India spread all over Asia and converted the whole continent to the teachings of Gautam Buddha.
But the problem was, they had learned something that a disciple should never learn: they had learned in India that if you insist for truth, crucifixion is the result. If you want to survive, you have to compromise with all kinds of lies which are prevalent.
What they did not do in India they did in China, they did in Japan, they did in Korea, they did in Ceylon. All over Asia they compromised with the local population, its superstitions, its ancient ideologies unfounded on truth, just created out of fear. But because they compromised with them, they survived. And it was not only that they survived, they became very respectable. Buddhism became the religion of the whole of Asia except India.
It is a very strange phenomenon, because Buddha was born here; all his great disciples were born here. Hundreds of people became enlightened under his guidance. The consciousness of this country reached the highest point in the presence of Gautam Buddha. And yet the moment Buddha was gone, the tremendous experience disappeared, evaporated -- because the people who remained behind were still not ready to betray their master. They were ready to die, but not to betray; they were not going to compromise.
And Hinduism took revenge with great vengeance -- because in the presence of Gautam Buddha.... Hinduism did not have the guts to encounter this man. Efforts were made. Hindu pundits, scholars had gone to argue, but they were mere parrots. In the presence of Gautam Buddha, their borrowed knowledge proved completely inadequate for human growth.
The very presence of Gautam Buddha was enough to convince them that this man had experienced something that they had not experienced. What they were saying was simply repetition of old scriptures. What he was saying was a valid individual experience -- his own. And when the experience is your own, it has an authority.
Hinduism had to wait for Buddha's death. In his presence, it was impossible to argue in favor of superstitions. They had to wait for five hundred years; because after Buddha, his immediate disciples -- Sariputta, Moggalayan, Mahakashyap, Ananda -- and hundreds of others were filled with the same light, with the same silence. They created more living enlightened people. This continued for five hundred years.
Slowly slowly, it died out. Instead of the enlightened man, slowly slowly the scholar, the pundit became more important.
That was the time when Hinduism came with vengeance -- and certainly Hinduism is a far older religion. It had great scholars. The Buddhist scholars were amateurs, they could not withstand Hindu scholarship; they were defeated very easily.
Now, it was not their own experience.
These were the people who have written Buddhist scriptures. You will be surprised to know that every Buddhist scripture begins with the words `I have heard.' These people had not seen, these people had not experienced. These people had simply heard from others about the innermost reality, but it was only hearsay.
Hindus were more proficient scholars, almost ten thousand years old; very refined logicians, rationalists.
The poor Buddhist scholars could not manage to prove anything. They were defeated so utterly that they had to move back into the Hindu fold.
The Buddhist monks who had escaped from India learned a lesson: "If you don't have your own experience, then it is better to compromise to survive." They had burned their fingers in arguing for somebody else's experience.
They dropped argument. They started talking of the synthesis of all religions; they started spreading the idea that all religions are right. Nobody is wrong, the question of discussion does not arise.
And they were the first in the world to bring this idea that all religions are right. Naturally all religions respected these people -- they were not quarrelsome. Up to now every religion had been quarrelsome, arguing, proving that "We have got the truth; we are right and you are wrong."
And these were the first people who were saying, "Everybody is right. There are millions of paths, but the goal is one. There is no need for any argument. We may be moving on different paths, but we are moving towards the same goal."
The same has happened with Jainism in India, which was a contemporary religion to Buddha. Jainas are still in existence in India.
It is also a strange fact that Mahavira, their greatest teacher, and Buddha were contemporaries. In the presence of Gautam Buddha, Mahavira could not make any impact on the country. Yes, he had a small following, but Buddha loomed so large, he was such a huge tree that for three hundred years British scholars, historians, philosophers, thought that Mahavira was not separate from Gautam Buddha, that Mahavira was another name of Gautam Buddha. Because it is a title, just as `buddha' is a title. `Buddha' means the awakened one; `Mahavira' means one who has conquered. And they both had the same title of `Jaina' -- `Jaina' also means one who has conquered. Because the same title belonged to both, it was thought that Mahavira was not somebody separate.
It was just recently that scholars started feeling that this was not right, that these were two different people.
Buddha created so much impact, he overshadowed everybody -- but within five hundred years he disappeared.
Mahavira's followers are still in existence because Mahavira's followers compromised with the Hindus. They were not burned, they were not killed. They compromised so much that you cannot find much difference.
And they had to compromise because they are dependent on the Hindus for everything. They are not a whole culture. If they need shoes -- they cannot make shoes and certainly they need shoes -- they will have to depend on the Hindus. They need their toilets to be cleaned; they cannot do that, they have to depend on Hindus.
It is a strange phenomenon that Jainism and Buddhism both arose as a revolt against Hinduism. Mahavira is very strongly against Hinduism, but Jainas compromised on every point -- because from where are you going to get your clothes? The weavers are either Hindu or Mohammedan. Who is going to make your houses? Who is going to cultivate food for you? -- because Jainas cannot even cultivate. It is against their religion, because plants have life, and if you cultivate you will have to cut plants and you will be doing violence.
So all the violence has to be done by Hindus; then naturally you have to be dependent on them, and you cannot argue, and you cannot insist that you have the truth. You have to say that everybody has the truth; just the languages are different, paths are different, ways are different, but the basic experience is the same.
Jainism survived.
The same is true about Mohammedanism, Christianity -- they have all compromised with the existing people.
Just a few months ago, the present pope visited India.
The Indian Christians are the low caste Hindus, converted to Christianity because of poverty. There is no other reason for their conversion -- they are poor, uneducated, and Christianity promises them....
But the pope was faced with great difficulties because the Hindus who have become converted cannot simply drop their habits of thousands of years. In the church they bring incense before Jesus Christ. And it was reported to him by the bishops and the cardinals..."What should be done? We try to prevent them but they don't listen. They bring flowers, they bring incense... not only that, in the church they repeat the mantra omkar."
And the pope agreed that they should be allowed; otherwise, they will desert.
This is something so deep in them... they cannot think that OM, the sound of OM can be anything other than the most spiritual thing. They are Christians, and OM has nothing to do with Christianity -- but basically they are Hindus. And the pope's concession is a compromise, it is cunning.
Tomorrow these people will start painting Jesus Christ in the color red, and you will have to accept it because without the red color no stone can become God. It has never happened in India.
When for the first time the British government made roads and milestones, they had no idea what they were doing. They painted the milestones red, because red shows from far away, it stands out against the greenery, is more clear. So they painted them red, and they were surprised that every milestone was being worshipped! The villagers came with flowers, incense... every milestone had become the monkey god Hanuman.
Their engineers tried to explain, that "These are not gods, these are milestones."
They said, "You don't know. We have been doing this for thousands of years. Any stone painted red becomes divine." They were very happy -- not happy because of the roads, they were happy because of the milestones.
Christianity has been compromising from the very beginning in every country. That has been its way of survival.
You will be surprised to know that Indian Christianity is older than the Vatican. Indian Christianity is the oldest in the world, because one of Jesus' closest disciples, Thomas, came to India.
It was difficult to convert Indians to any other religion. They have seen so much, they have heard so much about religion, they have so many beliefs... Thomas was at a loss in the beginning, but finally he managed to compromise.
He started dressing like a Hindu. If you see the pictures of Thomas, you will be surprised that he shaved his head just like a Hindu shankaracharya. And he started using the thread that Hindus use, and he also used the wooden sandals that Hindu monks were using to avoid leather. And he would wear just a small dhoti with no shirt on top, just like the old brahmins. He learned Sanskrit.
And seeing him, that he was just like a brahmin, so whatever he was saying must be right, many people started following. They were the first Christians.
But this is more businesslike, it is salesmanship. It is not real conversion; it is tricky, it is exploiting innocent people.
In every country Christianity has compromised with the local population. Whatever its religion was, Christianity has compromised with it, taken its principles, its behavior. It is because of this compromising attitude that Christianity has become the biggest religion in the world -- almost half of the world is Christian.
Truth cannot be so cheap. And truth cannot be so appealing to such a big mob.
The crowd psychology is, that whatever it believes should be accepted as true; then there is a possibility of fifty-fifty: "You believe something from us, we will take something from you."
But truth knows no fifty-fifty.
It has to be a hundred percent pure; otherwise it is worse than a lie.
So when I said to you, "Don't compromise" I was saying many things in that.
First, to compromise means that convenience and survival are more important to you than truth.
Secondly, it means that truth is not a revolution but a business, that it is not a transformation of your being but a social conformity.
Thirdly, it means that you will never find yourself on the path. Once you have learned to compromise, you have started going astray.
Not to compromise is one of the basic, essential principles to follow if you want to find truth in its purity and full glory.
And when I said this to you, certainly you heard rightly something more which was not said: "Please don't do it to me."
My whole effort is to make you individuals, courageous enough even to stand against the whole world. If you feel that you are right and you are experiencing the truth in your innermost core, then the whole world may be against you -- it does not matter. Then even crucifixion is nothing but a seal of validity.
A man who can go to his crucifixion laughing has proved beyond doubt that he knows something more than the mortal body.
Jesus seems to be wayward. At the crucifixion, on the cross, he was not joyous, he was not smiling, laughing. On the contrary, he was complaining. He was shouting at God, "Have you forsaken me?" Because his expectation was not crucifixion; his expectation was crowning. He is the only begotten son of God, how can God allow him to be crucified? A miracle is bound to happen.
But the miracle did not happen, because miracles don't come from outside. The miracle would have happened if he had smiled and laughed because he knew, that "You can only crucify a dead body, you cannot crucify my consciousness."
It has happened in the case of al-Hillaj Mansoor. He was laughing -- and his crucifixion was more cruel than Jesus' because Mohammedans are more violent, more fanatic than any Jew. They cut him piece by piece, it was not a single stroke. First they cut his legs, then they cut his hands, then they made him blind, then they made him deaf. They killed him piece by piece and still, to the very last, he was smiling.
And somebody asked, "Before they cut your tongue, we want to know -- why are you smiling?"
He said, "I am smiling because they are punishing somebody else. The body that they are punishing is not me."
This is the miracle.
It does not depend on God, it does not depend on anybody else. It depends on your experience.
al-Hillaj proves himself to be far closer to truth, just by his simple action. He is not grumbling, he is not saying to God that "This is not right that they are behaving in this primitive way with me and you are simply silent." He is not talking about God at all.
He is simply enjoying the whole thing and laughing at the stupidity of people. "You are punishing somebody else. And I have always been telling you that you cannot punish me, you cannot even touch me. Punishment is not the question at all."
When you heard, although I did not say it to you, "Don't do it to me" you heard rightly. I was just going to say it, but seeing that you heard it, I did not say it.
All these years it has haunted you that you heard it and I have not said it -- was it your imagination or was I really saying something without saying it?
No, it was not your imagination. I was saying it without saying it.
I say many things to you without saying them. I simply create the atmosphere by saying many other things in which you can hear the unsaid.
Because there are a few things which can only be whispered, not shouted. And there are a few things which cannot even be whispered but only indicated indirectly, only then are they beautiful.

Question 2
BELOVED OSHO,
RECENTLY IT HAS STARTED HAPPENING THAT AS I BEGIN TO OPEN MY EYES FIRST THING IN THE MORNING I CAN SEE A VISION, LIKE A SCENE FROM A MOVIE -- AND THAT SCENE HAPPENS DAYS AFTER IN REALITY, JUST LIKE A REPETITION.
BEFORE I ARRIVED HERE IN BOMBAY, I HAD A VISION OF THE GOLDEN MANOR HOTEL -- THE SETTING, THE GARDEN, THE PEOPLE -- AND WHEN I ARRIVED HERE, IT WAS EXACTLY THE SAME AS MY VISION. I WROTE YOU A LETTER ABOUT THIS EARLIER, BUT DID NOT HAVE THE COURAGE TO DELIVER IT. NOW IT HAS BEEN HAPPENING OFTEN, AND I DON'T KNOW IF IT IS GOOD OR BAD.
ALSO, WHEN YOU WERE IN URUQUAY AND I WAS IN BRAZIL, I HAD THE SUDDEN COMPULSION TO GO TO MY ROOM, TO SIT ON THE FLOOR AND CLOSE MY EYES. I DID SO, AND LIKE A FLASH, I SAW YOU SITTING AT A TABLE, LAUGHING JOYOUSLY. I COULD ONLY SEE THE BACK OF ANOTHER MAN WHO SEEMED A LITTLE BIT SERIOUS OR SAD. THEN YOU SAW ME AND INVITED ME IN, AND THE MAN TURNED HIS FACE TO SEE ME. HE WAS BEAUTIFUL, VERY BEAUTIFUL... THE SCENE WAS SO FULL OF LIGHT! I'M SURE HE WAS NOT JESUS -- THE BEARD WAS DIFFERENT AND THE EYES WERE MORE DEEP AND DIRECT. HOURS LATER, THE RADIO GAVE THE NEWS THAT KRISHNAMURTI HAD DIED HOURS BEFORE.
OSHO, FROM THAT DAY ON, I WAS TOTALLY SURE THAT YOU LIVE ON TWO LEVELS SIMULTANEOUSLY, AND I DON'T KNOW ON WHICH LEVEL YOU ARE FOR MOST OF THE TIME DURING YOUR DAILY LIFE.
YOU ANSWERED TURIYA THAT YOU DON'T COME INTO OUR DREAMS.
BUT ISN'T IT TRUE THAT YOU ARE SO CLOSE TO THE DISCIPLE THAT WE ARE ONE WITH YOU ALL THE TIME, NOT ONLY IN OUR DREAMS?
One very fundamental thing has to be understood: a dream and a vision look alike, but they are two totally different phenomena.
A dream is a mind projection. It has no validity of its own. It is only a thought in picture form.
Small children cannot think in thoughts, but they can understand pictures; hence, in their books you will see big pictures, beautiful colors, and very little writing. Slowly slowly, as the child grows up, the pictures go on becoming smaller and the writing in his books increases. Finally, when he is in the university, pictures disappear and only writing remains. You may not have inquired why this is so....
If you give a child in a kindergarten school a book which has no pictures, he will not be interested at all, because he has not yet learned to think in words. But he can dream more perfectly than you can dream; he dreams so perfectly that once in a while you will find a child waking up in the morning and crying -- "Just now I had my bicycle. Where has it gone?" He was dreaming of riding on his bicycle, and as he opens his eyes he is in his bed and the bicycle is gone. And his dream is so clear that it is very difficult for him to make a distinction between the real bicycle and a dream bicycle; they look almost alike.
We are grown up, but our unconscious never grows, it remains a child.
So in sleep, when your conscious mind -- which has learned language, concepts, words -- is fast asleep, your unconscious starts dreaming. It is a child, so every thought form has to be translated by the unconscious mind into a picture form.
This is one of the great discoveries of Sigmund Freud, listening to your dreams. And he does the opposite process, translates your dream back from picture form into language, into concepts, into words. It needs a tremendous expertise. Still, nobody can be certain about it.
If you go to Sigmund Freud, each dream will end up as something sexual -- because that is his idea, that all sex is repressed.
It is true that much sexuality is repressed, but there are many other things also which are repressed. It is not only sex.
But it is a problem with inventors and pioneers particularly; they become so obsessed with their findings that they don't take note of other possibilities.
Freud's own disciple, Adler, went away from him just because Adler said that sex can be a part of repression, but that is not all. His own idea was that ambition, will to power, is far more important, and that a major part of your dreams concerns will to power.
For example, you dream that you have become a bird and you are flying. To Sigmund Freud it will symbolize only that you want the same sexual freedom as the birds and the animals, nothing else. But to Adler it will mean that flying upwards means you are ambitious, you want to become the prime minister.
But this is all guesswork.
Another disciple, Carl Gustav Jung, also went away from Freud because he was more interested in the ancient mythologies, and he thought that our dreams are part of our previous lives. So if you are a bird flying, he will interpret it that in some of your past lives you have been a bird.
Now what to do with these people, and how to decide?
The language of pictures cannot be precise. It is almost like a painting: many people can see and can decide its meaning in different ways.
Just as the child has a picture language, your unconscious has a picture language.
I am not interested in interpreting your dreams because it is such a rubbish job. You can go on interpreting for years and years, and the dreams will not come to an end -- every day, six hours every night you have to dream. And you have inexhaustible sources of dreaming.
And it is very quick -- the dream time is not the same as your ordinary time. Just reading your newspaper, you may fall asleep for a minute and you may see a dream which spreads for years; and when you wake up you look at your watch and just one minute has passed. You say, "My God, in one minute I saw a dream which is spread for a whole year, or even for years."
Dream time is totally different.
Up to now there has been no way to invent dream wristwatches, and perhaps there never will be a possibility, because there are lazy people and there are speedy people; some people are running fast, some people are simply sitting. In dreams also, the same differences exist: lazy people dream in a lazy way, speedy people dream in a speedy way; your dream reflects you. So I don't think there is any possibility of making a watch which can function for everybody. It is not possible, because everybody's dream speed is different.
Vision also appears to be just like dream, but it is not dream.
A vision is an objective phenomenon, it is not projected by your mind. You are seeing something, you are not projecting. In a certain clarity, your mind is capable of seeing things.
For example, I was traveling with one of my friends. He is a poet. We were in an air-conditioned bus, and it must have been nearabout ten o'clock in the night. And he suddenly heard, "Munna, Munna." Nobody else heard. I was sitting by his side, and he asked me, "Have you heard? Somebody is calling `Munna, Munna.'"
I said, "I have not heard anything. You must be dreaming."
He said, "No, I am awake. I was smoking, I was not dreaming. And only my father calls me `Munna'. Nobody else calls me Munna, that is my childhood name. My mother, who used to call me Munna, has died. My father is the only person alive who calls me Munna; and nobody else even knows. And the voice was exactly like my father's."
I said, "Let us reach the destination and we can phone your house from there, to see what is the matter."
We reached Nagpur nearabout twelve o'clock, and we phoned and we found that the father had died at exactly ten o'clock. Perhaps at the time of death he remembered his only son, and remembered the name that he always used.
Now, this is not a dream. He had not seen anything, but he had heard; it is objective. And the father was almost sixty miles away, and a dying man cannot shout to reach sixty miles. And if he had shouted that loudly, then everybody in the bus would have heard it. But only he heard it. Even I was not aware that his father called him `Munna'.
This is a vision... not visual, this is audio vision -- not video, Niskriya!
I may not come into your dreams -- and if I come it is your projection, I am not responsible for it. If I do anything, I am not responsible for it!
But I can come into a vision, and then the whole responsibility is mine.
The difference is very delicate.
The dream always happens when you are asleep.
The vision always happens when you are not asleep.
This is the first distinction: you are fully awake. And the vision always appears to be coming from outside, reaching to you. And sooner or later, you will find its validity, its reality.
The reality of dream you will never find. It is simple garbage, it is really the unwinding of the mind. The whole day the mind has to work, and it gets wound up, and needs unwinding to be fresh for tomorrow. So it is unwinding. Inconsistent things go on coming: you had been talking to somebody, you wanted to say something but you did not say it. Now that is hanging, it needs to be released -- in the dream it will be released.
The dream is a great help, a cleaning. It is not against you, it keeps you sane; otherwise, everybody will go insane. For six hours your mind goes on cleaning itself of every impression that has remained incomplete in the mind -- throws it off, prepares itself for tomorrow's work. But dreaming has no other significance.
Vision is a reality.
The dream is of the mind.
And the vision has a connection with the heart.
These things you will have to feel, because the differences are very very fine.
Whenever you are feeling something coming as a vision to you, be in a meditative mood, silent. Allow it to happen, be receptive; don't interfere, don't interpret. Just first let it be complete so that you can see it from the very beginning to the very end.
Most probably there will be no need of interpretation. Just seeing it in its completion will be enough; you will have the understanding. And then, soon some events will follow which will validate your vision.
Your dreams will never be validated by existence. So whatever you have seen was a vision -- you were awake.
And if you are silent, you can see things happening thousands of miles away. Space makes no difference. And you can see things which do not happen on the material level but happen on the level of consciousness. That's what you are mentioning, two levels.
Yes, it is true. I have to work on two levels: one is the level where you live, where you are, and one is the level where I am and I want you also to be.
From the top of a hill I have to come into the valley where you are; otherwise you won't listen, you won't believe the sunlit top. I have to take your hand in my hand and persuade you -- and on the way, tell stories which are not true! But they keep you engaged, and you don't create any trouble in walking; you go on, engaged with the story. And when you have reached the hilltop, you will know why I was telling long stories, and you will feel grateful that I told those stories; otherwise you would not have been able to travel that long, that far uphill.
It is something to be remembered: all the masters of the world have been telling stories, parables -- why? The truth can be simply said, there is no need to give you so many stories. But the night is long, and you have to be kept awake; without stories you are going to fall asleep.
Till the morning comes there is an absolute necessity to keep you engaged, and the stories the masters have been telling are the most intriguing things possible.
The truth cannot be said, but you can be led to the point from where you can see it. Now, the question is how to lead you to the point from where you can see it.
There is a story in Sarmad's life. He was teaching his students, his disciples, and suddenly he said, "Come on out of the class, something is happening." So they all came out.
A man was dragging a bull, but the bull was very powerful. The man was also powerful, but a bull is a bull. So although the man was dragging the bull... the man was being dragged!
Sarmad showed his disciples, "Look, this is the situation."
They said, "What do you mean?"
He said, "This is the situation between me and you, but I am not so stupid as this man."
And he said, "Listen! Are you taking the bull for the first time?"
The man said, "I am a new servant, and I come from the city and I don't know what to do... because I drag him one foot and he drags me four feet! It has been going on for hours, and I don't think that it is going to end."
Sarmad said, "You drop it! You don't understand the ways of the village, and particularly the language of bulls."
And he took a little grass, green and beautiful, and just walked ahead of the bull, without even touching the bull -- and the bull followed him. And Sarmad started walking faster, and the bull walked faster.
The man said, "This is great! He is not even dragging him, the bull is going on its own."
And Sarmad said, "You take this grass. Don't let him eat; otherwise, you will be in trouble. If he creates trouble, start running -- he will run with you, but you will reach home."
And he said to his disciples, "This is what I have been doing with you. All the parables, all the stories are nothing but green grass."
Visions should not be made an object of thinking. You should just wait, and life will provide you the right validity. Then accept it with gratitude.
Whatever you have seen was a vision, and it has been validated by life itself. Now there is no need to think about it.
If you start thinking, you will create a mess. And if you don't think, you will allow more visions to happen to you.
And a man of visions starts moving from the lower plane, from the valley, to the higher plane, towards the top, without much effort.
It is a good indication that you are ready.

Question 3
BELOVED OSHO,
THE LONGER I AM YOUR DISCIPLE, THE LESS I KNOW AND UNDERSTAND.
A MAGIC PULL BROUGHT ME TO BOMBAY, AND SITTING IN YOUR PRESENCE HAS BEEN LIKE COMING HOME AGAIN -- GLIMPSES OF TWO HEARTS BEATING TOGETHER, MOMENTS OF LOVE AND WONDER, DAYS OF JOY AND PLAYFULNESS.
BEING BACK IN HOLLAND THERE IS ONLY THIS BIG LONGING LEFT INSIDE MY HEART: TO SIT AT YOUR FEET AGAIN AND AGAIN AND AGAIN.
BELOVED MASTER, MY MIND IS LOSING CONTROL, AND MY HEART STARTS SINGING. WHAT IS HAPPENING?
The mind is a habit.
Even if there are moments when the heart is singing and the whole being is full of joy, the mind cannot leave its old habits. It will certainly ask what is happening.
Can't you allow things to happen without asking why? what?
Do you understand why we ask such questions?
The mind asks these questions because it wants to control your lifestyle, it wants to know everything that is going on. Nothing should happen which is beyond it; everything should be in its control. The mind is a great controller. And if everything remains in its control, it will be a tragedy because nothing great can happen to you.
Everything that is great, magnificent, is beyond mind.
And mind can never get the answer why, what, how.
You have to learn one thing: that it is not necessary to satisfy the mind about every experience.
Experiences of the heart, experiences of the being, experiences of the transcendental should not be made a point of inquiry. You should not ask why, you should enjoy them.
You should not ask what is happening, because if you insist on these questions the happening will stop. These questions are not your friends. Let the mind ask questions only when something is going wrong. You are sick, you have a headache, your stomach has cramps -- let the mind ask; that is the right realm for the mind.
But your heart is dancing -- what has the mind to do with it?
Just tell the mind, "Keep quiet, this is not your world. You look at your affairs. You should not go on poking your nose everywhere."
The heart is a higher reality.
The being is still higher, and there are realities higher than the being. Mind cannot ask questions about them, and no answer is possible.
You will have to learn some new ways, and you will have to drop some old habits.
So just make it a point, simple: if there is something wrong, you are miserable... misery is perfectly the right terrain where mind is needed. Without mind, you cannot create misery; it is the world of mind -- then ask why.
But it is strange: nobody comes to ask, "Why am I miserable?" But when the heart is dancing, people ask, "Why? What is happening?"
The reason is because your heart has not danced for centuries, so the experience is so new that you get scared. You start feeling perhaps you are a little bit crazy, getting old, senile. What is happening? -- because the experience is new.
But remember, the mind's area of concern is only with anything going wrong. The mind has the right to ask and to find the right cause and to put things right.
But celebration, rejoicing, ecstasy -- mind has nothing to do with them. Just tell the mind, "You rest. Everything is going fine, you need not worry."
If you can teach the mind to ask the right questions and not to interfere in realms which are beyond it, you will have disciplined yourself for more and more, greater and higher experiences.

Question 4
BELOVED OSHO,
IT SEEMS THAT MY PROBLEMS ARE GETTING MORE AND MORE SINCE I HAVE BECOME YOUR SANNYASIN. IS THAT YOUR WORK?
It is my work.
My work is to make you more and more aware, and when you become more aware you become aware of more problems.
Those problems were there before.
I don't create your problems, it is just that you were unconscious, you were not taking any note. Those problems were there.
It is just like a house which is in darkness, and many spiders are weaving their nests and scorpions are living and snakes are enjoying, and suddenly you bring light there. The light does not create the spiders or the scorpions or the snakes, but it makes you aware of them.
And it is good to be aware, because then the house can be cleaned; then you can avoid the snakes.
You have many problems which you are not seeing -- which in fact, you do not want to see. You go on postponing. You are so afraid of seeing those problems, because then you will have to solve them. But by postponing they are not solved; it is not so easy.
Problems are not letters written to George Bernard Shaw.
George Bernard Shaw used to collect letters; he would not open them. He would open them on the first of every month, so for thirty days he would collect thousands of letters from all over the world. His date was fixed: on the first of every month he would open them. And he would go on throwing them, because most of them had already been answered. It was rarely that some letter was left that had not answered itself.
Somebody asked him, "This is a strange way...."
He said, "It is not strange, it is the simplest way. When somebody does not get an answer for two weeks, three weeks, he gets the answer that `This man is not going to answer.' He drops the hope.
"And most of those letters are useless anyway. I am not going to waste my whole month. I have given them just one day -- and any really authentic letter that needs my attention, I answer. This way, I save my time, I save their time; otherwise they would have to read... and this is such a difficult world that they would not only read they would reply also... again you have to read it.
"It is better to finish it from the very beginning. It is a chain phenomenon, it can go on endlessly. And the more you allow it and then stop, the more it hurts. The first letter and it is finished -- it does not hurt. The man just understands that this man is not the type who answers letters."
But problems are not letters, and life is not George Bernard Shaw. You cannot postpone.
But people are postponing. They go on pushing them this way and that way, everywhere hiding them, thinking that some miracle... and things will settle down and problems will be solved. This is not going to happen. On the contrary, those problems will create their children. They will start finding boyfriends, girlfriends -- two problems meeting together and a third problem is produced, and you will be in more difficulty.
It is better to go on facing each problem as it comes by.
It is not sannyas that has created your problems. Sannyas has simply given you a little more awareness.
Your problems have always been there.
Sannyas has given you the opportunity to solve them.
And one should enjoy solving one's problems. It sharpens your intelligence. Each problem is a challenge. Each problem makes you more intelligent.
And the day you will not have any problems, your mind will come to its utmost clarity -- because no dust, no problem. Your mind becomes a mirror, so pure that it reflects reality.
Yes, it is my work.
But don't think that I am creating your problems.
I am just giving you insight, awareness, silence, so that you can see your problems and solve them.

============================================================

Question 1
BELOVED OSHO,
WHEN I CAME TO GREECE TO SEE YOU, EVERYTHING REFLECTED MORE AND MORE OF THE ZORBA.
NOW, BEING HERE IN INDIA, EVERYTHING AROUND YOU IS REFLECTING MORE OF THE BUDDHA.
OSHO, DOES THIS DEPEND ON BEING IN GREECE OR INDIA?
Human history has been a tragedy.
And the reason for it being a tragedy is not very complex. You have not to go very far to find it out, it is in everybody.
The whole past of man has created a split in man; there is a constant civil war in every human being.
If you do not feel at ease, the reason is not personal. Your disease is social.
The strategy that has been used is to divide you into two enemy camps: the zorba and the buddha, the materialist and the spiritualist.
You are not divided in reality. In reality you are a harmonious whole. But in your mind the conditioning is that you are not one whole, one piece: you have to fight against your body. If you want to be a spiritual being, the body has to be conquered, defeated, destroyed, tortured in every possible way.
This has been the accepted ideology all over the world. In different cultures, different religions, the formulations may be different, but the basic rule is the same: divide man, create a conflict in him so one part starts feeling higher, becomes holy, starts condemning the other part as the sinner.
And the trouble is that you are one, there is no way to divide you.
Every division is going to create misery in you, every division will mean that half of your being is fighting with the other half. And if you are fighting within yourself, how can you be at ease?
The whole humanity up to now has lived in a schizophrenic way. Everyone has been cut into pieces, fragments. Your religions, your philosophies, your ideologies have not been healing processes, they have been root causes of inner conflict and war. You have been wounding yourself. Your right hand wounds the left hand, your left hand wounds the right hand; both your hands become wounded.
The West finally chose to go with the zorba. There was no other way to remain sane -- one part had to be completely destroyed, ignored, forgotten. The West denied the inner reality of man, his consciousness: man is only body -- there is no soul -- and eat, drink and be merry is the only religion. This was simply a way to find some peace of mind, to get out of the conflict, to come to a decision and a conclusion -- because this is accepting that you are one: just matter, just body.
The East has chosen the other way, but the basic problem is the same: the East has chosen that you are the soul and the body is an illusion.
Matter does not exist, the world is made of the same stuff as dreams are made of, so don't be bothered about it. Renounce it, forget all about it -- it is not worth taking note of.
On the surface it seems that East and West are doing different things, but essentially they are not doing different things. Essentially they are trying to find a rational way to be one. Because to be two means a constant dis-ease, a conflict -- it is better to drop the idea of the other.
The East says that the body is illusory, it is only an appearance, a shadow, it has no reality.
The West says that consciousness is a byproduct -- it does not exist in itself, it is an appearance. When the body dies nothing remains, the body is all, and the consciousness that you feel is just the combination of all the elements of the body.
For example, if you take all the parts of your car separately, or all the parts of your watch separately, do you think something like a soul will be released out of the watch? Who was running the watch? It was just because of the combination of the parts in a certain way that the watch was running, the car was running, that all machines are working; it is a byproduct. Put all the parts together again and the watch will start ticking -- the soul has not gone anywhere, there has been no soul in the first place.
As far as I am concerned, I see that the fundamental reason is to somehow choose one and decide that the other is illusory, so that you can be at peace, so that there is no need to fight, torture, and be in constant fear of being defeated.
Why have the East and the West chosen differently? That also has to be understood.
The Eastern mind, in search of a unitary being, tried to find out: what exactly is this inner consciousness that the Eastern mystics, saints and sages have been talking about, and calling the body illusory? To us the body seems to be real, and consciousness is just a word. But because all the saints in the East were insisting that this word `consciousness' is your reality, the East has tried to find out what this reality is before deciding in favor of the body.
The natural tendency will be to decide in favor of the body, because the body is there, already appearing real -- consciousness you have to search for, you have to go into an inner pilgrimage.
The East, because of people like Gautam Buddha and Mahavira, could not deny that these people were sincere. Their sincerity was so clear, their presence was so impressive, their words were so authoritative... it was impossible to deny. No argument was enough, because these people were their own argument, their own validity.
And they were so peaceful and so joyful, so relaxed, so fearless. They had everything that every human being desires... and in a way they had nothing. Certainly they had found a source within themselves, a treasure. And you cannot just deny it without giving enough time to the search. Unless you find that there is no consciousness, you cannot deny it.
We had people so fragrant... we could not see their roses, but the fragrance was so much that the East tried to look inside, and found that the soul is far more real. The body is just an appearance.
And just by the way, it will be significant to remind you that modern science has come to the conclusion that matter is illusory, that matter does not exist, it only appears. They have come to the conclusion from a very different route. By searching deeply into matter, they have found that, as they reach deeper into matter, it is less and less substantial. And at a point after the atom, there is no matter at all: there are only electrons, which are particles of electricity -- which is not matter but energy.
Just a hundred years ago, Nietzsche declared "God is dead" not knowing at all that within a hundred years the whole of science would agree that perhaps God may be alive, but matter is dead.
The East has moved inwards and found that the body, matter, is relatively non-substantial. The ultimate reality belongs to consciousness.
In the West, development happened in a different way. And there are reasons why it happened in that way.
The East is ancient. At least ten thousand years of a constant, consistent search of the inner reality of man -- and all the genius of the East has been devoted to it.
When the UPANISHADS were being written in the East, nearabout five thousand years ago, the West did not exist as a human society at all.
In India we have Mohenjo daro, Harrapur -- cities that existed seven thousand years ago, with such refined development... they have streets as wide as those in Bombay. They have bedrooms with attached bathrooms.
And you will be surprised at why I am saying this: because just a hundred years ago in America, there was a court case against bathrooms which went up to the Supreme Court. The first man who made a bathroom attached to his bedroom... Christianity was against it because this is dirty -- making your bathroom attached to your bedroom. This is un-Christian; cleanliness is next to God. And here is the bathroom next to the bedroom! Just a hundred years ago... and the Supreme Court had to decide that there is nothing unclean in it, and if somebody wants to have a bathroom attached to his bedroom it is nobody else's business to interfere and it has nothing to do with your religion.
But the church was fighting.
In Harapur, seven thousand years ago, they had bathrooms attached to their bedrooms, they had bathtubs, and they had a very special arrangement for circulation of water in the city. The hot and cold water in your bathroom is not a new thing; it was available in Harapur, in Mohenjo daro. They had swimming pools. It must have been a very highly cultured society.
At the time of Gautam Buddha, just twenty-five centuries ago, even then the West was not very evolved. And you can see it. We did not crucify Gautam Buddha, and the West crucified Jesus Christ five hundred years after Gautam Buddha.
And what Jesus was saying was nothing compared to Gautam Buddha. Gautam Buddha was saying that there is no God; still, nobody thought of crucifying him. Jesus Christ was not saying anything against Judaism; on the contrary, he was simply saying that he was their lost prophet. And he was repeating everything written in the Old Testament -- he was not saying anything that was contradicting the old religion. And Gautam Buddha was contradicting everything in Hinduism: he said that the VEDAS are idiotic, he said that there is no God, he said that all priests are the most cunning people in the world. And priests in India, the brahmins, are the highest caste. But nobody thought of crucifying him.
People challenged him for discussions, people discussed, and because they could not defeat him in argument.... They could not defeat him.
When they came in front of him, they were sincere enough to realize and recognize that he knew better, that their knowledge was only bookish, and his knowledge was authentic experience.
Western development is childish compared to Eastern development. It begins in Greece.
But even a man like Socrates, who was neither denying God nor affirming God, who was simply saying that, "I have not come to experience, hence, I cannot be untruthful -- I cannot say whether God exists or not. And I would like everybody to be sincere about it. Unless you encounter, don't say yes, don't say no; remain agnostic, keep your conclusions suspended."
A very reasonable man, but he was also poisoned. He has not denied your tradition, he has not denied your past, he has not denied anything -- he simply argued for a more rational approach, a more logical approach. It is not a crime. And this is the reward that he gets: he is poisoned, society decides that he is a dangerous man.
Those people who could have changed Western society towards inner reality are being crucified or poisoned.
Naturally, the talented people became afraid even of talking about inner things, mysteries. They started talking only about objective things, matter, because matter cannot be denied. And there is no problem with going into a deep search into matter.
The crucifixion of Jesus and the death of Socrates closed the door for Western genius to move inwards. Anybody who had any intelligence became aware that it is simply inviting your death; it is better to use your talents and genius in such a way that the society cannot condemn it.
So the whole genius of Western humanity became a servant for creating more comforts for the body, more technology, more machines, more knowledge about matter -- and everybody was happy.
Even in these matters, if there was something that went against religion, immediately the church was there to stop it.
For example, when Galileo wrote that the sun does not go around the earth as it appears, but that in actuality the earth goes around the sun, as it does not appear, he was called by the pope to his court and asked -- and he was old, seventy-five years old, sick and almost on his deathbed -- "You have to change your book because it goes against the BIBLE. In the BIBLE the statement is that the sun goes around the earth, and we are not ready to listen to any argument. You simply change it; otherwise, death will be your punishment."
Such an idiotic church, which is not even ready to listen to any argument, which only knows to dictate: Do it or be ready to die!
Galileo must have had a great sense of humor. He said, "There is no need for you to take so much trouble to kill me. I am going to die anyway. As far as the book is concerned, I will change it, but I want you to remember that by my changing the book, neither is the earth going to change nor is the sun going to change. The earth will still go around the sun, because they don't read my book and they don't care what I write."
So he cancelled the statement in his book. And in the footnote he wrote, "I am canceling the statement, knowing perfectly well that it makes no difference. The reality remains the same."
When Copernicus found that the earth is not flat as it is said in the BIBLE, but round, he was immediately in trouble.
Now, these matters have nothing to do with religion. What has religion to do with whether the earth is round or flat? It can have any geometrical shape -- religion does not have anything to do with it.
But Christianity, Mohammedanism, are very primitive religions. They don't have the cultured, sophisticated attitude of Hinduism, Jainism, Buddhism, Taoism. They don't know how to argue, they only know how to fight. Their only argument is the sword; at the point of the sword is to be decided who is right.
It is the church -- you will be surprised to know -- that has prevented the West from going in the direction of inwardness. It forced Western humanity to go towards matter.
The inner was absolutely the church's monopoly, and they decided everything about it: there was no need to search, there was no need to discover, there was no need to meditate. You were only supposed to believe in God. But if you could do something as far as matter is concerned, there would be no problem; as long as it did not come in conflict with the BIBLE.
Copernicus said to the pope, "It is just a small thing, and I have every proof that the earth is round. It is my lifelong work, and it does not affect your religiousness."
The pope said, "You don't understand. The question is not whether it affects our religiousness or not; the question is that the BIBLE is God's book, the holy book. If one statement in the BIBLE is proved wrong, that has great implications: first, that God can be wrong. We cannot accept that."
They cannot even accept that the pope can be wrong, what to say about God? The pope is a faraway representative. Jesus represents God, and the pope represents Jesus -- not directly, but through hundreds of popes who have died before him. He is connected through them to Jesus, and Jesus has a direct telephone line to God.
Just one statement against the BIBLE, if it is proved valid, makes God fallible. And it cannot be accepted -- that's one thing.
Secondly, if one statement is proved wrong, what is the guarantee about other statements? It creates suspicion. It destroys the very foundation of belief and faith -- "So we cannot accept anything in the BIBLE as wrong. You can do everything that does not go against the BIBLE."
Naturally only matter was left. You can do research in physics, in chemistry, in biology, in zoology, in geology. You can do all these things, you are free.
The church has been a great China Wall, preventing people from going inwards.
It looks strange, but it is a fact: the Christian church has proved the greatest enemy of religion on the earth. Other religions have also proved enemies, but not that great.
Genius was left to work only with matter.
In the East, the genius had first preference for the inner journey.
Only second-class, mediocre people would work for the outer, material things; real intelligence would always move into meditativeness.
Slowly slowly, the distance became bigger. The West became materialist -- and the whole responsibility goes to the Christian church -- and the Eastern humanity became more and more spiritualist. The division, the split that was created in each man, became a split on a wider scale: as East and West.
One great poet has written, "East is East and West is West, and never the twain shall meet." And this man, Lord Kipling, was very much interested in the East. He lived in India for years, he was in the government service. But seeing the difference... that the whole Eastern consciousness moves inwards and the Western consciousness moves outwards -- how could they meet?
My whole work is just to prove Lord Kipling wrong.
I would like to say -- neither West is West nor East is East, and the twain have already met.
What do you mean by `East'? In Bombay, Calcutta is east; in Calcutta, Bombay is west. This is nonsense, these words are relative words. You cannot say that a certain place is east and a certain place is west; they are all relative. For the people of Calcutta, Tokyo is east -- and that's what the Japanese think. They call their land "the land of sunrise" and they call their king "the only begotten son of the sun god." The sun god is the real god, and Hirohito, the king of Japan, is his only son.
In fact, in the second world war when the Japanese were defeated, they could not believe it. Thousands of soldiers committed suicide just out of shame -- "How can it happen that God's son should be defeated? Now there is no point in living, everything has gone wrong."
They believe that they are the real East.
Nobody is East and nobody is West.
But the attitudes can be understood, and they are very prominent. And my whole approach is to bring a bridge into each individual, so that you are one whole.
Don't be against your body; it is your home.
Don't be against your consciousness, because without consciousness your house may be very decorated but it won't have any master, it will be empty. Together they create a beauty, a fuller life.
Symbolically, I have chosen Zorba for the body and Buddha for the soul.
Your question is that when I was in Greece I was talking more about Zorba, and here in India the atmosphere seems to be closer to Buddha. Your observation is true.
In Greece I was talking about Zorba. Still they deported me.
If I had been talking about Buddha, you would not have seen me again!
I was talking about Zorba because that is the foundation. But I was making it clear that Zorba alone is only the foundation of the house, it is not the house itself.
In India I am talking about Buddha, but I have not forgotten Zorba.
Each statement that I make -- whether it is about Zorba or about Buddha -- implies the other automatically, because to me they are inseparable. It is only a question of emphasis.
To make the Greek mind understand, I emphasized Zorba.
The ambassador of Sri Lanka to America wrote me a letter saying that "Your followers around the world are making restaurants, discos, and calling them ZORBA THE BUDDHA. It is very insulting to Buddha. And if you do such thing in a country like Sri Lanka, there can be violence. I advise you to drop this name."
I told my secretary to write to him, that "In the first place, nobody has the monopoly on Zorba or on Buddha. Secondly, we are not concerned with Gautam the Buddha; `buddha' is not a personal name, it is a quality. It means the awakened one. Anyone who is awakened can be called the buddha. Gautam Buddha is only one of the millions of buddhas who have happened and who will happen. And you cannot prevent Zorba becoming a buddha. In fact, you should help me to make zorbas into buddhas, because that is the only real revolution -- that a materialist, a zorba, who knows nothing of higher consciousness, becomes a buddha."
He never replied.
Zorba has his own beauty. And the island in Greece where I was staying is the place where Kazantzakis, the novelist who created the novel ZORBA THE GREEK.... Zorba is a fictitious name, he is not a historical person. But the island where I was staying was the island where Kazantzakis was born.
And Kazantzakis is one of the best novelists of this century, and he suffered tremendously at the hands of the church. Finally, when he wrote ZORBA THE GREEK he was expelled from the church. By writing ZORBA he was forced: "You withdraw your book ZORBA; otherwise you will be expelled." Because he did not withdraw the book, he was expelled from Christianity and condemned to hell.
Zorba is really Kazantzakis' own individuality, which Christianity had repressed, which he could not live, which he wanted to live. He expressed that whole unlived part of his life in the name of Zorba.
Zorba is a beautiful man -- no fear of hell, no greed for heaven, living moment to moment, enjoying small things... food, drink, women. After the whole day's work, he will take his musical instrument and will dance on the beach for hours.
And the other part of Kazantzakis which he lived in ZORBA THE GREEK... Zorba is the servant. The other part is the master who employed Zorba as his servant. He is always sad and sitting in his office, doing his files, never laughing, never enjoying, never going out and always feeling deep down jealous of Zorba because he earns a little, not much, but he lives like an emperor, not thinking of tomorrow, of what will happen. He eats well, he drinks well, he sings well, he dances well. And his master, who is very rich, is just sitting there sad, tense, in anguish, in misery, suffering.
One day Zorba says to his master -- which is Kazantzakis himself -- "Master, there is only one thing wrong with you: you think too much. You come with me." It was a full-moon night.
Kazantzakis tried -- "No, no. What are you doing?"
But Zorba pulled him out to the beach and he started dancing, playing his instrument. And he told Kazantzakis, "Try. Jump! If you cannot dance, do SOMETHING." And with Zorba's energy and his vibe, Kazantzakis also started dancing. For the first time in his life he felt that he was alive.
Zorba is the unlived part of every so-called religious person.
And why was the church so much against it when ZORBA was published? It was just a novel; there was nothing for the church to be worried about. But it was so clear that it is the unlived Christian in every Christian, this book could be a dangerous book. And it is a dangerous book.
But Zorba is tremendously beautiful. Kazantzakis sends him to purchase some things from the city, and he forgets all. He drinks and goes to the prostitutes and enjoys, and once in a while he remembers that it seems many days have passed but still, the money is with him. Unless all the money is finished, how can he return? The master will be very angry, but nothing can be done about it -- it is his problem.
And after three weeks he comes back -- and he had gone only for three days -- and he does not bring anything that he was sent for. And he comes with all the stories -- "What a great journey it was, you should have been there. I met such beautiful bubalinas... and such good wine."
And the master said, "But what about the things? For three weeks I have been sitting here boiling."
He said, "When there are so many beautiful things available, who bothers about such small things? You can cut my salary every week, by and by, slowly, and take your money back. I am sorry I could not come earlier. And you should be happy that I have come -- because the money was finished I had to come. But next time when I go, I will bring all the things."
He said, "You will never go again. I will send somebody else."
Zorba's whole life is a life of simple, physical enjoyment, but without any anxiety, without any guilt, without any botheration about sin and virtue and....
I would like this man Zorba to be alive in everybody, because it is your natural inheritance. But you should not stop at Zorba.
Zorba is only the beginning. Sooner or later, if you allow your Zorba full expression, you are bound to think of something better, higher, greater. It will not come out of thinking; it will come out of your experiences -- because those small experiences will become boring.
Buddha himself had come to be Buddha because he had lived the life of a zorba. That thing has not been noticed by the East -- that for twenty-nine years Buddha lived as no Zorba could ever live. Zorba was so poor.
Gautam Buddha's father had arranged for all the beautiful girls to be picked from the whole kingdom for Buddha's enjoyment. He made three beautiful palaces in three different places for different seasons. He had beautiful gardens and lakes. Buddha's whole life was just luxury, pure luxury. But he got bored.
One of the most significant experiences that he comes across was when one night beautiful girls were dancing... he was drinking, they were drinking, and then everybody fell asleep drunk. In the middle of the night he woke up and looked around, and he was shocked; and that shock was one of the turning points in his life. Some girl was snoring -- she was a beautiful girl, but her mouth open and snoring... she looked so ugly, the saliva was coming out... somebody's nose was flowing. And he said, "My God, this is what beauty is!" He was finished. Those girls were dispersed the next morning. "I don't want any girls in my palaces. Enough is enough."
In fact, it was too much. In twenty-nine years he lived almost the equivalent to four or five lives of an ordinary man. With all that luxury, soon he found himself tired and bored, and a question became very prominent in his mind: Is this all? Then what am I going to live tomorrow for? Life must mean something more; otherwise, it is meaningless.
It was out of the zorba that the search, for Buddha, started.
Not everybody becomes a buddha; and the basic reason is that the zorba remains unlived.
Do you see my argument? My argument is: live Zorba fully, and you will naturally enter into the life of a buddha.
Kazantzakis has written ZORBA THE GREEK. He's dead. If he had been allowed to live more.... He was sick, he was very tense, he remained very miserable because he was always afraid of sin. And then when he was expelled from the Christian church -- that means condemned to hell; only Christians can go to paradise -- that was such a shock that he could not survive. He was really killed by the Christian church expelling him.
If he were alive, I would have told him: "Your book is half. You need to write another book, ZORBA THE BUDDHA. Then it will be a complete phenomenon. But you can write the other book only if you live your zorba. You have not even lived zorba; how can you live the buddha?"
Enjoy your body, enjoy your physical existence. There is no sin in it. Hidden behind it is your spiritual growing, is your spiritual blissfulness. When you are tired of physical pleasures, only then will you ask, "Is there something more?" And this question cannot be only intellectual, it has to be existential: "Is there something more?"
And when the question is existential, you will find within yourself something more.
There is something much more. Zorba is only the beginning.
Once the buddha, the awakened soul, takes possession of you, then you will know that pleasure was not even a shadow. There is so much bliss.... That bliss is not against pleasure. In fact, it is pleasure which has brought you to bliss.
There is no fight between Zorba and Buddha. Zorba is the arrow -- if you follow it rightly, you will reach the Buddha.
Certainly in Greece there is an atmosphere different from India. The Greek personality has remained materialistic.
In India, the basic and the essential atmosphere is that of the awakened soul.
Whether you go on sleeping, it doesn't matter, but the atmosphere around you is that of the sunrise. The birds are singing, the flowers are blossoming, and from everywhere the indication is for you to wake up.
I will go to Greece again because I have been enjoying all these deportations. And next time I have to talk about Buddha -- because I have talked only about Zorba, and I never leave anything incomplete.
And already, the minister of interior in Greece has invited me: "We will make arrangements, you come."
I said, "I will come, but at least for three weeks don't deport me" -- because no country seems to be able to have me for more than three weeks. A few countries are so stupid that they cannot even have me for thirty-six hours.
England proved to be the worst. They would not allow me six hours to sleep at the airport -- not even entering England, but just the airport lounge. They wouldn't allow me to sleep there for six hours.
I said, "What reasons have you got?"
And the airport officer said, "We have no reasons. This is the file, the information from the prime minister is that `This man is dangerous and should not be allowed.'"
But I said, "I am not entering England, and from the lounge there is no way to enter into England. And you have checked me well -- I am not carrying any bombs or anything. And sleeping six hours in the airport, what danger can I do? You just think...."
He said, "Don't put me into trouble, because tomorrow it is going to be in parliament and then I will be answerable -- `Why did you allow him?'"
So I had to go to jail for six hours. They said, "The only place we can allow you to remain is in jail."
And the next day in parliament the question was there, and I am always surprised that the question is asked and the same answer is given, that "The man is very dangerous," but nobody in the parliament has the intelligence to ask, "What danger could he have been just sleeping in the lounge at the airport? He may be dangerous, but what danger could he have been?" Nobody in the parliament asked.
So I have informed the minister in Greece that I will go. I have to go.
I was really thinking to stay longer, and I had fifteen more days on the visa to stay, but the archbishop of Greece threatened the government that if they didn't deport me immediately then they were going to burn my house where I was staying, burn me alive and all the people who were staying with me, dynamite the house. And the government became threatened, and they thought that "Some problem may arise, it is better to send this man away immediately."
I was asleep when I was arrested. You don't arrest people when they are asleep.
And they had no reason, because I had not gone out of the house for fifteen days. I said, "You have to show some reason why you are deporting me."
They said, "We don't have any reason, just orders from above." And all the orders were based on the threat of the archbishop.
It is the same archbishop that expelled Kazantzakis.
And these people are living almost out of date, out of time. They are not contemporaries.
Because the day they deported me from the island, the people of the island, who had no idea about me, just rumors.... But seeing the threat of the archbishop they all felt ashamed. And they asked me, "What we can do? We are poor people."
I said, "You all go to the airport to show the archbishop how many people are with him and how many people are with me -- although I have been here for only fifteen days and they have been here for two thousand years." And there were only six old women with the archbishop in the church, and three thousand people, the whole island, at the airport.
Still they don't understand that they are no longer needed, that their time is finished. And they talk about loving your enemy and loving your neighbor, and God is love -- and they threaten a man who has not done anything that they will burn him alive, with all his friends. At least twenty-five people were staying in that big mansion.
This shows that somehow the Western mind has not grown towards inwardness, towards love, towards non-violence. Their whole approach is materialistic.
Two thousand years after Jesus is crucified, and this man is threatening me -- Jesus Christ's representative in Greece is threatening me -- that he will burn me alive. Does he represent Jesus Christ or was he also one of the rabbis who crucified Jesus Christ?
The mind of the priest in the West has been a hindrance to Western growth towards meditation. But a strange time of revolution has come -- at least for the new generation, because the new generation is not with these old priests and these old churches.
And the new generation in the West is looking towards the East. That's a great hope.
That is Zorba searching for Gautam Buddha.

Question 2
BELOVED OSHO,
THOUGHTS OF DEATH HAVE BEEN A FREQUENT VISITOR DURING MY DISCIPLEHOOD. HOW CAN A DISCIPLE DIE IN A MASTER'S PRESENCE, ESPECIALLY WHEN THE MASTER IS PHYSICALLY DISTANT?
OSHO, IS MAHAKASHYAP THE ONLY ANSWER?
The question is not whether or not you are in the presence of the master, but whether or not you are filled with love and trust for the master.
Physical closeness means nothing. Only spiritual closeness is significant.
Your love, your trust is enough. You can be on the moon and the master will be by your side -- really, the master will be inside you -- because as your love deepens, something of the master, his energies, start melting and merging with you.
The fear of physical distance is the fear of lack of love and trust.
Mahakashyap alone is not the answer. Everybody has to be an answer unto himself.
Mahakashyap remained with Buddha, and after Buddha's death he died; he could not survive separately.
But that is Mahakashyap's uniqueness. It is not the only answer.
I will tell you a few other stories around Buddha so you can understand.
Ananda lived with Buddha for forty-two years. Nobody else lived with Buddha so long, nobody was allowed to live with him so long. But there was a problem. Ananda was Buddha's cousin-brother, and older than him, and just the Eastern tradition.... Before taking initiation -- Ananda was the elder brother -- and he said to Gautam Buddha, "Siddharth" -- Siddharth was his family name -- "Listen: after initiation, whatever you say I will have to do. I will be your disciple, you will be my master. Right now I am your elder brother, you are my younger brother; whatever I say you have to do. Three things you have to remember -- don't forget them when I become a disciple." It is a beautiful story.
Buddha said, "What are the three things?"
Ananda said, "First, I will always live with you; you cannot send me anywhere else to spread the message. Second, if I want anybody to meet you -- even in the middle of the night -- you cannot say no; that is my personal privilege. And thirdly, I will sleep in the same room where you sleep. Even in sleep, you cannot make me stay in a different place."
Buddha promised, and these three conditions were followed for forty-two years.
But Ananda did not become enlightened. You can understand his pain and his anguish -- people who had come long after him became enlightened, and he remained in his ignorance just the same as before. The day Buddha died he said, "What will happen to me? I could not become enlightened even though I was with you for forty-two years, day in, day out, twenty-four hours a day. Without you, I don't see any hope."
Buddha said, "You don't understand the dynamics of life. Perhaps you will become enlightened only when I am gone; I am the barrier. You take me for granted. The day you had asked those three conditions, I had thought that those conditions were going to be a barrier for you. You cannot forget that you are my elder brother, even now. You cannot forget that you have certain privilege over others. You cannot forget that I have agreed on three conditions only for you, for nobody else. Perhaps my death will help."
Buddha died. And after twenty-four hours, there was a great meeting of all the enlightened disciples to write down whatever Buddha had said in these forty-two years. But the problem was that nobody had been with him continuously for forty-two years except Ananda -- but he could not be allowed in the meeting because he was not enlightened. An ignorant man, unenlightened -- you cannot rely on what he is saying, whether he heard it or imagined it, whether he has forgotten something, whether he has put his own interpretation in it. It is difficult.
And the scene is really tragic. The conference is inside a hall and Ananda is sitting outside on the steps crying, because he lived with Buddha for forty-two years; he knows more than anybody else. Each single moment he remembers, but he is unenlightened. Crying, sitting there outside the hall, something transpired. He had not cried his whole life. With those tears, his ego disappeared; he became like a child.
They opened the door to see whether Ananda was still sitting outside -- because they had told him, "You sit outside. If we need some confirmation from you, we will ask you, but you cannot enter the conference."
They saw a transformed being. The old Ananda, the old egoist was gone. An innocent being with tears of joy... and they all could see the light surrounding him.
They invited him -- "You come in. Now there is no need for us to be worried. But it is strange... you could not become enlightened for forty-two years, and just after twenty-four hours you have attained that state" -- and this was continuously emphasized by Gautam Buddha.
Ananda said, "It was my fault. His death became the death of my ego too."
All the scriptures that are in existence are related by Ananda.
There were other enlightened disciples who did not die with Gautam Buddha. It was asked -- when Mahakashyap died, it became a very significant question -- it was asked to other enlightened disciples, "If Mahakashyap has died, how are you living?"
One of the disciples, Moggalayan, said, "I have to live now for my master's message. I am not living anymore -- I died with him; now he is living in me. That was one way, the way of Mahakashyap -- to dissolve in Gautam Buddha. This is another way. I have also dissolved, but dying is not going to help anybody. And there are so many blind people in the world who need eyes, there are so many people in darkness who need light. I will live. I will live as long as it is possible; I will live for Buddha."
So it is not a question of one person being decisive. Each person has to be unique in his own way. Somebody dies for the master, somebody lives for the master, and you cannot say who is greater -- perhaps no comparison is right. Both are themselves.
Just remember one thing -- your love. Then wherever you are, space and the distance in space does not matter. And at a certain depth, even time does not matter.
And when time and space both are immaterial, then you have really touched the feet of the master.
Then whatsoever transpires in you -- to live for the message or to die, whatever comes naturally and spontaneously -- let it happen.

============================================================

Question 1
BELOVED OSHO,
I OFTEN WANTED TO ASK YOU SOME QUESTIONS, BUT AFTER WAITING FOR A WHILE, I ALWAYS FOUND MY QUESTIONS ANSWERED BY YOU. AND AT THE SAME TIME I FOUND OUT THAT ALL THOSE QUESTIONS WERE JUST SILLY QUESTIONS, COMING FROM MY MIND WITHOUT ANY CONNECTION TO MY HEART. MY HEART ONLY WANTS TO CRY, AND MY MIND ONLY WANTS TO KNOW, DESPITE ANY ANSWER.
COULD YOU PLEASE COMMENT ON HOW TO DEAL WITH A CONTINUOUS QUESTIONING MIND THAT IS NOT INTERESTED IN ANY ANSWER ANYWAY? OR AM I JUST A GREEK DONKEY?
The disciple who can wait will find all his questions answered at the right moment.
But waiting is a great quality: it is deep patience, it is great trust.
The mind cannot wait, it is always in a hurry. It knows nothing about patience; hence it goes on piling questions upon questions without getting the answer.
It is something very delicate to understand: that it is not the answer that is significant but the right timing, your readiness to receive it; otherwise it will just go above your head. The impatient mind is too much occupied in questioning. It forgets that questioning in itself is a meaningless activity -- the real thing is the answer, but for the answer you need a certain silence, peace, openness, receptivity. The mind is incapable of these qualities; hence, for thousands of years the mind has been asking and asking but it finds no answer.
In the world of the mind there are only questions.
And in the world of the heart there is only the answer, because the heart knows how not to ask, how to wait: let the spring come by itself; wait like a thirsty earth... the rainclouds will come; they have always been coming. There is no need to distrust, because there is not even a single exception where trust has failed, where waiting is not fulfilled, where patience is not immensely rewarded.
The functioning of the heart and the mind are totally different; not only different, but diametrically opposite. The mind creates philosophies, theologies, ideologies -- they are all questions that don't have any answer. The heart simply waits. At the right moment, the answer blossoms by itself.
The heart has no question, yet it receives the answer.
The mind has a thousand and one questions, yet it has never received any answer because it does not know how to receive.
Your mind is full of questions yet you have been observing that by and by, they are being answered. This should create in you a new insight, a new trust. A new dimension is opening: that you have just to wait, alert and awake, and if it is needed the answer will come to you.
You are also seeing that most of the questions that the mind is filled with are silly.
They are -- not most of them, all of them are silly for the simple reason that mind does not go through the discipline of asking receptively. It is more concerned with questions. Even while the answer is being given, it has moved on to another question. Perhaps, listening to the answer, it has created ten more questions out of the answer itself.
Questions arise out of the mind just like leaves grow on the trees. And slowly slowly, they become more and more silly -- because it is very difficult to find many significant questions, and the mind is not satisfied with a small quantity of questions. It is greedy. It wants to ask everything; it wants to know everything without being ready to understand anything.
There are few significant questions.
And there is only one really fundamental question.
But that small quantity does not satisfy the greed of the mind.
You will be amazed to know that the English word `greed' comes from a very strange word in Sanskrit -- and if you want to see those people from where this word has come, Bombay has most of them. In Sanskrit the vulture is called giddha, and from `giddha' comes greed. And Bombay has the greatest number of vultures in the whole world, because Bombay has the greatest number of Parsees. There is a certain relationship between Parsees and vultures.
Parsees have a very strange way of disposing of their dead: they don't burn them like the Hindus, Buddhists, Jainas; they don't bury them like the Christians and the Mohammedans and the Jews. They have a unique way of their own, and they have a certain rationale for it. In their cemetery... and Bombay has the biggest, because Bombay has the biggest population of Parsees.
In their cemetery they have a big well. There are steel rods on top of the well. The dead body is put on those steel rods, and between the steel rods there are gaps. All around, there are big, ancient trees and thousands of vultures are sitting there, waiting for some poor Parsee to die -- the vultures need food every day; Parsees supply the food. The dead body of the Parsee is put on those rods on top of the well and the vultures eat whatever is edible. And whatever is not edible -- bones, et cetera -- goes on falling through the gaps between the rods into the well.
On the surface it looks very strange -- "What are you doing?" -- but the Parsees have their rationale. In this world everybody has some reasonable grounds for every superstition. They say, "Because we have been eating everything, now it is our duty to be eaten." A beautiful logic: you have been eating for your whole life. If you are a meat-eater you have been eating animals. If you are a vegetarian, then you have been eating vegetables; that too is life. For your whole life you have been eating, and it is natural to be part of the same circle by being eaten. According to the Parsees, this is the most natural thing.
And I think people who believe in nature will support their idea -- because to burn a body is to destroy food, is to unnecessarily kill a few vultures, or to keep them hungry.
In a Hindu village, vultures don't exist. What will they do there? At the most, once in a while a cow dies, or a buffalo, and they can eat that.
Now there is a widespread movement amongst intellectuals around the earth that we should not break natural cycles anywhere. For our whole lives we have been eating -- now it is time that we should be eaten. And anyway you are dead; why unnecessarily destroy good food for the vultures?
Just go here in Bombay, you will see a beautiful scene -- you will not see it anywhere else in the whole world -- so many vultures together just waiting for poor Parsees to die, praying to God, "Finish someone today." And God seems to listen to the vultures; some Parsee is bound to come.
The English word `greed' comes from the same root as `giddha', the vulture.
The vulture is one of the ugliest birds you can conceive of.
And greed is certainly one of the ugliest things in man that you can think of.
But the mind is a vulture. It is never satisfied with anything. You go on giving to it, it goes on taking, and it goes on asking for more. It never feels grateful; it is always complaining that it is not enough. Nothing is enough to the mind.
Question after question -- meaningful, meaningless, relevant, irrelevant -- and not even a small space for any answer to enter into your mind. It is so crowded with questions.
The heart knows no questions.
And this is one of the mysteries of life: that the mind questions the whole life long and never receives any answer, and the heart never asks but receives the answer.
But there is one thing to be remembered: the mind is noisy, there is maddening noise. The heart may be receiving the answer, but because of the noise of the mind you may not come to feel that the answer has been received, that you are carrying it with you, that you are pregnant with it.
Not only does the mind disturb your peace, your silence; it disturbs it to such an extent that the heart -- which is capable of listening to silence, waiting, receptive -- is denied all connection with your being. The mind monopolizes your being; it simply puts the heart aside. And because the heart is silent, and a gentleman, it does not quarrel; it simply goes down the street, waits by the side of the road.
Mind wants to occupy the whole space.
The disciple has to understand this whole situation -- that the dictatorship of the mind has to be destroyed, that the mind is only a servant, not a master. The master is the heart, because all that is beautiful grows in the heart; all that is valuable comes out of the heart -- your love, your compassion, your meditation.
Anything that is valuable grows in the garden of the heart.
Mind is a desert, nothing grows there -- only sand and sand and barren land. It has never given any fruit, any flower. You have to understand it: mind should not be supported as much as you have been supporting it up to now. Mind has to be put in its right place.
The throne belongs to the heart.
And this is the revolution through which the disciple becomes a devotee: when the heart becomes the master, and the mind becomes a servant.
This has to be remembered: that as a servant, the mind is perfect. As a master... it is the worst master possible; as a servant, it is the best.
And the heart -- wherever it is, either on the throne or on the street -- is your only hope, the only possibility for you to be bridged with your being, to be bridged with existence. It is the only possibility for songs to arise in you, stars to descend in you, for your life to become a rejoicing, a dance.
You are asking me how to stop this mind, its constant questioning, its silly crowd of questions.
That is where everybody takes the wrong step. If you try to stop it, you will never be able to stop it. Ignore it. Be indifferent to it. Let it chatter.
Be aloof, unconcerned -- as if it does not matter whether it chatters or not, whether there are questions or not. Only this aloofness, this ignoring -- Buddha has given it the right name, upeksha -- this indifference slowly, slowly makes the miracle happen.
What you want to achieve by fighting is not possible, because when you fight with someone you are giving energy to the enemy. You are giving attention, and attention is food; you are getting entangled with the mind, and mind enjoys a good fight. It has never happened that anybody has been able to stop the mind by fighting with it. That is the most important thing to understand: don't take any step towards fighting.
Just ignore, just be aloof, just let the mind do whatever it wants to do. When the mind feels unwelcomed, when the mind sees that you are no more interested in it, that it is pointless to go on shouting; you are not even hearing it, that you are not even curious about what is going on in the mind -- it stops.
It happened... and I have remembered it because the boy is here today. He is my sister's son.
He was very young, six years old. We had gone to see the chief minister of Madhya Pradesh and his father was driving. His father went to make inquiries, to say that I had come, and ask whether the chief minister was in the house or not.
At that very moment -- the boy must have been feeling sleepy in the jeep; we had come a long distance -- he fell asleep and hit his head on the dashboard in front of him. He looked at me. I didn't pay any attention, I looked outside the jeep. He was going to cry and create trouble -- he looked again and again I looked outside.
Then his father came out. I went in for a half-hour meeting. Then we went home. It was almost two hours later, as we arrived home, that he started crying. As soon as he saw his mother he immediately started crying. I said, "What happened?"
He said, "I hit my head on the jeep."
I said, "That happened two hours ago!"
He said, "I know, but there was no point in crying because twice I looked at you and you looked outside the window. What is the point in crying with such a man? You did not even ask what had happened... you had seen that I had hit my head. Now my mother is here; now I can cry."
Even that small child could understand that when there is indifference, it is pointless to make any fuss; it is as if there is nobody in the jeep.
When you are indifferent, the mind starts feeling as if there is nobody -- what is the point of all the questions? Because you are interested, curious, you get involved, you are giving juice to the mind.
Indifference to the mind is meditation.
And all those questions will disappear, because they are absolutely meaningless. And when the chattering of the mind has disappeared, there is a silence, a peace, so that you can hear the still, small voice of your heart.
Only the heart knows the answer... it already knows it.
And if you are with a master, the heart simply says yes to the master, because the heart knows the answer already. Perhaps the master is putting it in a better way, more articulate, but the heart is in complete agreement. And that agreement dissolves all distances between the master and the disciple.
Then silence is not only silence, it is also communion.
Then things are not said but heard; then things are not said but shown.
And when the heart is totally willing, life is such a simple, uncomplicated phenomenon that you cannot conceive of anything more simple.
It is the mind which creates complications, goes on creating complications and questions. Mind's whole expertise is to create complications.
If you want to live a simple, a beautiful, a silent, a joyful, a blissful life, let the mind be ignored and let the heart be restored to its status as master. This is the whole work of a religious seeker; nothing more is needed.

Question 2
BELOVED OSHO,
I HAVE NEVER BEEN GOOD AT REMEMBERING MY DREAMS. THEY SEEM TO BE THERE ONLY IN TIMES OF EMOTIONAL CRISIS. ONCE OR TWICE A YEAR I HAVE A `BIG' DREAM WHICH IS MORE LIKE A VISION -- AND THAT'S IT.
DURING THE LAST YEARS IT HAS BECOME WORSE, AND NOW IT'S DOWN TO ZERO. CONSIDERING DREAMS AS IMPORTANT FOR MY WORK AS A THERAPIST, I TRIED HARD WITH ALL KINDS OF METHODS BUT HAD NO SUCCESS.
RECENTLY I MADE PEACE WITH IT. AS LOTS OF FLASHES AND INTUITIONS COME UP IN THE DAYTIME, OR BEFORE I'M FALLING ASLEEP, I THOUGHT THIS MIGHT BE FINE TOO. AFTER YESTERDAY'S DISCOURSE WHERE YOU SAID THAT TO UNBURDEN THE SUBCONSCIOUS IS THE WAY TO THE SUPERCONSCIOUS, I STARTED WORRYING AND WONDERING AGAIN. AM I SO REPRESSIVE? WHAT AM I SCARED OF THAT MAKES ME INCAPABLE OF REMEMBERING MY DREAMS?
Purna, the process of dreaming and the process of remembering the dream are two things.
Very few people remember dreams; that does not mean that they don't have dreams.
Everybody has dreams -- but remembering a dream is a totally different thing. Even the people who remember dreams remember only the last dreams, the dreams of the early morning when you are just waking up, because the mechanism of memory is part of the conscious mind. Dreams happen in the unconscious; the unconscious doesn't have any memory mechanism. Only the conscious mind has the memory mechanism.
So if a dream is happening in the unconscious mind but very close to the conscious mind, then it remembers it faintly, vaguely.
In the morning when you are waking up you are coming closer to the conscious mind -- from the unconscious, back to the conscious mind. The last dream, the tail end, will be remembered, because it will be very close to when you wake up. So even people who remember, remember only the last dreams. They have been dreaming for almost six hours through the whole night; if they are sleeping for eight hours, they are dreaming for six hours. You can catch hold of just a faint reflection of the last dream, but if you don't catch hold of it for a few seconds, it will be gone. As you become more awake, you are farther away from the unconscious.
So to different people, different things will be happening.
There are people who wake up very slowly; they don't wake up quickly, in a jump.
The people who wake up quickly, in a jump, will have a different kind of memory from the people who wake up very slowly. They will have another kind of memory.
It also depends on what kind of dreams you are having.
Because you are a therapist -- and not only a therapist but my therapist -- your repression cannot be superficial. Because my whole teaching is: Don't repress; live out every instinct, every feeling, every emotion. If you are living out your emotions, your feelings, then you will not have superficial dreams; your dreams will be very deep. They will be less in the unconscious and more in the collective unconscious -- so deep that you will not be able to remember them. Unless a special effort is made, they cannot be remembered. And the only effort that is possible is hypnosis.
If you are hypnotized and led by your hypnotist deep into your unconscious and asked, "What is happening there? What kind of dream is going on?" only then will you be able to express it to him. When you wake up, you will not be able to remember what you have said either. It will take a long training between you and the hypnotist: after each hypnosis he has to suggest to you that you will remember it when you wake up. He has to emphasize it every time so much that it becomes a deep-rooted impression. Then you may be able to remember your dreams.
But there is no need. Unless you are especially working on dreams, for some specific purpose, there is no need.
I am emphasizing that you should ignore the mind. Now the unconscious, collective unconscious, cosmic unconscious -- these are all parts of the mind, and you are trying to remember them. Just the conscious mind is enough to torture you -- why do you need to remember the unconscious mind?
In the East we have been aware that the conscious mind is not the only mind. Below it, there is the unconscious mind; then below that is the collective unconscious mind; then below that is the cosmic unconscious mind. Above it, there is the superconscious mind; above that there is the collective superconscious mind; above that there is the cosmic superconscious mind. And when I say `mind' I mean this whole range -- they are one entity, one rainbow.
Ignore them all. There is no need to remember.
Many people are in madhouses because by some accident their collective unconscious has broken up and released its memories. Now their conscious mind is not capable of holding those memories, the weight is too much; that's what is driving them mad.
For example, in your collective unconscious mind, the woman who is your wife now may have been your mother in your past life. If this memory comes to your mind then you are going to be in trouble. Then how are you going to behave with your wife, as your mother or as your wife? Just being your wife was enough; just being your mother was enough too -- now she is both. And you will be crushed, because you cannot have a sexual relationship with a woman who is your mother... the whole inhibition of thousands of years. And how will you manage your wife? Because she has no remembrance; she is going to say, "You are crazy, just forget all about it" -- but you cannot forget about it.
Nature has a beautiful arrangement: with each death, a thick layer of forgetfulness comes over your memories. You are carrying all the memories of all your lives. But a small human being finds it so difficult to live with a small conscious mind of one life -- if so many lives burst upon him, he is bound to be insane. It is a natural protection.
It happened....
I was in Jabalpur and a girl was brought to me. She must have been, at that time, nine years of age. She remembered her past life completely -- so realistically that it was not a memory for her, it was a continuity. It was just some accidental error in nature that there was no barrier between the past life and this life.
There is a place just eighty miles away from Jabalpur, Katni. She was born in Katni and she remembered that she had her family in Jabulpur. She remembered the names, she remembered her husband, she remembered her sons, the house -- she remembered everything. One of my friends brought them to me.
I said, "This is strange, because the people she is remembering are living just three or four blocks away from my house." They had a petrol pump, so I used to go for petrol at their petrol pump every day. But I said, "You wait. You wait in my house and I will call them -- the Pathak brothers -- I will call them and we will see whether this girl remembers them or not."
So they came with their servants and a few other neighbors. There were twelve, thirteen people in the crowd, so that they could see whether she could find out.... She immediately jumped, and said, "Brother, have you recognized me or not?" She caught hold of both brothers, among thirteen people, and she inquired about the mother and the children... and father had died, and she was crying. It was not a memory, it was a continuity. They took her to their home and then it was a problem: the girl was torn apart about whether to go to this family's house in Jabalpur and live there, or to go back to Katni to the new family where she had been born.
Of course, in this family she had lived for seventy years, so the pull was more towards the past-life family. And in the new family she had been born only nine years before; there was no pull -- but that was her family, her real family. This other family was only a memory, but to her, it was such a heart-rending problem.
And both the families were disturbed about what to do: if she remained in Jabalpur, she would remember the other family continuously, worry about what was happening to them and feel, "I want to go there." If she was there, she would be thinking that she wanted to be in Jabalpur.
Finally I suggested that the only way -- it was a freak case, there was nothing spiritual in it -- was that she needed a deep hypnosis for a few days, so the barrier could be created. She had to be hypnotized to forget the old and the past. Unless she could forget the past, her whole life was going to be a misery.
Both families were ready to accept that something had to be done. She was hypnotized continually for at least ten days, to forget. It took ten sessions to create a small barrier so that the old life's memories didn't float into the new life.
I have been inquiring about her. She is now perfectly okay -- married, has children, has forgotten completely. Even when those people come to see her, she does not recognize them. But her barrier is very thin and artificial. Any accident, and the barrier could be broken, or any hypnotist could break it very easily within ten sessions; or some great shock, and the barrier could be broken.
There is no need for you to remember. It is perfectly good.
We have to get free from the mind.
The East has known all the layers of the mind, but the East has emphasized a totally different aspect than the West: ignore it -- you are the pure consciousness behind all these layers.
Western psychology is just childish, just born at the end of the last century. It is not even a hundred years old. They have taken up the desire to enter into dreams and to find out, to dig deeper into what is there in the mind.
There is nothing. You will find more and more memories, more and more dreams, and you will destroy the person because you will make him vulnerable to an unnecessary burden which has to be erased.
One has to go beyond mind, not within the mind.
And you don't have any memory as far as the state of beyond mind is concerned.
Just drop the idea of the mind. Don't meddle with it; it is getting into an unnecessary trouble and nightmare. You have to surpass the mind, you have to transcend the mind.
Your whole effort should be one-pointed, and that is how to be a no-mind: no dreams, no memories, no experiences.
Then you are at the very center of your being.
Only then do you taste something of immortality. Only then, for the first time, do you know what intelligence is.

Question 3
BELOVED OSHO,
ONLY JUST NOW I DISCOVERED THAT A MASTER-DISCIPLE RELATIONSHIP IS REALLY A TWO-WAY AFFAIR, IN WHICH THE DISCIPLE NEEDS TO RESPOND OPENLY TO THE MASTER IN ORDER FOR THE MASTER TO BE ABLE TO DO HIS WORK.
I MYSELF, ON THE CONTRARY, HAVE ALWAYS WATCHED PASSIVELY, KEPT A DISTANCE AND DRAWN MY OWN CONCLUSIONS.
PLEASE COMMENT.
The master never does anything.
And if you are remaining aloof, nothing will ever happen to you.
Your receptivity and openness is not needed for the master to do something; your openness and receptivity are needed so that the very presence of the master can provoke something to happen in you -- and these are two different things. Doing something is a very positive effort, and just allowing your presence for something to happen in you is a totally different thing. There is no positive effort. The effort is on the side of the disciple.
So what you have discovered, you have discovered wrongly: it is not a two-way affair, not a two-way road; it is a one-way street. It is up to you to be open, ready, available.
The presence of the master is there, just like the light -- you open your eyes and the light is there.
The light does not travel to your eyes in particular. You can keep your eyes closed and the light will not knock on your eyelids: "Please open your eyes." You can keep your eyes closed; the light is very democratic, it will not interfere. But if you open your eyes you will see the light; not only the light, but in the light you will see many other things too -- the flowers, the people, the whole world. Still, you cannot say that light has been doing something to you. Something is transpiring in you. It will not transpire without the light, so certainly the presence of the light is needed -- but just the presence is needed, not the action.
Action is needed on your part, not just presence, because you can be present here and closed -- nothing will evolve out of it.
The disciple has to do everything.
And this is the beauty of the whole phenomenon. Otherwise, you will become a puppet in the hands of the master. Then he will do things that he wants to do; then he will make you the way he wants to make you -- the ideal, the mold. He will destroy your individuality, he will destroy your freedom. No master worth the name can do that.
The master can give his whole being to you, can make it available -- but only as a presence, not as an action.
The doing is on the part of the disciple. You have to be receptive, you have to be silent, you have to be meditative, you have to be trusting everything, because it is your life and you should be responsible for it. You are not a painting that the master painter can change in whatever way he wants.
I have heard that in a small school, a beautiful painting was shown that had been made by the drawing teacher of the school. He was showing the students the art and the craft of painting. And he said, "It is such a delicate phenomenon. You look at the painting."
And they said, "Yes, we can see a man with a sad face."
The painter went to the painting and just gave one or two touches with his brush and the whole painting changed -- the face was smiling. And because the face was smiling, the whole complex of trees and flowers and stars now had a different effect. Everybody was impressed: the teachers were impressed... parents had come; they were very much impressed. Just one small boy was not interested.
The painter asked, "Are you not interested?"
He said, "I am interested. But this is not something great; my mother does it every day."
He said, "What do you mean? Is she a painter?"
He said, "She is not a painter. But I go home smiling, and with one slap the whole world changes into tears and tears and crying. And if you want me to show you, I can show you here, because I have also become an expert. Every day it is happening."
He simply went and hit a small girl sitting there, and the girl started crying. And she had been smiling and enjoying, but suddenly the hit, and tears came to her eyes and she started crying. And because of her crying and this boy's craftsmanship, the whole crowd fell silent.
And even the drawing teacher said, "This is right. I was thinking that I had some great art. Your mother knows better. Without brush, without color, just a hit and everything changes; the whole world changes."
The master can change you, but that change is very costly. He can do many things, but you are becoming more and more of a slave. You had come to be liberated, and it is going the wrong way.
No authentic master has ever done anything. He has made himself available in many ways. He has taught you how to be available, how to be open, how to be receptive -- and then, whatever your potential is will start growing. In the blissful showering of the presence of the master your potential will grow, but it will grow according to its own intrinsic qualities. Nothing is imposed from outside.
So please note it down: your observation is not right, it is not two-way traffic. From the master's side there is no traffic at all.
You have to do something. Certainly the master is present and available, his love is available. In his shadow, in his loving radiation, you will start growing. But he will not touch you; he will let you be whatever you can be. Whatsoever is your destiny, you should not be carried away from it.
He is just a silent help: without touching you, he transforms you. That is the miracle of the master.

Question 4
BELOVED OSHO,
SITTING IN YOUR PRESENCE, MEDITATION IS REALLY AT ITS BEST. IF ASKED WHY, I WOULD SAY THAT IT IS BECAUSE YOUR BLISSFUL PRESENCE IS CONTAGIOUS AND SOMEHOW MOTIVATES ME TO BE AS TOTAL AS POSSIBLE.
BELOVED OSHO, WOULD YOU PLEASE EXPLAIN AGAIN HOW IT IS POSSIBLE TO BE IN SUCH A NICE MEDITATION WHEN NOT BEING IN YOUR PRESENCE?
My presence has to be only a lesson.
Once you have learned the art of opening, the art of being silent, it does not matter whether I am present or not. If you have really learned it, it will happen anywhere. It may be a little difficult in the beginning, but soon you will get the knack of it.
It is almost like swimming. The teacher who teaches swimming just gives you courage and trust, and is there so that nothing goes wrong. Just in three or four days' time, one hour each day, you start swimming. And the moment you start swimming you are surprised -- why didn't you start it from the very beginning? There is nothing to it. It's just that in the beginning you were not moving your arms artfully, it was haphazard. Just in three or four days you have learned to move your arms more smoothly, more harmoniously; now the teacher is not needed. Now you can go anywhere, for any distance, because the depth of the bottom does not matter; you are swimming on the surface. The depth can be one thousand feet, ten thousand feet, five miles deep; it does not matter, because you are always swimming on the surface.
And once you have learned... it has not been heard of in the whole history of humanity that anybody who has learned swimming has forgotten it. You may not swim for fifty years, and when again somebody pushes you into the swimming pool, you start swimming. You cannot say, "For fifty years I have not practiced" -- it is not a question of practice at all. It is a knack: once you have known it, you have known it; there is no way not to know it anymore.
Meditation is also a knack.
You are not to become attached to the presence of the master, because that will be learning something wrong. You have to learn how you are opening. Forget about the master; that is his business, to be present or not to be present. Your business is to see how you are opening, what happens in your opening, and then try on your own, when you are alone to see whether it can happen or not. It is bound to happen.
Maybe in the beginning you will feel that it is a little difficult; a certain attachment grows, unconsciously. But you cannot say that the teacher has to follow you everywhere, wherever you go swimming. That will not do. Then each swimmer will need one teacher; it will be too much. Each meditator will need one master with him; it will be too costly, and there is no need at all. You just have to see what is happening in you, and let the same happen when the master is not present.
Or, you can visualize. He will be present somewhere, a few miles away. Here, it is a few feet away. It is only a question of visualizing -- just visualize that your master is a few feet away....
Space makes no difference, but you have to learn what happens in you so that you can repeat it in the absence of the master. Otherwise, one can become attached to things which were to help you... but now they will hinder you. The presence of the master was to help you; now it has become a hindrance -- because the master is not there, so you cannot meditate.
Remember: no attachment should grow, no clinging should grow. They are all against your independence, your freedom, your individuality. And whatever is happening here can happen anywhere; it just needs a little understanding of how it happens here.
Just try. Even if you fail a few times, don't be worried. It is a knack which will come to you.
And once it happens without any support from outside -- even the smallest support, such as the presence of the master -- you will feel a great joy, because a great freedom has happened.
Now there are no barriers for you. Wherever you are you can be in meditation, you can be in silence, you can be peaceful. Now you can carry your paradise within you.
And unless that happens, a disciple has not matured.

============================================================

Question 1
BELOVED OSHO,
WHAT IS IT THAT REDUCES ME TO A HYSTERICAL, INCOHERENT CHILD IN YOUR PRESENCE OR EVEN AT THE THOUGHT OF BEING IN YOUR PRESENCE?
IS IT SOMETHING INHERENT IN THE MASTER-DISCIPLE RELATIONSHIP, OR MY PSYCHOLOGICAL IMMATURITY, OR BOTH?
Pankaja, humanity is not yet mature. We have the faces of human beings, but our minds are lagging far behind.
In the ordinary world, it is easy to manage your mask, your pretension, your hypocrisy. But when you come to a master... the very urge to come to a master shows a tremendous desire in you to know your original face, to know yourself.
The face that you are carrying now is not your original face, it is not you.
I am saying you are not you, and you know it.
The master is only a mirror. You cannot deceive the mirror, it simply reflects your reality.
There is an ancient parable of a very ugly woman who was very antagonistic towards mirrors because she thought, just as you all think, that it was the mirror that created the ugliness in her -- because when the mirror was not there, she was no longer ugly. She was so madly against mirrors that whenever she would see a mirror, she would immediately break it.
The parable is signficant. That's what we are all doing in our lives in many ways. Whatsoever reflects our reality we want to escape from because it is not gratifying.
Pankaja, here in my presence, or even when you think of me, if you feel yourself as immature, a retarded child, don't try to explain it away in any way. This is the truth. And this is not only your truth; this is the truth of the whole of humanity. You are just fortunate that you have become aware of it.
You have come across a mirror.
Breaking the mirror is not going to help.
Poisoning Socrates has not helped the Greeks -- he was a mirror.
Crucifying Jesus has not helped the Jews -- he was a mirror.
Killing al-Hillaj Mansoor has not helped the Mohammedans -- he was a mirror.
On the contrary, they have remained retarded, childish, because there is no one to show them where they are, who they are. They are in a crowd of similar kinds of retarded children.
After the first world war, for the first time in Germany they tried to figure out the average mental age of a soldier. Thousands of soldiers went through the process, through many experiments, and the result was shocking and shattering to the whole of human pride. The result was that the average mental age of the soldiers was only fourteen years.
And the average age of those who are not soldiers cannot be much more. A man may be seventy years old -- his body has aged, but his mind has remained at the age of fourteen. And once in a while you can see it in yourself; you can see it in others in certain situations.
Every woman knows moments when she starts throwing tantrums; they cannot be coming out of maturity.
Every man knows that whenever he feels nervous, he starts smoking. Now, smoking cannot help in any way, but it diverts your mind from nervousness.
Only nervous people smoke. And you can watch... some days you smoke more, some days you smoke less. The days you smoke more are the days when you are very tense, worried, very much in anguish. The world is too much. You are feeling so nervous that you want to divert your mind to something, something uncomplicated, something not involving anybody else -- because that could bring more complications.
The cigarette is very innocent -- and very soothing, because it has the same chemical as tea has, as coffee has, which gives a certain soothing effect for the moment.
And more specifically, smoking has a resemblance to... a deep-rooted remembrance of drinking milk at your mother's breast. The breast has almost the same warmth, the milk is warm just as the smoke from your cigarette or cigar is warm. The cigarette or cigar have the same feel on your lips as the nipples of your mother, and the smoke is flowing inside you just like the milk through the nipple. You have fallen back into childhood -- those golden days when there were no anxieties, no problems, no worries. So whenever you feel nervous, you start looking for your cigarette.
When you are not nervous -- when you are feeling happy and blissful and joyous -- you completely forget all about cigarettes.
All smokers are retarded people, so the retarded people are in the majority in the world.
And there are other substitutes. You may not be smoking and you may think, "I'm not retarded because I use chewing gum." And it is worse than cigarettes -- chewing gum! You are not only retarded, you are stupid, engaged in an activity which is absolutely useless, uncreative, unnecessarily tiring your mouth and your teeth. But it proves Charles Darwin was right.
Although scientists have tried in many ways to disprove the theory of evolution proposed by Charles Darwin, the theory has such psychological significance that even if it is proved wrong, its significance cannot be destroyed.
Just watch a monkey. He cannot sit in one posture, he cannot sit on one branch. He is continuously chewing this or that, eating this or that -- the whole day. From the time he wakes up in the morning till he goes back to sleep, he is chewing something.
Perhaps man is not yet completely free from his animal heritage -- although he walks on two legs, that does not make much difference.
As far as I know, monkeys don't think that you have evolved, developed, gone forward more than them. They laugh at the very idea.
They think you have fallen from the trees. And they have substantial reasoning behind it. You are no longer as strong as a monkey; you cannot live in trees, you cannot go on jumping from one tree to another tree for miles. You have lost the beauty of the body that the monkey has. Just because you started walking on two legs....
Monkeys think, "Poor fellows... those few monkeys can't make it living in the trees" -- because it is a very challenging life, risky, full of danger -- "those cowards have got down onto the earth and started walking on two legs! Not only that, to hide their cowardice, they are proposing a theory of evolution!"
No monkey agrees with the theory of evolution.
Pankaja, if in my presence you feel a childishness in yourself, a mind which has not become mature, this awareness has to be welcomed.
Once you become aware that you are retarded somewhere, that something is blocking your consciousness, then those blocks can be removed. In fact, to be aware that there are some blocks... the very awareness removes them.
There are things which one has just to be aware of. The very awareness brings the transformation; it is not that after being aware you have to do something to make the change.
Seeing your mind as childish, you can also see that you are not the mind -- otherwise, who is seeing the mind as childish? There is something beyond the mind -- the watcher on the hills.
You are only looking at the mind.
You have completely forgotten who is looking at it.
Watch the mind, but don't forget the watcher -- because your reality is centered in the watcher, not in the mind. And the watcher is always a fully grown-up, mature, centered consciousness. It needs no growth.
And once you become aware that the mind is only an instrument in the hands of your witnessing soul, then there is no problem; the mind can be used in the right way. Now the master is awake, and the servant can be ordered to do whatever is needed.
Ordinarily the master is asleep. We have forgotten the watcher, and the servant has become the master. And the servant is a servant -- it is certainly not very intelligent.
You have to be reminded of a basic fact: intelligence belongs to the watching consciousness; memory belongs to the mind.
Memory is one thing -- memory is not intelligence. But the whole of humanity has been deceived for centuries and told indirectly that the memory is intelligence. Your schools, your colleges, your universities are not trying to find your intelligence; they are trying to find out who is capable of memorizing more.
And now we know perfectly well that memory is a mechanical thing. A computer can have memory, but a computer cannot have intelligence.
And a computer can have a better memory than you have. The day is not far off when people will be carrying small computers in their pockets rather than unnecessarily going through years of studying history and geography and chemistry and physics. All that can be contained in a small computer which you can carry in your pocket, and whatever information you want, the computer can supply it immediately -- and it is going to be absolutely correct.
Man's memory is not so reliable. It can forget, it can get mixed up, it can get blocked. Sometimes you say that "I remember it, it is just on the tip of my tongue." Strange, it is on the tip of your tongue, then why don't you speak?
But you say it is not coming, "It is on the tip of my tongue... I know that I know, and it is not very far -- it is very close." But still some block, some very thin block -- it may be just a curtain -- is not allowing it to surface.
And the more you try, the more tense you become, the less is the possibility of remembering it. Finally, you forget all about it, you start doing something else -- preparing a cup of tea or digging a hole in the garden -- and suddenly it is there because you were relaxed, you had forgotten all about it, there was no tension. It surfaced.
A tense mind becomes narrow. A relaxed mind becomes wide -- many more memories can pass through it. A tense mind becomes so narrow that only very few memories can pass through it.
But for thousands of years a misunderstanding has continued, and it continues still, as if memory is intelligence. It is not.
You will find people who have a great memory but no intelligence, and you can also find people who have great intelligence and no memory at all.
It is said about Thomas Alva Edison... perhaps he is the only man who is credited with at least one thousand inventions, but his memory was nil.
In the first world war he was standing in a queue to receive his ration card. Ration cards had come into existence for the first time. By and by the queue became smaller and smaller, and finally he came to the front and the clerk shouted, "Thomas Alva Edison!" -- he looked here and there, because he had forgotten his name. Because it was long, long ago... when his father and mother were alive, they used to call him by name. Now he was so well known, such a great scientist, a great professor -- nobody used his name, people called him `Professor'. He himself had forgotten.
Fortunately, one man in the queue behind him recognized that this fellow looked like Thomas Alva Edison, who was standing in front and looking here and there.
And the man said, "What is your name?"
Edison said, "My God, I will have to go home and ask my wife."
The man said, "As far as I know, you are Thomas Alva Edison."
Edison said, "It seems I have heard this name somewhere before. Perhaps I am. If nobody else claims it, then that card is mine."
He was such a great intelligence. You cannot find many more people of that intelligence.
But, going for a lecture tour, before getting into the car, he said goodbye to his wife and kissed her and waved at her maidservant. And the wife said, "You are absolutely wrong; I am your maidservant and she is your wife!"
He said, "The whole day I am so engaged in the experiments -- I only come home at night. It is a long time since I have seen my wife in the sunlight, so please forgive me -- whichever is my wife, I kiss her, and whichever is my maidservant, I wave to her. But let me go, because the train is standing at the platform."
Absolutely no memory.
His wife used to keep notes of his thoughts... because sometimes he would come to a thought, but it was incomplete. And before he forgot it, he would tell somebody, whoever was close by, "Please write it down and keep it for me. Whenever I need it, just remind me -- because half is missing. It will come, but my fear is that when the other half comes, this half may be lost."
Somebody suggested, "You are behaving strangely. Why don't you keep a notebook?"
He said, "That is the trouble. I have been keeping notebooks, but then I go on forgetting where I have put them. Then the notebook becomes the problem! This is far better. At least somebody is responsible for the half thought and he will remind me: `This is half your thought. If the other half has come to your mind, take this and relieve me of the burden.'"
In India -- as in Arabia, China, Greece, Rome, in all old countries -- all the old languages depend on memory, not on intelligence. You can become a great Sanskrit scholar without a bit of intelligence -- no need for intelligence, just your memory has to be perfect. Just like a parrot... the parrot does not understand what he is saying, but he can say it absolutely correctly, with the right pronunciation. You can teach him whatever you want. All old languages depend on memory.
And the whole educational system of the world depends on memory. In the examinations, they don't ask the student something that will show his intelligence but something that will show his memory, how much he remembers from textbooks. This is one of the reasons for your retarded mind. You have used the memory as if it were your intelligence -- a tremendously grave misunderstanding. Because you know and remember and you can quote scriptures, you start thinking that you are grown up, you are mature, that you are knowledgeable, you are wise.
This is the problem, Pankaja, that you are feeling.
I am not a man of memory. And my effort here is to provoke a challenge in you so that you start moving towards your intelligence.
It is of no use how much you remember.
What is significant is how much you have experienced yourself.
And for experiencing the inner world, you need great intelligence -- memory is of no help. Yes, if you want to be a scholar, a professor, a pundit, you can memorize scriptures and you can have a great pride that you know so much. And other people will also think that you know so much, and deep down your memory is nothing but ignorance.
In front of me, you cannot hide your ignorance.
In every possible way, I try to bring your ignorance in front of you because the sooner you get hold of your ignorance, the sooner you can get rid of it. And to know is such a beautiful experience that the borrowed knowledge, in comparison, is just idiotic.
I have heard about the archbishop of Japan. He wanted to convert a Zen master to Christianity. Not knowing, not understanding anything of the inner world, he went to the master. He was received with great love and respect.
He opened the BIBLE he carried with him and started reading the Sermon on the Mount. He wanted to impress upon the Zen master that..."We follow this man. What do you think about these words, about this man?"
He had read only two sentences and the Zen master said, "That will do. You are following a good man, but he was following other good men. Neither you know nor does he know. Just go home."
He was very much shocked. He said, "You should at least let me finish the whole thing."
He said, "No nonsense here. If you know something, you say it. Close the book! -- because we are not believers in books. You are carrying the very truth in your being, and you are searching in dead books. Go home and look within. If you have found something inside, then come. If you think these lines that you have repeated to me are from Jesus Christ, you are wrong."
Jesus Christ was simply repeating the Old Testament. He was trying his whole life to convince people that "I am the last prophet of the Jews." He had never heard the word `Christian', he had never heard the word `Christ'. He was born a Jew, he lived a Jew, he died a Jew. And his whole effort was to convince the Jews that "I am the awaited prophet, the savior which Moses has promised. I have come."
The Jews could have forgiven him... Jews are not bad people. And Jews are not violent people either. Nobody who is as intelligent as the Jews are can be violent. Forty percent of Nobel prizes go to Jews; it is simply out of all proportion to their population. Almost half the Nobel prizes go to Jews, and the other half to the rest of the world.
Such intelligent people would not have crucified Jesus if he was saying something which was of his own experience. But he was saying things which were not his experience -- all borrowed. And yet he was pretending that they were his. Jews could not forgive that, that dishonesty.
Otherwise, Jesus was not creating any trouble for anybody. He was a little bit of a nuisance. Just like the Witnesses of Jehovah or the Hare Krishna people; they are a little bit of a nuisance. If they catch hold of you they will not listen to you at all and they will go on giving you all kinds of wisdom, advice -- and you are not interested; you are going for some other work, you want to be left alone. But they are determined to save you. Whether you want to be saved or not does not matter -- you have to be saved.
It happened that I was sitting near the Ganges in Allahabad, and it was just as the sun was setting. A man started shouting from the water, "Save me! Save me!"
I am not interested in saving anybody. So I looked all around... if somebody is interested in saving him, let him have the first chance. But there was nobody, so finally I had to jump.
And with difficulty... he was a heavy man, fat. The fattest men in India you will find in Allahabad and Varanasi -- the brahmins, the Hindu priests, who do nothing except eat.
Somehow I pulled him out. And he started being angry -- "Why did you pull me out?"
I said, "This is something! You were asking for help, you were shouting, `Save me!'"
He said, "It was because I was becoming afraid of death. But in fact I was committing suicide."
I said, "I am sorry, I had no idea that you were committing suicide."
I pushed the man back! And he started shouting again, "Help!"
I said, "Now wait for somebody else to come. I will sit here and watch you commit suicide."
He said, "What kind of man are you? I am dying!"
I said, "Die! That is your business!"
But there are people who are bent upon saving you.
The Zen master said to the archbishop, "Jesus was repeating old prophets. You are repeating Jesus. Repetition is not going to help anybody. You need your own experience -- that is the only deliverance, the only liberation."
Pankaja, it is good that you are understanding that your mind starts behaving like a child, immature. Remember also who is watching the child, the immature mind, and be with the watcher. Pull out all your attachments from the mind -- because the mind is only a mechanism -- and the mind will start functioning perfectly well. Once your watcher is alert, your intelligence starts growing for the first time.
Mind's work is memory, which the mind can do very well. But the mind has been burdened by the society with intelligence, which is not its work. It has crippled its memory. It has not made you more intelligent, it has simply made your memory erroneous, fallible.
Always remember: your eyes are for seeing, don't try to listen with the eyes. Your ears are for listening, don't try to see with the ears. Otherwise, you will get into an insane state. While your eyes are perfectly alright, your ears are perfectly alright, you are trying to do something with a mechanism that is not meant to do it.
If your watcher is clear, then the body does its own functions, the mind does its own functions, the heart does its own functions. Nobody interferes in each others' work.
And life becomes a harmony, an orchestra.

Question 2
BELOVED OSHO,
WHY DO I ALWAYS FEEL SO MISERABLE? HAVE I EVER REALLY LET YOU IN? THE MOMENT I SIT IN FRONT OF YOU, ALL IS GONE. WHAT IS HAPPENING? CAN'T YOU TAKE IT ALL AWAY?
The answer is in your question. You don't want to take responsibility for your own being, somebody else should do it.
And that's the sole cause of misery.
There is no way that anybody else can take away your misery. There is no way that anybody else can make you blissful. But if you become aware that you are responsible for whether you are miserable or blissful.... Nobody else can do anything. Your misery is your doing; your bliss will also be your doing.
But it is hard to accept -- misery is my doing?
Everybody feels that others are responsible for his misery. The husband thinks the wife is responsible for his misery, the wife thinks the husband is responsible for her misery, the children think the parents are responsible for their misery, the parents think the children are responsible for their misery. It has become such a complexity. And whenever somebody else is responsible for your misery, you are not aware that by giving the responsibility you are losing your freedom.
Responsibility and freedom are two sides of the same coin.
And because you think others are responsible for your misery.... That's why there are charlatans, so-called saviors, messengers of God, prophets who go on telling you, "You have not to do anything, just follow me. Believe in me and I will save you. I am your shepherd, you are my sheep."
Strange, that not a single person stood up against people like Jesus Christ and said, "This is utterly insulting to say that you are the shepherd and we are sheep, and you are the savior and we are just dependent on your compassion, that our whole religion is just to believe in you." But because we have been throwing the responsibility for our misery on others, we have accepted the corollary that bliss will also come from others.
Naturally, if misery comes from others, then bliss has to come from others. But then what are you doing? You are neither responsible for misery nor are you responsible for bliss -- then what is your function? What is your purpose? -- just to be a target for a few people to make you miserable and for others to help you and save you and make you blissful? Are you just a puppet?
All the strings are in the hands of others. You are not respectful of your humanity; you do not respect yourself. You don't have any love for your own being, for your own freedom.
If you are respectful of your life, you will refuse all the saviors. You will say to all the saviors, "Get lost! Just save yourself, that's enough. It is our life and we have to live it. If we do something wrong, we will suffer the misery; we will accept the consequences of our wrong action without any complaint."
Perhaps that is the way one learns: by falling, one gets up again; by going astray, one comes back again. You commit a mistake. But each mistake makes you more intelligent; you will not commit the same mistake again. If you commit the same mistake again, that means you are not learning. You are not using your intelligence, you are behaving like a robot.
My whole effort is to give back to every human being the self-respect that belongs to him -- which he has given to just anybody.
And the whole stupidity starts because you are not ready to accept that, for your misery, you are responsible.
Just think: you cannot find a single misery for which you are not responsible. It may be jealousy, it may be anger, it may be greed -- but something in you must be the reason that is creating the misery.
And have you seen anybody in the world ever making anybody else blissful? That too depends on you, on your silence, your love, your peace, your trust. And the miracle happens -- nobody does it.
In Tibet, there is a beautiful story about Marpa. It may not be factual, but it is tremendously significant.
I don't care much about facts. My emphasis is on the significance and the truth, which is a totally different thing.
Marpa heard about a master. He was searching and he went to the master, he surrendered to the master, he trusted totally. And he asked the master, "What am I supposed to do now?"
The master said, "Once you have surrendered to me, you are not supposed to do anything. Just believe in me. My name is the only secret mantra for you. Whenever you are in difficulty, just remember my name and everything will be all right."
Marpa touched his feet. And he tried it immediately -- he was such a simple man. He walked on the river. Other disciples who had been with the master for years could not believe it -- he was walking on the water!
They reported to the master that, "That man, you have not understood him. He is no ordinary man, he is walking on water!"
The master said, "What?"
They all ran towards the river and Marpa was walking on the water, singing songs, dancing. When he came to the shore, the master asked, "What is the secret?"
He said, "What is the secret? It is the same secret that you have given to me -- your name. I remembered you. I said, `Master, allow me to walk on water' and it happened."
The master could not believe that his name.... He himself could not walk on water. But perhaps... he had never tried.
But it would be better to check a few more things before he tries. So he said to Marpa, "Can you jump from that hill?"
Marpa said, "Whatever you say." He went up on the hill and jumped, and they were all standing in the valley waiting -- just pieces of Marpa will be there! Even if they can find pieces of him, that will be enough -- the hill was very high.
But Marpa came down smiling, sitting in a lotus posture. He came just under a tree in the valley, and sat down. They all surrounded him. They looked at him -- not even a scratch.
The master said, "This is something. You used my name?"
He said, "It was your name."
The master said, "This is enough, now I am going to try," and the first step in the water, he sank.
Marpa could not believe it when he sank. His disciples jumped in and somehow pulled him out. He was half dead. The water was taken out of his lungs... somehow he survived.
And Marpa said, "What is the matter?"
The master said, "You just forgive me. I am no master, I am just a pretender."
But Marpa said, "If you are a pretender, then how did your name work?"
The pretender said, "My name has not worked. It is your trust. It does not matter who you trust -- it is the trust, the love, the totality of it. I don't trust myself. I don't trust anybody. I cheat everybody -- how can I trust? And I am always afraid to be cheated by others, because I am cheating others. Trust is impossible for me. You are an innocent man, you trusted me. It is because of your trust that the miracles have happened."
Whether the story is true or not does not matter.
One thing is certain, that your misery is caused by your mistakes and your bliss is caused by your trust, by your love.
Your bondage is your creation and your freedom is your declaration.
You are asking me, "Why am I miserable?"
You are miserable because you have not accepted the responsibility for it. Just see what your misery is, find out the cause -- and you will find the cause within yourself. Remove the cause, and the misery will disappear.
But people don't want to remove the cause, they want to remove the misery. That is impossible, that is absolutely unscientific.
And then you ask me to save you, to help you.
There is no need for you to become a beggar. My people are not to become beggars. My people are not sheep, my people are emperors.
Accept your responsibility for misery, and you will find that just hidden inside you are all the causes of bliss, freedom, joy, enlightenment, immortality.
No savior is needed. And there has never been any savior; all saviors are pseudo. They have been worshipped because you always wanted somebody to save you. They have always appeared because they were always in demand, and wherever there is a demand, there is a supply.
Once you depend on others, you are losing your soul.
You are forgetting that you have a consciousness as universal as anybody else's, that you have a consciousness as great as any Gautam Buddha's -- you are just not aware of it, you have not looked for it. And you have not looked because you are looking at others -- somebody else to save you, somebody else to help you. So you go on begging without recognizing that this whole kingdom is yours.
This has to be understood as one of the most basic principles of sannyas -- a declaration of self-respect and freedom and responsibility.

Question 3
BELOVED OSHO,
WOULD YOU PLEASE TALK ABOUT THE SADHANA BASED ON HOLDING AS MUCH AS POSSIBLE TO THE "I" THOUGHT OR THE SENSE "I AM" AND ON ASKING ONESELF THE QUESTIONS, "WHO AM I?" OR "FROM WHERE DOES THIS `I' ARISE?" IN WHAT WAY DOES THIS APPROACH TO MEDITATION DIFFER FROM THAT OF WATCHING THE GAPS BETWEEN ONE'S IN-BREATH AND OUT-BREATH? DOES IT MAKE ANY DIFFERENCE WHETHER ONE WITNESSES THE BREATH FOCUSING ON THE HEART CENTER OR ON THE LOWER BELLY CENTER?
It is an ancient method of meditation, but full of dangers.
Unless you are alert, the greater possibility is that you will be led astray by the method rather than to the right goal.
The method is simple -- concentrating yourself on the concept of I, closing your eyes and inquiring, "Who am I?"
The greatest problem is that when you ask "Who am I"... who is going to answer you? Most probably the answer will come from your tradition, from your scriptures, from your conditioning.
You have heard that "I am not the body, I am not the mind. I am the soul, I am the ultimate, brahma, I am God" -- all these kinds of thoughts you have heard before.
You will ask a few times, "Who am I? Who am I?" -- and then you will say, "I am ultimate, BRAHMA." And this is not a discovery, this is simply stupid.
If you want to go rightly into the method, then the question has not to be verbally asked. "Who am I?" has not to be repeated verbally. Because as long as it remains a verbal question, you will supply a verbal answer from the head.
You have to drop the verbal question. It has to remain just a vague idea, just like a thirst. Not that "I am thirsty," -- can you see the difference? When you are thirsty, you feel the thirst.
And if you are in a desert, you feel the thirst in every fiber of your body. You don't say, "I am thirsty, I am thirsty." It is no longer a linguistic question, it is existential.
If "Who am I?" is an existential question, if you are not asking it in language but instead the feeling of the question is settling inside your center, then there is no need for any answer. Then it is none of the mind's business.
The mind will not hear that which is non-verbal, and the mind will not answer that which is non-verbal.
All your scriptures are in the mind, all your knowledge is gathered there.
Now you are entering an innocent space. You will not get the answer. You will get the feel, you will get the taste, you will get the smell.
As you go deeper, you will be filled more with the feeling of being, of immortality, blissfulness, silence... a tremendous benediction.
But there is no answer like, "I am this, I am that." All that is from the scriptures. This feeling is from you, and this feeling has a truth about it.
It is a perfectly valid method.
One of the great masters of this century, Raman Maharshi, used only this method for his disciples: "Who am I?" But I have come across hundreds of his disciples -- they are nowhere near the ultimate experience. And the reason is because they know the answer already.
I have asked them, "Do you know the answer?"
They said, "We know the answer."
I said, "If you know the answer, then why are you asking? And your asking cannot go on very long -- do it two or three times and the answer comes. The answer was already there, before the question."
So it is just a mind game. If you want to play it, you can play it. But if you really want to go into it as it was meant by Raman Maharshi, and by all the ancient seers, it is a non-verbal thirst.
Not knowing oneself hurts, it is a wound. Not knowing oneself makes the whole of life meaningless. You may know everything, only you do not know yourself -- and that would be the first thing to know.
So if you can avoid the danger of falling into a verbal question, it is perfectly good, you can go ahead.
You have also asked about witnessing, watching the breath and where one should watch. Anywhere -- because the question is not where you are watching, the question is that you are watching.
The emphasis is on watching, watchfulness. All those points are just excuses. You can watch the breath at the tip of the nose where the breath goes in, you can watch it while it is going in, you can watch it when it returns -- you can watch it anywhere. You can watch thoughts moving inside. The whole point is not to get lost in what you are watching, as if that is important. That is not important....
The important thing is that you are watchful, that you have not forgotten to watch, that you are watching... watching... watching.
And slowly slowly, as the watcher becomes more and more solid, stable, unwavering, a transformation happens. The things that you were watching disappear.
For the first time, the watcher itself becomes the watched, the observer itself becomes the observed.
You have come home.

Question 4
BELOVED OSHO,
I HAVE NOT EXPECTED ANYTHING FROM YOU, YET YOU HAVE TRICKED ME AND GIVEN ME SOME BEAUTIFUL THINGS. IS THERE ANYTHING A SANNYASIN HAS TO ASK, OR DOES EVERYTHING HAPPEN ON ITS OWN?
Everything happens on its own, but a sannyasin has to be alert not to miss the train.
The train comes on its own, but you have to be alert. All around you so much is happening; in twenty-four hours... awake, asleep... you have to be watchful of what is happening. And the more you are alert, you will be surprised... the same things are happening that were happening before, but the meaning has changed, the significance is different.
The roseflower is the same, but now it is radiant, surrounded by some new energy that you were not aware of before -- a new beauty. It seems you used to see only the outer side of the rose; now you are able to see its inner world. You used to watch the palace from the outside; now you have entered into its innermost chambers. You have seen the moon hundreds of times, but when you see it silently, peacefully, meditatively, you become aware of a beauty that you were not aware of before, a beauty that is not ordinarily available, for which you need to grow some insight.
And in silence, in peace, that insight grows.
It happened... a very significiant incident. One of the Indian poets, Rabindranath Tagore, translated one of his small books of poems, GITANJALI, "Offering of Songs." He was awarded the Nobel prize for that small book.
In India it was available for at least fifteen years. But unless a book meets the international standards of language and gains international appreciation, it is difficult for it to get a Nobel prize.
Rabindranath himself was a little worried, because he translated it and to translate poetry is always a very difficult affair. To translate prose is simple; to translate poetry is immensely difficult, because prose is of the marketplace and poetry is something of the world of love, of the world of beauty, of the world of moon and stars. It is a delicate affair.
And every language has its own nuances which are almost untranslatable. Although the poet himself translated his own poetry, he was doubtful about the translation. So he showed it to one of the Christian missionaries, a very famous man of those days, C.F. Andrews -- a very literate, cultured, sophisticated man.
Andrews suggested four changes. He said, "Everything else is right, but in four places it is not grammatically right."
So Rabindranath simply accepted his advice, and changed those four places.
In London, his friend, the Irish poet Yeats, called a meeting of English poets to hear the translation of Rabindranath. Everybody appreciated it. The beauty of it was something absolutely new to the Western world.
But Yeats, who was the most prominent poet of England in those days, said, "Everything else is right, but in four places it seems that somebody who is not a poet has made some changes."
Rabindranath could not believe it. He said, "Where are those four places?"
Yeats pointed out the four places exactly.
Rabindranath said, "What is wrong?"
He said, "There is nothing wrong, they are grammatically correct. But poetically... whoever suggested them is a man who knows his grammar but does not know poetry. He is a man of the mind but not a man of the heart. The flow is obstructed, as if a river had come across a rock."
Rabindranath told him, "I asked C.F. Andrews; these are his words. I will tell you the words that I put there before."
And when he put his words in, Yeats said, "They are perfectly right although grammatically wrong. But grammar is not important. When it is a question of poetry, grammar is not important. You change it back, use your own words."
I have always been thinking that there are ways of the mind, there are ways of the heart; they need not be supportive of each other. And if it happens that the mind is not in agreement with the heart, then the mind is wrong. Its agreement or disagreement does not matter. What matters is that your heart feels at ease, peaceful, silent, harmonious, at home.
We are trained for the mind, so our mind is very articulate. And nobody takes any care of the heart. In fact, it is pushed aside by everybody because it is of no use in the marketplace, it is no use in the world of ambitions, no use in politics, no use in business.
But with me, the situation is just the opposite -- the mind is of no use. The heart....
Everything happens, just your heart has to be ready to receive it.
Everything comes, but if your heart is closed.... The secret laws of life are such that the doors of your heart will not even be knocked on.
Existence knows how to wait; it can wait for eternity.
It all depends on you.
Everything is ready to happen any moment. Just open all your doors, all your windows, so that existence can pour into you from every side. There is no other god than existence, and there is no other paradise than your very being.
When existence pours into your being, paradise has entered into you -- or you have entered into paradise, just different ways of saying the same thing.
But remember: nothing is expected of you.
All the religions have been telling you for centuries that you have to do this, you have to do that. That you have to be a torturer of yourself, you have to renounce pleasures, you have to fight with your body, you have to renounce the world.
The Buddhist scriptures have thirty-three thousand principles that a sannyasin should follow. It is almost impossible to remember them -- following them is out of the question.
I don't have a single principle for you to follow; just a simple understanding that it is your life -- enjoy it, allow it to sing a song in you, allow it to become a dance in you. You have nothing else to do but simply to be available.
And flowers are going to shower on you.

============================================================

Question 1
BELOVED OSHO,
WHAT IS THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN OBEYING THE MASTER AND FOLLOWING HIS GUIDANCE?
The question is complex.
In the first place, the master does not expect to be obeyed but to be understood.
He does not give you guidelines either.
In his presence, your loving heart finds them.
It means that those who order and expect that their orders should be followed, complied with, are not authentic masters.
The master is not a commander. He does not issue things like `Ten Commandments.' Certainly, he explains to you his experience, his realization, and then it is up to your intelligence to do whatever is right. It is not a direct order, it is an appeal to your intelligence.
An order never cares about your intelligence, an order never wants you to understand anything. The basic purpose of all ordering of people is to reduce them into robots.
All over the world, in every army, they are turning millions of people into machines -- of course, in such a way that you don't understand what is going on. Their methodology is very indirect.
What does it mean that thousands of people every morning are marching, following orders -- "Right turn, left turn, move forward, move backward" -- for what is all this circus going on? And for years it goes on. This is to destroy your intelligence.
The strategy is that if for years continuously you go on following any kind of stupid thing, meaningless, every day in the morning, every day in the evening... And you are not supposed to ask why. You just have to do it, to do it as perfectly as possible; there is no need for you to understand why. And when a person goes through such a training for years, the natural effect is that he stops asking why. And why? -- because the questioning attitude is the very base of all intelligence.
The moment you stop asking why, you have stopped growing as far as intelligence is concerned.
It happened in the second world war....
A retired army man... he had fought in the first world war, and he was honored well; he was a brave man. And now almost twenty-five years had passed. He had a small farm and lived silently.
He was going from the farm to his house with a bucket full of eggs, and a few people in a restaurant, just jokingly, played a trick on the poor old army man. One of the men in the restaurant shouted, "Attention!" and the man dropped the bucket and stood in the position of attention.
It had been twenty-five years since he had gone through the training. But the training had gone into the bones, into the blood, into the marrow; it had become part of the unconscious. He completely forgot what he was doing -- it happened almost autonomously, mechanically.
He was very angry. But those people said, "Your anger is not right, because we can call out any word we want. Who is telling you to follow it?"
He said, "It is too late for me to decide whether to follow it or not to follow it. My whole mind functions like a machine. Those twenty-five years simply disappeared. `Attention' only means `attention'. You destroyed my eggs. I am a poor man."
But this is being done all over the world. And not only today; from the very beginning armies have been trained not to use intelligence, but to follow orders.
You have to understand one thing very clearly: that to follow an order and to understand a thing are two diametrically opposite things. If, by understanding, your intelligence feels satisfied and you do something out of that, you are not following an order from the outside; you are following your own intelligence.
And an authentic master is not your commander. He loves you, and he wants you to be more understanding, more intelligent, more capable of finding your way, more insightful, more intuitive. This cannot be done by orders.
I am reminded of another incident in the first world war. In Berlin, one German professor of logic was recruited into the army. There was a shortage of soldiers, and everybody who was physically able was asked to volunteer. Otherwise, they were forcing people to go to the army....
Because all the societies, all the nations, all the cultures, have taken it for granted that the individuals exist for them, not vice-versa. To me, just the opposite is the case: the society exists for the individual, the culture exists for the individual, the nation exists for the individual. Everything can be sacrificed, but the individual cannot be sacrificed for anything.
Individuality is the very flowering of existence -- nothing is higher than it.
But no culture, no society, no civilization is ready to accept a simple truth.
The professor was forced. He said, "I am not a man who can fight. I can argue, I am a logician. If you need somebody to argue with the enemies, I am ready, but fighting is not my business. It is barbarous to fight."
But nobody listened, and finally he was brought to the parade grounds. The parade started, and the commander said, "Left turn." Everybody turned left, but the professor remained standing as he was standing.
The commander was a little worried: "What is the matter? Perhaps the man is deaf." So he shouted loudly, "Now turn to the left again!" All the people turned to the left again, but that man remained standing as if he had not heard anything.
Forward, backward... all the orders were given and everybody followed. That man remained just standing in his place.
He was a well-known professor; even the commander knew him. He could not be treated just like any other soldier, he had a certain respect. Finally, when the parade ended and everybody came back to the same line from where they had started, the commander went to the professor and asked, "Is there some problem with your ears? Can't you hear?"
He said, "I can hear."
"But then," the commander said, "why did you remain standing? Why did you not follow the orders?"
He said, "What is the point? When everybody finally has to come back to the same state, after all this movement going forward and backward, left and right, what have they gained?"
The commander said, "It is not a question of gaining, it is a training!"
But he said, "I don't need any training. This kind of stupid thing... You come to the same place after doing all kinds of stupid things, which I don't see any point in. Can you explain to me why I should turn left and not right?"
The commander said, "Strange, no soldier asks such questions."
The professor said, "I am not a soldier, I am a professor. I have been forced to be here, but you cannot force me to do things against my intelligence."
The commander went to the higher authorities and said, "What to do with this man? He may spoil other people -- because everybody is laughing at me, and everybody is saying, `Professor, you did great!' I cannot tackle that man. He asks... each thing has to be explained: `Unless I understand it, unless my intelligence supports it, I am not going to do it.'"
The commander in chief said, "I know the man. He is a great logician. His whole life's training is in questioning everything. I will take care of him, you don't be worried."
He called the professor to his office and said, "I am sorry, but we cannot do anything. You have been recruited; the country needs soldiers. But I will give you some work which will not create any difficulty for you and will not create any difficulty for others. You come with me to the army mess."
He took the professor there, and showed him a big pile of green peas. He told the professor, "You do one thing: sit down here. You have to sort out the big peas on one side, the small peas on the other side. And after one hour I will come to see how things are progressing."
After one hour he came back. The professor was sitting there and the peas were also sitting there, in the same place. He said, "What is the matter? You have not even started."
He said, "For the first and for the last time, I want you all to understand that unless you explain to me... Why should I sort out the peas? My intelligence feels insulted by you. Am I an idiot, to sort the peas? What is the need? Moreover, there are other problems. Sitting here, I thought that perhaps there is some need, but there are questions which have to be decided: there are peas which are big and there are peas which are small, but there are peas of many other sizes. Where are they going to go? You have not given me any criterion."
A mystery school, a spiritual path, is not the path of a soldier.
Here, orders are prohibited.
Here, only intelligence is appealed to. The decision is always on your part.
It is only the phony masters who give you orders, because they cannot satisfy your intelligence. An authentic master is perfectly capable to satisfy your intelligence, and then leave it up to you. It is your life, and the final decision has to be made not by anyone else other than you. You have to take the responsibility on your own shoulders. So there are no orders as far as true masters are concerned.
You have also asked about guidelines.
People have been told such nonsense for centuries -- as if spirituality is a kind of geography, so that maps are given to you, guidelines are provided to you: Follow the right guidelines and you will reach the goal.
Alas, things are not so cheap.
There are no maps in existence; no solid guidelines either, because each individual is so unique that what may be a guideline for one may prove a distraction for another; what may be medicine to one may prove poison to another.
Individuals are so different.
And if a master cannot understand the difference of individuals, their unique qualities, talents, geniuses, then who is going to understand?
No general guidelines can be provided.
The master simply goes on dropping all kinds of hints. Remember my word `hints' -- not guidelines. And you have to choose whatever suits you, and you have to experiment to see whether it is workable for you or not. If it works, go on deeper into it; if it does not work, don't feel guilty. You have not committed any sin, you have simply failed in an experiment.
With a master, life becomes a scientific experiment. It is no more a question of heaven and hell, punishment and reward. It is a question of exploration.
And each individual has to explore in his own way.
There are no golden rules: this is the only golden rule there is.
There is no superhighway with milestones telling you how far you are from the goal. In the spiritual exploration, you have to walk and create your path by your walking; there is no ready-made path so that you have simply to walk on it.
And my feeling is that this is tremendously blissful and ecstatic. You are not like railway trains. Running on rails, you cannot run into the jungles, into the mountains, anywhere you like. The railway train is a prisoner.
But a river is not a prisoner. It also travels long. It may be coming thousands of miles, from the Himalayas, and it reaches finally to the ocean -- with no map, with no guidelines, with no guides, and nobody on the way to whom the river can inquire, "Which way am I to go now?"... because each step is a crossroad.
But strangely enough, every river reaches to the ocean with great freedom, finding its own path.
The master can only give you certain hints about how to find your path. He can give you certain indications whether you have found it or not, can give you certain criteria to judge whether you are moving towards the goal or away from the goal. But he does not give you guidelines. In the very nature of things, it is not possible.
The moment you have found a master, you have found the path.
And who is the master? -- not one who fulfills your mind expectations. A Christian mind has Christian expectations, a Hindu mind has Hindu expectations, a Buddhist mind has Buddhist expectations.
A master is one who fulfills the longing of your heart.
It has nothing to do with the mind. It is a love affair.
You simply find that you are in love. You simply find that your heart feels at home, at ease, that your heart has found a treasure, feels a tremendous benediction. And as you come closer to the master -- in your love, in your trust -- your peace deepens; your silence becomes not something dead, the silence of a graveyard, but something singing and dancing, alive.
The more you are moving towards your life's fulfillment, the more your life becomes a rejoicing, a deep joy for no reason at all, a blissfulness so deep and so abundant that you can start sharing it with others. In fact, you have to share it with others because it is overflowing, you cannot contain it.
For the first time, you are small and your bliss is infinite.
These are the indications that you are moving towards home.
Your ecstasies go on growing deeper and higher.
And if you are moving away, you will become more miserable, more sad, more saintly, more Christian, more Hindu, more Jaina -- all kinds of diseases. More knowledgeable... but inside, more and more empty; a beggar living by a thin thread of hope that somewhere in the other life, somewhere in the other world, you will be rewarded for all your sadness, your long British faces.
Saints don't laugh. They have fallen below humanity, because only human beings laugh. Buffaloes don't laugh, donkeys don't laugh -- they all belong to the categories of the saints and sages. Perhaps these fellows -- donkeys and buffaloes -- may have been great sages in their past lives and now they are getting their reward. Don't misbehave with them. Be respectful. One never knows.
But as far as I am concerned, your sense of humor, your laughter will become deeper as you grow in consciousness. You will become more playful in life.
So there are neither orders nor guidelines, but only vague hints, indications, and a constant effort to sharpen your intelligence so that you can find your way. And when you have found, you have the courage to burst into songs, into dances, into rejoicings.
That's the function of the master: to make you more intelligent and more courageous, more loving, more understanding. But there are no orders, no disciplines, no guidelines.
Orders, disciplines, guidelines -- these have been used by people who wanted to dominate you, by people who wanted to dictate their terms, to enforce their ideas on other people's lives. I call all such people great criminals. To impose your idea on somebody, to give some ideal, some mold, is violence, sheer violence. You are being destructive, and a master cannot do that.
A master is always creative.

Question 2
BELOVED OSHO,
I AM HAVING QUESTIONS COMING TO ME. I WRITE THEM DOWN AND READ THEM OVER. MEDITATING AGAIN, I OFTEN GET THE ANSWER, AND COINCIDENTALLY, MANY TIMES THE SAME QUESTION IS READ OUT TO YOU IN THE DISCOURSE OR AT THE VIDEO THAT NIGHT. EVEN IF IT IS FROM SOMEONE ELSE, I FEEL THAT IT IS MY QUESTION, AND I FEEL AS IF I AM BEING ANSWERED.
BELOVED MASTER, CAN YOU PLEASE COMMENT?
It is a fallacy that any question is yours.
It is just an old habit of possessiveness -- the house is mine, the wife is mine, the child is mine, even the question is mine.
All human beings are potentially capable of all the questions that any one of you can ask, because all questions come out of your insane mind and you are all equally insane.
There are only a few things in which you are equal -- insanity is one of them. Only once in a while somebody is more insane than others; then he is caught.
And the whole function of psychologists, psychiatrists, psychotherapists is not to destroy insanity -- they cannot; they don't have any understanding about what sanity is. All that they can do is that when somebody has gone a little ahead of the average insane humanity, they can pull him back: "Just be normal." "Just be normal" means "Just be normally insane; don't try to be abnormal."
Abnormally insane people are thought to be mad.
Normally insane people -- because they are the only kind of people there are -- raise no questions, no problems, although they are full of the same problems as the mad people. But the difference is of quantity.
Just sit down in your room, close all the doors and lock them from inside and write down on your pad anything that goes on in your mind. Don't do any kind of editing work; simply go on writing whatever comes into your mind. And you will be surprised -- after ten minutes, read it, and you will be shocked -- is it written by you or by some insane person? What kind of nonsense, what rubbish goes on and on in your mind?
It is said that God made the world. There are many people who prove that there are so many mistakes in the world... it cannot be made by God. A perfect God cannot make such an imperfect world.
But on one point I have a soft spot for him: he has not made small windows in your head through which others can look inside at what is going on. Otherwise, it would have been such a perfect world -- just little windows, so at least your friends can just have a look at what is going on. And they will be surprised that on the face nothing shows, and inside this man is carrying such garbage. And it goes on, round and round, twenty-four hours a day.
In my meditation camps I used to have a special meditation: the meditation was that for one hour, everybody was to sit relaxed and say whatsoever came to his mind -- just to become a spokesman of his own mind, just a loudspeaker -- and to do whatever he felt like doing, no inhibition, for one hour. And it was such a joy, and people were doing such great things! Such good people... you would have never imagined.
One man... I would never have thought that he would do this: he was continuously phoning, just sitting in front of me. And he was a man of the age of nearabout sixty, a rich man, continuously phoning -- "Hello, hello!" Later on I discovered that that's what he did; his whole business was the share market.
And he used to sit just in front of me, so once in a while he would look at me and smile because he would see that what he was doing was not right, what he was talking was nonsense. But what to do? -- this was the meditation one had to do!
Jayantibhai is sitting here. One of his friends -- they are old friends, they are still friends, and very deeply related -- simply stood up and started pushing his car down the hill. It was the car in which I used to come to the camp, and he was going to push Jayantibhai's car down the hill -- it would be finished! And he was his great friend. I had to tell a few people, "Stop your meditation. Just catch hold of that man; otherwise that car is finished. And he knows it is his friend's car, and he knows that I will need it, that I have to go..."
Somehow he was taken away from the car, but he was so angry that in his anger he climbed up the tree that was just in the middle where all the meditators were sitting, and he started throwing his clothes from there, became naked. He is such a serious, silent person -- you cannot imagine that he can do such things. And it was such a difficulty to bring him down: "The meditation is finished, you come down," but he wouldn't listen, it was too difficult for him to come out of the meditation.
These things go on in the mind, but you don't do them.
Finally I had to stop that meditation, because it was dangerous. It was very beautiful to throw out your garbage, it was very cleansing, but it was dangerous -- people may start hitting each other.
It happened in one place. People were meditating, and one sardarji started hitting... not that anybody was his enemy or anything. He made such long jumps to hit people that the whole of the grounds were empty; all the meditators were standing around the edge of the grounds, and the sardarji was alone inside.
I said, "Sardarji, now sit down. Everybody is gone."
He said, "What came over me? -- because I am not a violent man." And the people of his town also reported, that "He is a very good man. What came to his mind?"
I said, "It must have been coming to his mind every day; it is just that the chance was not there. Today he got a chance. He alone finished all the meditators!" and there were at least five hundred people.
I asked him later on, "Did you not realize what you were doing?"
He said, "I realized that what I was doing was not right, and that these people have done no harm to me. Most of them are unknown to me. But from my very childhood, I have had dreams of beating people, cutting their heads. Even in the day, when I close my eyes I have always had this: that I alone am enough for hundreds of people. You have seen it yourself -- five hundred people, great meditators, all forgot their meditation."
I said, "And do you think you are sane?"
He said, "That's what I have been asking after your meditation! This thing is in my mind... any day, something goes wrong, goes beyond my control and I will be insane. Insanity is there, it is just repressed."
There are only two kinds of people in the world: normally insane people and abnormally insane people.
One man became mad... and mad people are very inventive because they don't have any fear of anybody; no question of respectability, no question of what others will think about them. They become very fearless, and they start doing their thing, what they had always wanted to do but were suppressing.
This man had this idea that some strange, slimy creature was rolling all over him, and the whole day he was throwing it off of himself. His family said, "What are you doing? -- because we don't see any slimy creature or anything."
He said, "You cannot see it. I was also in your situation before; I had suspicions about it but I had never seen it. Now it seems my third eye has opened. I can see it!" and he would go on throwing it off.
They said, "You are just... are you going to the business, to the office, or not?"
He said, "How can I go? And it is so disgusting -- it crawls on my face, it goes on into my hair... I cannot go anywhere."
So finally they took him to the psychiatrist. The psychiatrist said, "Don't be worried, I have seen such cases. You come here and sit."
He sat there, and he was continuously throwing off the creature. The psychiatrist said, "There is nothing; you just have an idea, you have become obsessed with an idea."
He says, "Obsessed? I will show you."
He took his chair close to the psychiatrist. And the psychiatrist said, "What are you doing?"
And the man started throwing his creatures onto him, and the psychiatrist said, "Stop! Don't throw those creatures on me! What kind of fellow are you? Have you come here for treatment or have you come here to make me sick also? What a disgusting fellow!"
He said, "Now you see, it is not an idea."
He said, "I do understand, it is not an idea. I can see them; it seems my third eye is also opening! You just don't come again. You can try another psychiatrist; he lives just opposite me. He is my enemy, and when I find cases like you, I send them to him. But you forgive me -- this is your fee, you take it back. But don't drop your creatures here! Take them to the other psychiatrist -- that is the office -- every day. And if you want something, I will pay your fee. Whatever fee you have to give to the psychiatrist, I will give to you. But open his third eye just the way you have opened mine. You are great -- there are yogis who are trying hard to open their third eyes and nothing opens, and within minutes you have opened my third eye."
And as the man was going out, he looked back. The psychiatrist was throwing off those creatures.
Everybody is in the same boat. Just a few are sitting in the middle, a few are sitting at the very edge, can fall into the river easily.
It is not your question. No question is yours.
Remember, all questions come out of your normal insanity.
So when you hear that somebody else has asked your question, don't be puzzled.
These are the same slimy creatures -- it is not your monopoly. They also have their own.
If you remain silent, you will find that every question that has ever bothered you is being asked by somebody else, by someone else -- because we are not islands; we are all connected, we are one continent. And we are continuously broadcasting our ideas, even without saying anything to anybody sitting by our side. Neither are you trying to say something to him, nor is he trying to listen to you, but those ideas are radiating.
It is something to be understood: that most of your ideas are just uninvited guests which you pick up just from anywhere. They are in the air, and once they get into your head you think, "It is my idea."
And if you listen carefully, every answer is for you. Even if the question was not yours, even if you were not able to recognize any resemblance of the question to any question in your mind, the answer is certainly for you -- as it is for everybody else.
Because my work is not what you call retail; it is wholesale.
Now, if I go on doing retail work, it will be too big a job in too small a life; I cannot help many people.
I do a wholesale job. My answer is for you, whether you have asked or not. Perhaps you may ask tomorrow or the day after tomorrow; just wait -- but remember the answer. The question will come. The question may be coming, already arising from your unconscious layers; it has just not reached in time. So you keep the answer; the question is bound to come.
I am answering your questions just to kill them, just to destroy them, so that I can help you to go beyond questions and beyond answers into a state of silence where there is no question and no answer.
That space is the space of all miracles, of all mysteries.
That magical space I call true religion.
To enter into it is to be a religious person.

Question 3
BELOVED OSHO,
WHEN SITTING HERE WITH YOU, I TRY TO WATCH AND TO BE AS AWARE AS POSSIBLE. MY MIND RUNS ON, WONDERING IF THIS SPACE IS RIGHT, WHETHER I SHOULD BE THE WATCHER OR BE LOST INTO YOU. AT THE SAME TIME, I TRY TO RELAX AND IGNORE ALL THIS.
SOMEHOW, DESPITE ALL THESE GYMNASTICS, A MOMENT COMES WHEN MELTING HAPPENS, AND I BECOME SO SOFT AND RECEPTIVE, SO VERY SIMPLE AND FLOWING.
BELOVED MASTER, HOW CAN I GET OUT OF MY OWN WAY SO THAT I DON'T WASTE SO MUCH OF THIS PRECIOUS TIME WITH YOU?
There are things which are really simple, but become very complicated because of you.
Now sitting here, you can simply relax and enjoy -- but no, you make a problem out of it: whether to relax or to merge or to watch. And in all this, you are missing the train.
There is no need to do anything here.
Just relax and listen, and out of that listening a few insights will come to you. Use those insights in your life.
When somebody insults you, watch it -- as if you are just the watcher, he is insulting somebody else. That's truly the case.
Or you are sitting by the side of the ocean -- merge with the beauty of the sunrise, don't bring the watcher in, because beauty is something which has to be enjoyed.
And anger is something which has to be dropped.
So different methods have to be used in different situations.
Lying on your bed, you have nothing to do -- just relax. The whole day you have been active, you have been doing a thousand and one things. Now is the time to forget it all and just let your whole energy relax and be refreshed.
Relaxation, merging, watching -- all are different techniques for different situations. And if you are trying all the techniques in a single situation, you will simply miss the whole point and you will not be able to do either this or that.
Still, you are fortunate that doing such a stupid thing you finally find relaxation. Perhaps you get tired, because enough is enough -- merging, watching, relaxing.... You get tired, so relaxation comes on its own; you feel soft.
It is good.
In India we have a proverb that if a person gets lost in the morning and comes home by the evening, he should not be called `lost'. At least he has come back -- for the whole day he has been wandering and doing all kinds of stupid things.
But when you see that relaxation comes and you are soft and things become beautiful, why not do it from the very beginning? Or is that introduction a necessity?
If you have seen George Bernard Shaw's dramas, his introductions are very long, longer than the drama. The drama is very small, and the introduction is three times bigger. Every friend, well-wisher, told him, "This is unnecessarily tiring. If we miss the introduction and just read the drama, then it feels that perhaps we are missing something: the man has written such a big introduction, there must be something in it. And if we read your introduction, it is so tiring that by the time we come to the drama we feel like throwing the book away -- you have tortured us so much."
There is no need of long introductions, just a preface.
So it is okay if for a minute or two you do merging, relaxation, watching; finish it quickly so you feel satisfied that the introduction part is done. Then come to the real drama -- relax and enjoy.
Things are simple. But somehow the mind wants to make them unnecessarily complicated, because unless they are complicated, the mind is not of any use.
The mind is useful only when something is complicated -- then the mind is needed. When the thing is simple, the mind is not needed at all.
And life is so simple that if one is courageous enough to live it, mind can be abandoned completely. And to abandon the mind and to live life spontaneously is what I call sannyas.
Moment to moment, we will see.
Why go on doing rehearsals?
When the moment comes, your consciousness will face it and respond to it.
But people are preparing so much that almost their whole lives are used up in preparations.
I have heard about a German professor. He wanted to have the biggest collection of philosophical, religious, spiritual literature. And he was a very rich man too, so he wandered around the earth collecting all kinds of scriptures. There are three hundred religions in the world, and there are hundreds of philosophies, and each philosophy has hundreds of books in different languages. And he had translators translating them all into German. This was all preparation for when he would start reading.
But by the time he was ninety, he was still collecting books.
Somebody told him, "Now it is time that you should start reading. The preparation has gone on too long, and you have thousands and thousands of books -- we don't think you will be able to read all of them. Your life is just at the very end, maybe a year or two more."
But the man said, "But my collection is not complete yet."
So he started collecting more forcibly, put more men into collection, into translation. Finally he fell sick, and the doctor said, "He is not going to survive more than seven days."
He called all the scholars who were translating his books: "Now stop translating. You just try to find small summaries from every scripture, because I have got only seven days and I want to know what is written in all the scriptures. So just prepare small summaries of all the scriptures."
But the scholars said, "You have collected so many scriptures, even summaries will not be possible. We will try, but in seven days all the summaries will not be ready."
The last day came. He inquired again, "What has happened?"
They said, "We are trying."
He said, "Forget all about it. You do one thing: just make one small note summarizing all the scriptures. Because there is no more time; I feel that I am going. So be fast and be quick."
They said, "How can we be fast and quick? We have to look into scriptures to find the very gist, the very essential center of all of them. It will take a little time."
The whole day passed, and by the evening when they had come to a conclusion, a small summary of a few pages.... They reached; the man was almost drowning. He said, "That many pages won't do. You just make it half a page, just a small summary that can be printed on a postcard. I don't have time for all these pages."
So they rushed back, again they summarized. Now it meant nothing, because all those scriptures, summaries and summaries... and by the time they came back, the man was dead.
His wife said, "It is a very sad thing. You can at least shout loudly in his ear; perhaps he may be able to hear. He is just going down."
The doctor said, "Now it is useless. But you can try, there is no harm in it." So one scholar shouted the summary of all the scriptures. But the man was dead already, and the doctors were saying, "Now he cannot hear."
His whole life went into preparation.
And this is not the story of one strange, weird man. This is the story of all normal people: preparation, preparation, preparation. They forget completely, that... preparation for what?
We are not certain even of the next moment.
Preparation for what?
Either live or prepare.
If you want to live, live now.
Or prepare for tomorrow -- and remember, tomorrow never comes. What comes in place of tomorrow is death. An intelligent person lives his life. He does not bother about preparations, disciplines.
You are here with me. Live this moment to its totality, to its very intensity. Perhaps out of that totality and intensity, you may get the taste that will go on lingering with you into the next moment. And once you have known that a moment can be lived with totality and intensity, you know the secret, the very secret of life.
You are always given a single moment; you are not given two moments together.
If you know the secret of living one moment, you know the whole secret of life. Because you will always get one moment -- and you know how to live it, how to be totally in it.
Your question reminds me about one of my old friends, a centipede. A centipede has one hundred legs; hence, the name `centipede'. The name comes from ancient Sanskrit, shattpadee.
Just one morning, early in the morning as the sun was rising, the centipede was going for a morning walk. A philosophical rabbit, watching the legs, could not believe -- he said, "My God, this centipede is going to be in trouble soon. How is he going to remember which foot first, which foot second... one hundred legs! He is bound to be in trouble."
The rabbit came close and said to the centipede, "Uncle, I am a philosophical rabbit -- just a student, an inquirer about truth."
The centipede said, "That is all right, but what is the problem?"
He said, "The problem is: how do you manage one hundred legs?"
So the centipede said, "I never thought about it. And no centipede has ever thought about it; there is no mention of it in our scriptures. We have been managing perfectly well. But your question is valid. Just sit. I will try," and he could not go even two feet. Puzzled, he fell down.
And he was very angry at the rabbit. He said, "You rascal, never again ask any centipede your philosophical question, because now I am in trouble. And the question has got into my head; now I cannot walk without thinking about how it is happening -- which one? And one hundred legs... my life is finished. But be kind enough not to ask such questions to anybody else. I will try to forget this question. I don't know.... If I can forget it I can live; if I cannot forget it, I am finished."
Now you are trying to be in my presence, relaxing, merging, watching... you will get into trouble.
Forget all nonsense, forget all philosophical questions.
Here, just be.
Simply be, and out of that being grows an understanding that will give you the insight into where to merge, where to watch, where to relax.
Here, you are to just get a taste of being -- of being fully alive, silent, joyous -- and everything else will come out of it.