---
title: From Misery to Enlightenment 01
series: From Misery to Enlightenment 01-30
talk_number: 1
url: https://oshoworld.com/from-misery-to-enlightenment-01
language: English
duration: 02:36:26
author: TALKS IN AMERICA
scraped_at: 2026-01-03T09:14:35.889419+00:00
---
Osho,
Seeing and hearing you speak, one thing continues to strike me: from your earliest childhood, up until the latest split second, you have always had so much self-respect and so much self-delight. Are we all capable of so much?
Man is not aware of what he is capable unless he comes to realize it.
It is just like a small young bird. The bird, sitting in the shelter the mother and the father have made, watches them fly, can see the delight of their flight. He himself would also like to fly in the same way, be on the wing in the infinite sky, under the sun. Seeing them going higher, moving with the winds, a great urge arises in him also. But he is not aware that he is capable of the same flight, the same delight, the same dance. He is not even aware that he has wings.
It takes a little time for the mother and the father to persuade him. And they have a certain methodology to persuade him. The mother may sit just a little higher on another branch and give a call to the child. The child tries to fly but is afraid he may fall. But the mother goes on calling him; that gives him confidence. Sometimes it is needed for the father to actually push him out of the shelter. There is fear, he is nervous, but one thing is certain: for the first time he knows he has wings.
He flutters his wings. He does not know how to fly, but the mother is not far away; he manages to reach her – the miracle has happened. Now the mother’s call will be coming from a second tree, and then the call will be coming from a far-off forest. But once he knows that he has wings, then distances don’t matter. Slowly there is no need for the mother to call or the father to push him.
One day comes when he simply says good-bye to his father and mother and flies and never comes back. He has become an individual on his own.
Whatever you see in me, feel in me, is there in you, but only as a potential.
Nobody has called you from a distance and given you the confidence that you have wings. Nobody has pushed you and of course in the beginning it will look as if he is your enemy, pushing you to your death: you will fall! But unless you are pushed, and you see that by fluttering your wings you remain in the air and you don’t fall…. Then a great potential has become actual: the first vision of your own flying. Now it is no longer a dream, you can realize it.
This is the problem – that man is not as alert as the birds are, that the child has to be made aware of his potentiality.
Man’s misfortune is this – that the father is not interested in the child’s potentiality. He is interested in his own investment. He would like the child to be part of his business, of his religion, of his politics, of his ideology. The mother is not interested in the child’s development because that’s an unknown factor. It is not as simple as a bird’s; man is a complex being, multidimensional. The child is capable of becoming so many things, but the mother has her own investment – she would like the child to become someone in particular. I
Man’s parents, because of their own investment – business, politics, religion, philosophy – are less interested in the potential of the child. They are more interested in how to mold the child so that he fits in their world, becomes respectable in their world, is not an outcast, is not a misfit.
All this arises out of good intentions, but the result is not good. It is almost slaughtering the child, destroying, killing him. Most of his potential will always remain only potential. He will never be even aware what treasures he has brought with his life. He will die and those treasures will remain unopened.
He lived his whole life according to somebody else’s dictates: he lived a borrowed life. He smiled because it was expected; he paid respect to people because that was what he was taught. He went to the church, to the synagogue, to the temple because his parents were going there, everybody else was going there. This was the thing to do, this was the in thing.
With me something went wrong from the very beginning.
The reason was that for seven years I was not with my parents, I lived with my maternal grandfather and grandmother. Those two old persons had no investment – they simply loved me. They knew perfectly well that sooner or later I would be gone, I was only a guest. You don’t start investing in a guest – tomorrow morning he will be gone. They acted out of a space which parents cannot. That’s where things went wrong with me.
They allowed me total freedom to be myself because they had no desire to mold me. In fact, they wanted me to go back to my parents, so whatsoever my parents wanted me to become I would be available. My maternal grandfather actually said to me many times, “Our whole effort is to return you to your parents the same clean slate as they gave us. We don’t want to write anything on you. Who knows? – it may be against your parents’ wishes. You belong to them, to us you are a guest: all that we can do is give you freedom, our love, space to grow.”
But the first seven years are the most important in life; never again will you have that much opportunity. Those seven years decide your seventy years, all the foundation stones are laid in those seven years. So by a strange coincidence I was saved from my parents – and by the time I reached them, I was almost on my own, I was already flying. I knew I had wings. I knew that I didn’t need anybody’s help to make me fly. I knew that the whole sky is mine.
I never asked for their guidance, and if any guidance was given to me I always retorted, “This is insulting. Do you think I cannot manage it myself? I do understand that there is no bad intention in giving guidance – for that I am thankful – but you do not understand one thing, that I am capable of doing it on my own. Just give me a chance to prove my mettle. Don’t interfere.”
In those seven years I became really a strong individualist: hard-core. Now it was impossible to put any trip on me.
I used to pass through my father’s shop, because the shop was in front – at the back was the house where the family lived. That’s how it happens in India: house and shop are together so it is easily manageable. I used to pass through my father’s shop with closed eyes.
He asked me, “This is strange. Whenever you pass through the shop into the house, or from the house” – it was just a twelve foot space to pass – “you always keep your eyes closed. What ritual are you practicing?”
I said, “I am simply practicing so that this shop does not destroy me as it has destroyed you. I don’t want to see it at all; I am absolutely uninterested, totally uninterested.” And it was one of the most beautiful cloth shops in that city – the best materials were available there – but I never looked to the side, I simply closed my eyes and passed by.
He said, “But in opening your eyes there is no harm.”
I said, “One never knows – one can be distracted. I don’t want to be distracted by anything.”
Naturally, he wanted me – I was his eldest son – he wanted me to help him. He wanted me, after my education, to come and take charge of the shop. The shop he had managed well; it had become a big place, slowly, slowly. He said, “Of course, who else is going to look after it? I will be getting old; do you want me continually to be here?”
I said, “No, I don’t, but you can retire. You have your younger brothers who are interested in the shop, in fact too interested – even afraid that you may give the shop to me. I have told them, ‘Don’t be afraid of me; I am no one’s competitor.’ Give this shop to your younger brothers.”
But in India the tradition is that the eldest son inherits everything. My father was the eldest son of his father; he inherited everything. All that he had now was for me to take care of Naturally he was worried…but there was no way. He tried in every possible way, somehow to get me interested.
He would say to me, “Even if you become a doctor you cannot earn as much in the whole month as I can earn in a day. If you become an engineer, what salary are you going to get? If you become a professor – I can hire your professors, no problem. And you know there are so many thousands of graduates, post-graduates, PhDs, unemployed.”
First he tried to persuade me not to go to the university because he was very much afraid that it would make me absolutely independent for six years – going far away. Then he would not even be able to keep an eye on me. He had already been regretting that for seven years he left me with my mother’s parents.
I told him, “Don’t be afraid. What has to happen has happened: I am really graduated. Those seven years…. No university is needed to corrupt me; I am corrupted completely – out of your hands. And these means of persuasion – salaries, respect, money – I don’t give any value to them. And I am not going to become a doctor or an engineer, so don’t be worried. In fact, I am going to remain a vagabond my whole life.”
He said, “That is even worse! It is better you be come an engineer or you become a doctor, but vagabond? – that is a new profession. You have got some mind to find such things. You want to become a vagabond! Even those who are vagabonds feel humiliated if you say, ‘You are a vagabond,’ but you are telling your own father that all your life you want to be just a vagabond.”
I said, “That is what is going to be.”
Then he started saying, “Then why do you want to go to the university?”
I said, “I want to be an educated vagabond, not a vagabond out of weakness. I don’t want to do anything in my life out of weakness: because I could not be anything, that’s why I am a vagabond – that is not my way. First I want to prove to the world that I can be anything that I want to be, Still I choose to be a vagabond – out of strength. Then there is respectability even if you are a vagabond, because respectability has nothing to do with your vocation, your profession; respectability has something to do with you are acting out of strength, clarity, intelligence.
“So be perfectly aware that I am not going to the university to be able to find some good job; I am not born to do such stupid things. And there are so many to do those things. But a very cultured, sophisticated, educated vagabond is very much needed because you don’t see any around. There are vagabonds but they are just third-grade people, they are failures. I want first to be absolutely successful and then to kick all that success and just be a vagabond.”
He said, “I cannot understand your logic, but if you have decided to be a vagabond I know that there is no way to change you.”
Those seven years…he reminded me again and again, That was our basic fault. That was the time we could have managed to make you something of worth. But your Nana and your Nani, those two old fellows destroyed you completely.”
And after my Nana’s death, my Nani never went back to the village; she was so heartbroken. I have seen thousands of couples very intimately because I have been staying with so many families, wandering around India, but I could never find anybody who could be compared with those two old people: they really loved each other.
When my Nana died, my Nani – my maternal grandmother – wanted to die with him. It was a difficult task to prevent her. She wanted to sit on the funeral pyre with her husband. She said, “My life is gone – now what is the point of being alive?” Everybody tried, and by that time…. This is an ancient tradition in India called suttee.
The word suttee means the woman who dies sits on the funeral pyre, alive, with her dead husband. The word suttee means truthfulness. Sut means “truth,” also “being”; suttee means “who has a true being – whose being is of truthfulness.” She has loved the person so deeply that she has become identified with his life; there is no point in her living. But after the British Raj the suttee tradition was declared illegal.
To the Western eye it looked almost like committing suicide; literally it was so. And for almost ninety-nine percent of women who became suttees it was nothing but suicide. But for one percent I cannot say it was suicide. For one percent, to live without the person whom they had loved totally and from whom they had never thought for a single moment to be separated, living was suicide.
But law is blind and cannot make such fine distinctions. What Britishers saw was certainly ugly and had to be stopped. The one percent went on the funeral pyre of their own accord. But it became such a respectable thing that any woman who was not willing to do it…and it was really a very dangerous, torturous way of dying – just entering the funeral pyre alive!
Ninety-nine percent were not willing to do it but their families, their relatives felt awkward because this meant the woman never loved the man totally. It would be a condemnation of the whole family: the honor of the family was at stake. So what these people did was they forced the woman; and a certain climate was created in which you would not be able to discover that the woman was being forced. She was of course in a terrible state, in a great shock.
She was taken to the funeral pyre and on the funeral pyre so much ghee, purified butter, was poured that there was a cloud of smoke all over the place; you could not see what is happening. Around that cloud there were hundreds of brahmins loudly chanting Sanskrit sutras, and behind the brahmins there was a big band with all kinds of instruments making as much noise as possible – so to hear the woman screaming or crying or trying to get out of the funeral pyre was impossible. Around the funeral pyre the brahmins were standing with burning torches to push the woman back in.
When Britishers saw this – this was certainly not only suicide but murder too. In fact, it was murder; the woman was not willing. The whole atmosphere was created so that you could not hear her screams, you could not see that she was trying to escape – everybody else was out of the circles of brahmins.
When Britishers found out that this was something criminal and ugly, they made it illegal: if any woman tried it and was found out and caught alive, she would be sentenced for her whole life. And anybody who persuaded her – the family, the priests, the neighbors – they were also partners in the crime and they would also be punished according to whatsoever part they had played in it.
So the institution slowly slowly disappeared; it had to disappear. But once in a while those one percent of women were always there for whom it didn’t matter, because their lives were now a sentence unto death. Why not take the chance of finishing it with your loved one?
So they all tried, everybody, to persuade my Nani not to do it, but she said, “I have nothing to live for. I cannot go back to my village because in that same house where we both lived our whole life for sixty years, I cannot live alone. He will be too much there. I have not eaten a single meal before he did; it will be impossible for me to eat. In the first place, impossible to cook because I used to cook for him; he loved delicious foods and I enjoyed cooking for him. Just to see him delighted was my delight. Now for whom am I going to cook?
“And I have never taken my meal before him. Even if it was very late if he had gone to some other village for some work, or to the court in a faraway town – I had to wait the whole day, but it was a joy to wait for him. In sixty years of married life I have not eaten a single meal before him.”
That has been a tradition in India: how can you eat unless the person you love and for whom you have cooked and prepared has eaten? Just the other day my mother was saying…. She told me that she had wanted to tell me before but could not gather courage to tell, that day she wanted to say it because it was like a heavy weight on her heart.
I said, “You should have told me before; if just by telling me that weight disappears, why should you keep it?”
She said, “l felt so ashamed to mention it to you, but I cannot bear it any more, for the simple reason that if any day I die, I will die with this heavy weight, so it is better I should tell it.”
And what was the matter? The matter was nothing – to the Western eye it is meaningless. The matter was this, that she had also never eaten before my father, but on the last day, when my father died…. She used to come from the hospital in the night and in the early morning she used to go back. She was just preparing tea before she went to the hospital, just about to take a cup of tea when the phone call came that my father’s condition was serious, so without drinking the tea she went to the hospital. He was going up and down the whole day, so she completely forgot about eating.
By the evening my father was better. I went to see him nearabout three, and he was as good as one could hope – and that was a dangerous signal because it always happens before a man dies that he becomes absolutely okay. When death is coming, somehow the whole life flame gathers together to face death as the last challenge. That’s why before death people become almost cured. It is just like before a flame disappears from the candle: in that last moment before disappearing it burns really bright, and with full vigor, with intensity.
Life is almost a flame. Even scientifically too it is a flame; that’s why you need constant oxygen – oxygen is needed by every flame. If you cover a candle with a glass, soon the candle will be gone because inside the glass there is only a little bit of oxygen. Once that oxygen is burned by the flame, the flame is finished. You need constant oxygen just to keep your flame burning. So scientifically also you are a flame, not only poetically.
When I went to see him at three o’clock he was perfectly cured. He was laughing, sitting up, enjoying himself; and he said to me, “Now I am feeling perfectly good, and I think tomorrow I can come home.” I could see what was going to happen. He was going home but he was not coming home.
So I tried to change the subject of home, because it was difficult for me to say, “Yes, tomorrow you are coming home” – because what I was seeing was that he was going home that day. But I said, “That is perfectly okay. Why wait for tomorrow? If you are feeling good and there is no problem, and the doctor allows it, you can come today.” And I tried to talk about mundane things. I told him, “We have brought a new, very big car for you. It has come, and whenever you are ready you will be coming home in your own new car.”
He was almost childlike as he went deeper into meditation. And he took sannyas only when he had touched the rock bottom of meditation, not before it. People take sannyas to enter into meditation; he waited. My mother took sannyas, my uncles took sannyas, but he waited.
Everybody was asking me, “Why don’t you tell your father?” My uncle was saying it, my mother was saying it. I said, “He has never told anything to me, never forced me to do anything. Now this would be absolutely unfair on my part to tell him to do something – and particularly to take sannyas. Whenever he wants, he will say; I am not going to tell him. And I know he is waiting” – because he was continuously reporting about his meditation to me: how he was going, what he experienced, for how many seconds his thoughts disappeared and what kind of thoughts came when they came.
Whenever he came to me he was mentioning his meditation – and that was a clear indication that he was waiting; until he had touched rock bottom he would not say anything about sannyas. And he knew perfectly well that I was not going to say anything.
One day, in the morning…he used to meditate from three o’clock in the night up to six – three hours. So just nearabout six, Laxmi came running and said, “Your father wants you immediately, and he also says, ‘Bring a mala and the sannyas form.’ I don’t know what has happened to him.” He had been sitting for three hours; he was staying in the room where afterward Laxmi stayed – in Lao Tzu house in Pune, the same room. He had just come for a few days, so Laxmi had moved out and he was staying there. I went into the room. He said, “Now the time has come: give me sannyas.
After that day he became more and more childlike – interested in any small thing, just like a child. But that day when I mentioned, “We have brought a very big car for you, perhaps the biggest available in India” – and you can find the biggest cars in India because elsewhere, all over the world, they have disappeared – “and now you will not feel any discomfort, any trouble,” he took no notice. That was another indication to me that he was feeling something. I left him after ten minutes and I told him, “I will inquire of the doctor, and if you are cured then why wait for tomorrow? – you come home today.”
When my mother saw him he was looking perfectly well. He said that he wanted to go out and sit on the verandah and just see the outside world. After my leaving they took him out. At that time my mother realized that she had not eaten the whole day. She felt so hungry that she told Sohan, or somebody who was there, “I am feeling very hungry, my stomach is almost hurting.” She told my father, “Sohan is coming soon with the food so you eat first – my stomach is hurting.”
But my father said, “I am not feeling like eating. I am feeling so good that I don’t want to disturb my body by anything; I simply want to sit and look at the sky. Don’t be worried – you go and eat” – and she was so hungry that she ate before my father.
This weight she had been carrying – that for the whole of her life she never ate before my father, and on the last day she did. As she finished, my father came in and she brought his food: he took one bite and said, “My body doesn’t feel to take anything.” Within half an hour he was gone; his body came home that night – he came home in that car that Laxmi had been trying to bring.
But my mother just said the other day, “Relieve me of this pain because this hurts. That last day I completely forgot that he has to eat first.”
I said, “Perhaps he could see better, that now you will be eating alone; it will not be possible any longer to give him food first and then eat. So just out of compassion he told you, ‘You eat, don’t be worried. There is nothing in it – who eats first, and who eats later. It is all the same.’
“My feeling is that he was also feeling that there was not much time left, and then you would have to eat afterward without giving food to him. He must have been happy to see that you had eaten, that you would not be in the same position as my mother’s mother was.”
For almost ten or twelve days my grandmother didn’t eat. First it was difficult to prevent her from going on the funeral pyre. Finally they all, my whole family, told me, “Only you can persuade her; you have been with her for seven years.” And certainly I succeeded. All that I had to do – I said to her, “You are saying constantly, ‘For what do I have to live?’ Not for me? Just tell me: you don’t want to live for me? Then I will tell the whole family that we both are going on the funeral pyre.”
She said, “What!”
I said, “Then why am I going to be here? For what? It is good we both go.”
She said, “Stop this nonsense. Who has ever heard of a boy, seven years old…? It is not for you, it is for a woman whose husband has died.”
I said, “Your husband has died, my Nana has died, and my Nani is going to die – it is enough reason for me. And anyway, any day I will have to die, so why wait so long? Finish it quickly.”
She said, “I know you are mischievous and even though your Nana is dead you are playing a trick on me.”
I said, “Then stop harassing the whole family, otherwise I am coming with you.” She agreed that she wouldn’t go to the funeral, she would live for me.
She stayed in my father’s town, but she was a very independent woman: she did not like the big joint family; my father’s brothers, their wives, their children – it was a huge caravan. She said, “This is not the place for me. I have lived my whole life with my husband, in silence. Only for seven years were you there, otherwise there has not been much conversation either, because there was nothing to say. We had talked about all those things before, so there was nothing to say – we just sat silently.”
And it was a beautiful place where they lived, facing a very big lake, so they would sit looking at the lake and the water birds flying, coming in thousands in certain seasons. She said, “I would like to live alone.” So a house was found for her near the river where she would find some similarity; in this town we had no lake but we had a beautiful river.
The whole day I was in school or roaming around the town or doing a thousand and one things, and at night I always stayed with my Nani. Many times she said, “Your parents may feel bad. We took you from them for seven years, for which they cannot forgive us. We thought that we should return you as clean as we had got you, not trying to impose anything on you. But they are angry; they don’t say so but I can feel it and I hear from other people that we spoiled you. And now you don’t go to sleep with your father and mother and your family; you come here every night. They will think that the spoiling is continuing – the old man is gone but the old woman is still here.”
I said to her, “But if I don’t come can you really sleep? For whom do you prepare the second bed every night before I come? – because I do not tell you that tomorrow I will be coming. About tomorrow, from the very beginning I have been uncertain because who knows what will happen tomorrow? Why do you prepare the second bed? And not only the second bed….”
I had a long habit which Devaraj somehow had to manage to finish; it took him almost two or three years. I had, from my very childhood, as long as I remember, needed sweets before going to bed, otherwise I could not sleep. So she was not only preparing my bed, she used to go out and buy sweets, the sweets that I liked, and she would keep the sweets by my bed so that I could eat; even in the middle of the night if I felt like it again, I could eat. She would put enough so that if you ate the whole night there would be no problem.
I asked her, “For whom do you bring these sweets? – you don’t eat them; since Nana died you have not tasted sweets.” My Nana loved sweets. In fact it seems he gave me this idea of sweets; he also used to eat before going to sleep. That is not done in any Jaina family. Jainas don’t eat in the night; they don’t even drink water or milk or anything. But he lived in a village where he was the only Jaina, so there was no problem. And it is perhaps from him that I got the habit. I don’t remember even how I started it: it must have been he, eating and calling me also to join him. I must have joined him, and by and by it became a routine thing. For seven years he trained me!
I could not go to my house for two reasons. One reason was those sweets – because in my mother’s place it was not possible: there were so many children that if you allowed one child, then all the children would ask. And anyway it was against the religion – you simply could not even ask. But my difficulty was this, that I could not go to sleep without them.
Secondly, I felt, “My Nani must be feeling to be alone, and here it is difficult to be alone so many people, it is always a marketplace. Nobody will be missing me if I am not here” – nobody ever missed me. They just made certain that I was sleeping with my Nani, then there was no problem.
So even after those seven years I was not under the influence of my parents. It was just accidental that from the very beginning I was on my own. Doing right or wrong – that was not the important thing, but doing on my own. And slowly slowly, that became my style of life, about everything – for example, about clothes.
In my town I was the only non-Mohammedan dressed liked a Mohammedan. My father said, “You can do anything but at least don’t do this, because I have to live in the society, I have to think of the other children. And from where did you get this idea?”
Mohammedans in my town used instead of the dhoti that Indians use, a certain kind of pajama that is called a salwar. That is used by Pakhtoons in Afghanistan and Pakhtoonistan – those faraway places near the Himalayas, beyond the Himalayas. But it is a beautiful pajama, and not made in a miserly way, like a pajama; it has so many folds. If you have a real salwar you can make at least ten pajamas out of it; it has so many folds. Those folds give it its beauty, when they all become gathered. And I wore a long Pakhtoon kurta – not an Indian kurta. The Indian kurta is short and the sleeves are not very loose. The Pakhtoon kurta sleeves are very loose and the kurta is very long; it goes below the knees. And I had got a Turkish cap.
My father used to tell me, “You enter the shop anyway with closed eyes, and with closed eyes you go out. Why don’t you use the back door?” He said, “You can come in from the back door, you can go out from the back door; you can have the key to yourself because nobody uses the back door. At least we will be saved the trouble of answering every customer, ‘Who is the Mohammedan going inside with closed eyes?’ And you get these strange ideas. We have a cloth shop – all kinds of cloths are there, ready-made clothes are there – you can have any style, but Mohammedan?”
In India, a Mohammedan is the worst thing. I said, “This is why, because all you people think that the Mohammedan is the worst thing. I am protesting against you all, that the dress of the Mohammedan is the best. And you can see it; wherever I go only I am noticed, nobody else is noticed. Whenever I enter the classroom I am noticed; anywhere I go I am immediately noticed.”
And the way I was using that dress…. It was a really graceful dress, and with a Turkish cap. The Turkish cap is long and has a tassel of hair hanging by the side; very rich Turkish people use it. I was so small, but that dress helped me in many ways.
I might go to meet the collector, and the man, the peon, guarding the gate would just look at me and he would tell me, “Come on.” Seeing that dress…. He would not have allowed me, a small boy, to enter, but, “With this dress he must be a sheik or somebody very important.” And even the collector would stand up, seeing my dress. “Sheik” is used for very respectable people, and he would say, “Sheikji, baithye – Sheikji, please sit down.”
I told my father, “This dress helps me in so many ways. Just the other day I went to see a minister and he also thought that I am a sheik belonging to some rich Arabian family or Persian family. And you want me to drop this dress and just use a dhoti and kurta which nobody is going to notice?” I continued to wear that dress up to my matriculation.
They tried hard to stop me, but the harder they tried, the more…. I said, “If you stop trying perhaps I may drop it; while you continue to try I am the last person to drop it.”
One day my father took all my salwars my kurtas and my three Turkish caps in a bundle and put them in the godown, the basement, where all the broken, useless things were kept. I could not find anything to wear, so when I came out of the bathroom I simply went naked, with my eyes closed, into the shop. As I was going out my father said, “Wait! Just come in. Put on your clothes.”
I said, “You bring them, wherever they are.”
He said, “I had never thought you would do this. I thought you would look around and search for the clothes; and you would not find them because I had put them in such a place you couldn’t find them. Then naturally you would wear the normal clothes that you are supposed to wear. I never thought that you would do this.”
I said, “I take direct action, I don’t believe in unnecessary talk. I didn’t even ask anybody where my clothes were. Why should I ask? My nakedness will serve the same purpose.”
He said, “Have your clothes. Nobody is going to bother you about your clothes, but please don’t start walking naked because that will create more trouble – that a cloth merchant’s son has no clothes to wear. You are notorious and you will also make us notorious with you: ‘Look at the poor child!’ Everybody will think that we are not giving you clothes.”
Since then they stopped; by the time I passed matriculation I dropped those clothes. When I left the town, I changed my clothes to those more suited to my college life. I had found that in the first college I went to, wearing a cap was compulsory – you could not go there without a cap. That was a great idea. You had to come very properly dressed: shoes, buttons fastened, wearing a cap. I went there with no buttons, with no cap, with my wooden sandals – and suddenly I became a celebrity.
The principal immediately called me. He said, “What is this?”
I said, “This is just a way to get introduced to you, otherwise it may take years. Who bothers about a first-year student?”
He said, “You have some idea behind it, but it is not allowed; you will have to wear a cap, and your buttons have to be fastened.”
I said, “You will have to prove to me the scientific grounds for wearing a cap. Does it help in any way to increase intelligence? Then I can even use a turban – why a cap? – if it increases brain power. But the fact is that most idiots in India are in the Punjab, and they wear a turban, tied tightly. Perhaps they are the only people in the whole world who tie a turban so tightly; their mind is completely imprisoned, finished. And the most intelligent people in India are the Bengalis, who don’t wear caps.” I said, “Just tell me: What are the fundamental, scientific reasons that I have to wear a cap?”
He said, “This is strange – nobody ever asked for the fundamental, scientific reasons for caps. This is simply our convention in this college.”
I said, “I don’t bother about convention. If the convention is unscientific and destroys people’s intelligence, I am the first to rebel against it. And soon you will see caps disappearing from the college because I am going to tell people, ‘Look – Bengalis have the best intelligence and they don’t wear caps.’
“In India, two Nobel Prizes have gone to Bengal. I don’t think ever in the future there is going to be a single Nobel Prize to Punjab. I am going to spread this movement, but if you keep silent and allow me the way I am, I won’t create a nuisance. Otherwise there will be a movement: you will see bonfires, caps burning in front of your office.”
He looked at me and he said, “Okay, don’t create any nuisance, just go on the way you are. But I will be in trouble because sooner or later others are going to ask, ‘Why did you allow him?’”
I said, “The fact is that if you are an honest man; you should stop wearing the cap yourself because you don’t have any scientific grounds for it. Otherwise, whosoever comes, tell him to find scientific, fundamental reasons for it – that in some way it helps intelligence. The college is meant to help people’s intelligence; it should be sharpened. In what way does the cap help? It imprisons.”
But he said, “At least buttons…”
I said, “I don’t like them. I like the air going directly to my chest, I enjoy it; I don’t like buttons. Nowhere in your college code are caps mentioned, so for the cap I need scientific reasons. Nowhere is it mentioned that you have to have buttons.” But nobody there had ever thought that people would come to college without buttons. I said, “You can see: I don’t even have the holes for the buttons.”
I won the first prize in my first year in an inter-university debate competition, and this principal was very happy. He said, “I knew that you would win because you find proofs and reasons which nobody even suspects exist. But now there is a problem: we need your photograph with the trophy and everything; it is going to be published. The cap I cannot say anything about, leave it; but buttons, without buttons…. The picture will be going to all the newspapers.”
I said, “Then you can stand in my place, with buttons, proper dress and cap. I am not interested. And when I was debating I did not have buttons; I won the trophy without buttons. And in the photo I have to be without the buttons, otherwise you are not being fair. You should have told me there that without buttons I could not participate in the debate.
“You had chosen me to participate out of all the candidates in the college – at that time also I had no buttons. I participated in the debate, I won the competition; now the trophy is there. If you cannot stand in my place because everybody will recognize that you are the principal, then just hang your coat with the buttons by the side of it. I have no interest in it. But if I am going to stand, I am going to stand the way I am. Even with the buttons I am not the same person.”
He was shocked but he agreed that it was true. Even with buttons it would not be the same person. The personality consists of very small things; just a slight change…. I said, “Just think” – he had a good mustache – “if we shave your mustache and tell you, ‘Please pose for us because your photo is going to be printed,’ would you be willing?”
He said, “But that would not be like me.”
I said, “Exactly. With buttons it would not be me.”
It went on – I never missed a single opportunity to sharpen my intelligence. I turned every possible opportunity to sharpening my intelligence, individuality. You can understand now, looking at the whole picture, but in fragments…. The people who had come in contact with me of course were unable to understand what kind of man I am – crazy, nuts – but I was going very methodically.
Each fragment may not give you the idea because it is out of context, but if you put it in the whole context…. I was being expelled from one college, another college, but I was enjoying it – and that’s what was shocking to them.
When I was expelled from one college, my first college, it was this same principal who had to expel me. He felt very sorry, because it was not right to expel me; and by and by he had come to have a certain liking for me, for my absolute determination to be myself whatsoever the cost. He had grown, by and by, a certain respect: “This man can sacrifice anything even for buttons, just for the cap.”
He tried to persuade me, “If you wear the cap I guarantee you that you will get the first class first in the intermediate examination, because it is in my hands.”
I said, “I would prefer to be failed now, but the cap I am not going to use. I am ready for the consequences: it is in your hands; fail me.” But before he could fail or pass me he had to expel me, because one professor insisted he would resign or I had to be expelled. He felt sorry because the professor was just being illogical – and strangely, he was the professor of logic! He was being absolutely illogical, because all his complaint was, was that I continually argued.
I told the principal, “The class of logic is meant to argue. We have come to learn logic, not to sit there like dodos. And that old fellow goes on saying any absurd thing. I cannot tolerate it. If anything illogical is said in the logic class, I am going to fight, I am going to stand for logic. It is a question of defending logic and its reputation. Just for an ordinary professor I cannot tolerate any illogical thing.
“And this is absolutely illogical: he gives no reason why I should be expelled, what crime I have committed. He just says that I argue – but is argument a crime? And ask him whether he has been able to answer my argument. Is it my argument that hurts him or that he cannot answer it?”
He said, “I can understand and I feel sorry for you.”
I said, “Never feel sorry for me, because I enjoy being expelled – it is creditable – and expelled for no reason at all, expelled for being right. I feel proud.
Don’t feel sorry for me, I feel sorry for you all that none of you have guts. You are the principal of the college and you don’t have guts. And remember that Life is a very strange phenomenon: today you are in a position of power; tomorrow I may be in a position of power.”
He said, “What do you mean?”
I said, “I don’t mean anything, I am simply saying that one day it is possible you may be in trouble and only I can save you.”
He said, “That is almost impossible. What trouble could I be in? Don’t try to confuse me.” He was already becoming afraid: “What trouble and what power is he talking about?”
I said, “One day, God willing, we will see.”
And, strangely, it happened that ten years after that incident I became a professor. One of the colleges near Gwalior was opened by a Jaina family. The family donated all the money, all that the college needed. And they were very much in love with me, so they put me on their managing committee. This principal – I had completely forgotten about him. Ten years is a long time, and in ten years I had been expelled so many times. There had been so many principals and vice-chancellors that I had been fighting and fighting; but it went on helping me to become more and more solid, confident.
This principal had lost his job; his was a private college, and the managing committee decided to throw him out, so he applied for this new college. I had no idea. I was on the committee to interview principals and professors for the college. When he came up – his name was Principal Paranjpe…when he came up and saw me sitting in the place of the chairman of the managing committee he started trembling.
I said, “Principal Paranjpe, don’t be afraid.”
Then he said, “Forgive me. What I did with you was absolutely unfair and wrong. Please forget about it.”
I said, “There is no question…I cannot forget it, I am going to reward you for it. You are chosen as the principal for this college because you expelled me. Now I cannot in any case not choose you because that would be simply, in your mind, revenge. Although you are not the best candidate – there are more qualified people than you – I have to choose you.
“Do you remember, I had said to you that one day things can be just upside down? That day you were sitting in the chair and I was standing in front of you. Today I am sitting in the chair and you are standing in front of me.
“Life is a very strange drama…but I appoint you to be the principal of this college, only because you expelled me. How can I forget it? Forgive?, that is perfectly okay – I have forgiven you long ago because no harm has been done to me – but forget?, that I cannot do. If I forget it you will not be appointed. Now tell me, should I forget it? – then you cannot be appointed. There are far better candidates, you can see. This is the list: there are PhDs there are DLitts – you are only a double MA
“Your only qualification is that I remember that you expelled me without any reason. Now being the principal of this college don’t do any idiotic thing like that.”
He could not believe it. In the evening he came to see me where I was staying, in the family who had made this college. He had tears in his eyes; he said, “I cannot believe it! I was certain that I was finished. Seeing you there I had lost all hope. I have been out of a job for one and a half years – I am in a terrible state. And you saved me, knowing perfectly well that I have been unfair to you.”
I said, “Forget about it. That is your problem – to be fair or to be unfair – but it helped me immensely. If you had not expelled me I would not have found a better college, a better principal, better professors. I am really thankful to you.”
Actually that was the thing: because of his expulsion I found a better college. But from there also I was expelled, and finally I had to leave Jabalpur because no college was ready to give me admission. But that was also a great blessing. In my whole life, looking backward, I find that if you are just a little alert everything turns into a blessing. I don’t remember anything in my whole life which turned out to be a curse. All nights have proved to be the beginnings of a brighter day.
When all the colleges refused me, I was living in Jabalpur with one of my father’s sisters who was married. She started crying and her husband was in tears. They said, “We have been telling you; why do you unnecessarily get into trouble? And it is not just one college – in four years how many colleges have there been? And you again do something. It surprises us that whatever you do you are righteous about it. And in fact we cannot say that you are wrong; you are right too. We have never seen such a thing happening to any student – who is always right and is expelled. If you are wrong and expelled it is understandable.” I said, “This is the beauty in my case. I am never wrong; but in this whole wrong society, to be right is to be wrong. Here, wrong is acceptable, right is not acceptable; hence I don’t feel that it is any insult. These are all certificates for my character.” And that’s how it turned out to be.
I moved to another city, Saugar, and gave all my certificates of expulsion to the vice-chancellor of the university. He said, “But why are you telling me all these terrible things?”
I said, “I am telling you: these are my character certificates. And I don’t want to keep you in the dark; first you should know about me, only then give me admission. Otherwise it is safer not to give me admission, rather than expel me later on, because then it will be your responsibility. And you will be condemned for it, because I always do the right thing; perhaps at the right moment, the right thing done rightly is too much, and the people who have been continually doing wrong things freak out. So I am telling you these are my character certificates.”
He said, “You are a strange young man but I cannot refuse you, because who else would give such character certificates? And I am the last to think of expelling you, because each time you are right. I am not going to deny you admission.”
He gave me admission – not only admission, he gave me scholarships. He gave me free food, lodging, boarding, everything free. He said, “You should be given all respect, because so much injustice has been done to you.”
I told him, “One thing you should remember: you are doing all these things; it is so compassionate of you; but if sometimes a problem arises then I am going to give you a tough time. I will not think of your favors – that you must keep in your mind – I cannot be bribed.”
He said, “l am not bribing you, these are not bribes. I really am impressed.” He was the only person who did not expel me for two years continuously. And those two years were the hardest for my professors because those were the two last years, the post-graduate years. So many complaints….
But that man, Doctor Tripathi – he was a very great historian. He was a professor of history at Oxford, and from there, when he retired, he became vice-chancellor of Saugar university. He kept his word.
He simply went on throwing all complaints into the wastepaper basket, although every day when I used to go for a morning walk, passing his house, he would tell me, “So many complaints came yesterday; they are all in the wastepaper basket.” And he was so happy that he had been able to keep his word against all odds. It was really difficult for him; there were complaints from students, from superintendents, from the proctor, from professors. But he went on inquiring, “Was he wrong or right?”
One professor was delivering a lecture. He said in his lecture – it was the anniversary celebration of the founder of the university – he said, “There was a time when India was known as a golden bird. It was so rich and so religious that there was no need to lock your doors – locks were not invented even.”
I stood up and asked him, “If this is true – that people were not keeping locks on their houses because there was no question of anybody stealing, of thieves, of criminals – then why does Gautam Buddha go on continually teaching people, ‘Don’t steal, don’t be a thief’? Do you think you are saner than Gautam Buddha? Mahavira continues, all the teachers from the Vedas…. If there was no stealing happening then these people seem to be utterly mad. For forty years Buddha teaches against stealing – to whom?”
I said, “Take your statement back. I can accept the idea that locks were not invented; that may be the reason why people were not locking their doors. A second reason is: there was nothing to be stolen, people were so poor. And poverty has existed since the days of the Vedas; it is mentioned in every scripture.
So the only explanation is that people were poor, so poor that what could you steal? – they had nothing. Moreover, to invent locks some kind of technology is needed – they don’t just grow on trees. The technology was missing. Of course the rich people had no need of locks because they had naked swords guarding their palaces and houses. But guarding against whom? There must have been poverty just on the other side of the road.”
He complained. But at the lecture he said, “Okay. I don’t want to make this celebration a place of argumentation or discussion. I take my statement back.”
I said, “You are not taking it back, you are just trying to save your face. But okay, this will do.”
Later he complained, “This man insulted me before the whole university.” By chance, when he was complaining I went to see the vice-chancellor for some other reason. I was the prefect of the hostels, and the superintendent of the hostels was continually issuing orders – of course they had to pass through me. If I found they were not right I threw them away; if they were right then I pasted them on the board. He was very angry.
He told me, “It is not within your power to throw away my orders.”
I said, “You prove that it is not within my power.” So I had gone just to explain the whole thing, and that the superintendent would be coming, and that this was the situation: “He issues stupid orders. Now I am not so stupid as to put those orders on the board of the hostel. So either you accept my resignation as a prefect, or when he comes make it clear to him that these orders are stupid and the prefect is doing right.”
For example, one order was that exactly at nine all the lights should be out. I said, “This is nonsense. I read up to three o’clock in the night; and I have come to the university to study as much as possible. I am not doing any harm to anybody. I am not going to put my light off at nine o’clock. It will be put off at three o’clock. He can put his lights off at eight o’clock or nine o’clock or whenever he wants. He should put them off forever – I have no problem.
“And no student has reported that they have any trouble – because all the students have their own times and their freedom. Somebody studies up to ten, somebody studies up to twelve. Somebody goes to bed early, gets up early and starts reading at three o’clock; when I am going to sleep he is going to start reading and puts his light on. Now to change this is nonsense. And I have told the superintendent, ‘You are trying to control even our sleep. In the day you control us: what to do, how to do it, where to go, where not to go. Even in the night – soon you will be starting to control our dreams and asking us, “Why did you dream of this?”‘“
I told the vice-chancellor, “You are a man of history, you must know that one emperor of Egypt issued an order – this is an historical fact – a pharaoh issued an order to the whole kingdom that nobody should enter his dreams. If anybody tried he would be sentenced to death. Naturally, nobody should interfere with his sleep.
“Now, this was a troublesome thing. One of his courtiers appeared the next night in his dream. Immediately he was caught. He tried hard to explain, ‘I had not gone out of my house.’
The pharaoh said, ‘That is not the point. Why did you appear in my dream? Who are you to disturb my sleep?’ Now, it is the pharaoh’s dream, his imagination – that poor fellow had nothing to do with it; he had not even thought about the pharaoh, but he was given a punishment. Because he was part of the court, of course he was not given the death sentence but just a few years’ imprisonment.”
I said to the vice-chancellor, “You must remember that. Now this man will soon start ordering, ‘You have to dream this, you have to dream that’; and ‘you should dream only up to this point and then all dreams stop.’ I cannot put up with this kind of nonsense – students are free. There is no trouble and no problem. Nobody is disturbing anybody.”
So I had gone to tell him, “Soon there is going to be trouble and a fight between me and the superintendent. Either you will have to change me or the superintendent; we cannot coexist. And if you remember your word, you have to change the superintendent because he cannot prove that he is right.”
At that same time he said, “You see this other professor sitting here – he says that you disturbed his meeting.
I asked the professor, “You had taken your statement back and I told you that you had not taken it back. If you had taken it back, why are you here, complaining? If you had not taken it back you should have been courageous enough to argue. I cannot sit there just listening to stupid things – it is insulting to the university. I was not disturbing the meeting. You started the disturbance – I was trying to put it right.”
And the vice-chancellor said to that professor, “Now prove him wrong, because this is my promise to him, that if he is proved wrong only then can any action be taken against him.”
But everything helped me. The more I went into conflicts with people of intelligence, education, culture, sharpness, the more I found it immensely helpful…not the textbooks, not the class lectures, but what I used to call – they don’t call them – extra-curricular activities. I used to call my activities, extra-curricular; and they were really paying.
When on the first day I entered the university’s philosophy class, I met Doctor Saxena for the first time. Only for a few professors did I have really great love and respect. These two were my most loved professors – Doctor S.K. Saxena and Doctor S.S. Roy – and for the simple reason that they never treated me like a student.
When I entered Doctor Saxena’s class the first day, with my wooden sandals, he looked a little puzzled. He looked at my sandals and asked me, “Why are you using wooden sandals? – they make so much noise.” I said, “Just to keep my consciousness alert.”
He said, “Consciousness? Are you trying to keep your consciousness alert in other ways too?”
I said, “Twenty-four hours a day I am trying to do that, in every possible way: walking, sitting, eating, even sleeping. And you may believe it or you may not, that just lately I have succeeded to be aware and alert even in sleep.”
He said, “The class is dismissed – you just come with me to the office.” The whole class thought I had created trouble for myself the first day. He took me into his office and took from the shelf his thesis for a doctorate that he had written thirty years before. It was on consciousness. He said, “Take it. It has been published in English, and so many people in India have asked to translate it into Hindi – great scholars, knowing both languages, English and Hindi, perfectly well. But I have not allowed anybody, because the question is not whether you know the language well or not; I was looking for a man who knows what consciousness is – and I can see in your eyes, on your face, by the way you answered…you have to translate this book.”
I said, “This is difficult because I don’t know English much, I don’t know Hindi much either. Hindi is my mother tongue, but I know only as much as everybody knows his mother tongue. And I believe in the definition of the mother tongue. Why is every language called the mother tongue? – because the mother speaks and the father listens – and that’s how the children learn. That’s how I have learned.
“My father is a silent man; my mother speaks and he listens – and I learned the language. It is just a mother tongue, I don’t know much; Hindi has never been my subject of study. English I know just a little bit, and that is enough for your so-called examinations, but for translating a book which is a PhD thesis…. And you are giving it to a student?”
He said, “Don’t be worried – I know you will be able to do it.”
I said, “If you trust me, I will do my best. But one thing I must tell you, that if I find something wrong in it then I am going to make an editorial note underneath, putting a star on it, that this is wrong, and how it should be. If I find something missing, I am going to put a star again and a footnote that something is missing, and this is the part that is missing.”
He said, “l agree to that. I know there are many things missing in it. But you surprise me: you have not even seen the book, you have not even opened it. How do you know that things will be missing in it?”
I said, “Looking at you…in the way you can see by looking at me, that I am the right person to translate it, I can see perfectly, Doctor Saxena, you are not the right person to write it!”
And he loved that so much that he told it to everybody. The whole university knew about it – this dialogue that had happened between me and him. In the next two-month summer vacation I translated the book, and I made those editorial notes. When I showed him, there were tears of joy in his eyes.
He said, “I knew perfectly well that something is missing here, but I could not figure it out because I have never practiced it. I was just trying to collect all the information about consciousness in Eastern scriptures. I had collected a lot, and then from that I started sorting it out. It took me almost seven years to finish my thesis.” He had done really a great scholarly job – but only scholarly. I said, “It is scholarly, but it is not the work of a meditator. And I have made all these notes – that this can be written only by a scholar, not by a meditator.”
He looked at all those pages and he said to me, “If you had been one of my examiners for the thesis I would not have got the doctorate! You have found exactly the right places that I was doubtful about, but those fools who examined it were not even suspicious. It has been praised very much.”
He was a professor in America for many years, and his book is really a monumental work of scholarship; but nobody criticized him, nobody has pointed…. So I asked him, “Now what are you going to do with the translation?”
He said, “I cannot publish it. I have found a translator – but you are more an examiner than a translator! I will keep it but I cannot publish it. With your notes and with your editorial commentary it will destroy my whole reputation – but I agree with you. In fact,” he said, “if it were in my power I would have given you a doctorate just for your editorial notes and footnotes, because you have found exactly the places which only a meditator can find; a non-meditator has no way to find them.”
So my whole life from the very beginning has been concerned with two things: never to allow any unintelligent thing to be imposed upon me, to fight against all kinds of stupidities, whatsoever the consequences, and to be rational, logical, to the very end. This was one side, that I was using with all those people with whom I was in contact. And the other was absolutely private, my own: to become more and more alert, so that I didn’t end up just being an intellectual.
Intellect and meditation, meeting together, growing together, give you the wholeness of being.
There have been meditators who have not had very grown-up intellects. They enjoyed their meditation, they were fulfilled, but they were incapable of conveying the message to anyone – because for that a very sharp intelligence is needed. You will have to cut the whole jungle of the other person’s mind, you will have to make a path in the jungle of thoughts. You will need a really sharp, sword-like intelligence.
But if you just create the path, that is not the purpose. A path is meaningless unless there is a traveler.
Intellect can make the path but meditation travels on it.
You ask me, Is that the same potential of all? Yes, absolutely yes. It is everybody’s birthright. You have just never tried it.
You have wings but nobody has pushed you.
You have not taken the jump on your own: you are still sitting in the shelter.
The whole sky is yours – but you are not claiming it.
My function here is to drag you out of your shelter.
Whatever is needed to be done, I am ready to do it If you need a push, good; if you need a hit, good.
I am ready to do anything to give you just a little experience – to experience that you have wings, then my work is finished.
If you can just flutter from one tree to another, you have got the golden secret in your hands.

============================================================

Osho,
What is meditation?
It is the most important question as far as my religion is concerned. Meditation is the very center of my whole effort. It is the very womb out of which the new religion is going to be born.
But it is very difficult to verbalize it. To say something about meditation is a contradiction in terms. It is something which you can have, which you can be, but by its very nature you cannot say what it is. Still, efforts have been made to convey it in some way. Even if only a fragmentary, partial understanding arises out of it, that is more than one can expect.
But even that partial understanding of meditation can become a seed. Much depends on how you listen. If you only hear, then even a fragment cannot be conveyed to you, but if you listen… Try to understand the difference between the two.
Hearing is mechanical. You have ears, you can hear. If you are getting deaf, then a mechanical aid can help you to hear. Your ears are nothing but a certain mechanism to receive sounds. Hearing is very simple – animals hear, anybody who has ears is capable of hearing – but listening is a far higher stage.
Listening means that when you are hearing, you are only hearing and not doing anything else – no other thoughts are in your mind, no clouds pass in your inner sky. So whatever is being said reaches as it is being said. It is not interfered with by your mind; not interpreted by you, by your prejudices; not clouded by anything that, right now, is passing within you – because all those are distortions.
Ordinarily it is not difficult: you manage just by hearing because the things that you are hearing are common objects. If I say something about the house, the door, the tree, the bird, there is no problem. These are common objects; there is no need of listening. But when we are talking about something like meditation – which is not an object at all, it is a subjective state; we can only indicate it – you have to be very attentive and alert, and then there is a possibility that some meaning reaches you.
If even a little understanding arises in you, it is more than enough because understanding has its own way of growing. If just a little bit of understanding falls in the right place, in the heart, it starts growing of its own accord.
First try to understand the word meditation. It is not the right word for the state about which any authentic seeker is bound to be concerned. So I would like to tell you something about a few words. In Sanskrit, we have a special word for meditation, the word is dhyana. In no other language does a parallel word exist; the word is untranslatable. It has been recognized for two thousand years that this word is untranslatable for the simple reason that in no other language have people tried it or experienced the state that it denotes. So those languages don’t have that word.
A word is needed only when there is something to say, something to designate. In English there are three words: the first is concentration. I have seen many books written by very well-meaning people, but they are not people who have experienced meditation. They go on using the word concentration for dhyana – dhyana is not concentration. Concentration simply means your mind is focused on one point; it is a state of mind. Ordinarily the mind is continuously moving, but if it moves continuously, you cannot work with the mind on a particular subject.
For example, in science, concentration is needed; without concentration there is no possibility of science. It is not strange that science has not evolved in the East – I see these deep inner connections – because concentration was never valued. For religion something else is needed, not concentration.
Concentration is the mind focused on one point, which has its utility because then you can go deeper and deeper into a certain object. That’s what science goes on doing: finding out more and more about the objective world. A man with a mind which is continuously roaming around cannot be a scientist. The whole art of the scientist is that he is capable of forgetting the whole world and putting his whole consciousness onto one thing. And when the whole consciousness is poured into one thing, it is almost like concentrating sun rays through a lens: you can create fire.
Those rays themselves cannot create fire because they are diffused; they are going farther away from each other. Their movement is just the opposite of concentration. Concentration means rays coming together, meeting on one point; and when so many rays meet on one point, they have enough energy to create fire. Consciousness has the same quality: concentrate it and you can penetrate deeper into the mysteries of objects.

I am reminded of Thomas Alva Edison – one of the great scientists of this country. He was working on something with such concentration that when his wife came with his breakfast, she saw that he was so involved that he had not even heard her coming. He had not even looked at her, he was not aware that she was there, and she knew that this was not the right time to disturb him. “Of course the breakfast will get cold but he will be really angry if I disturb him – one never knows where he is.”
So she simply put the breakfast at his side, so that whenever he came back from his journey of concentration he would see the breakfast and take it. But what happened? In the meantime a friend dropped by – he also saw him so concentrated. He looked at the breakfast getting cold and said, “Better let him do his work. I should finish the breakfast, it is getting cold.” He ate the breakfast and Edison was not even aware that this friend was there and had eaten his breakfast.
When he returned from his concentration, he looked around, saw the friend and saw the empty plates. He told the friend, “Please forgive me. You came a little late and I have already taken my breakfast.” Obviously, because the plates were finished somebody had eaten, and who else could have eaten it? He must have! The poor friend could not understand what to do. He was thinking to give him a surprise but this man had given him a bigger surprise: he had said, “You came a little late…”
But his wife was watching the whole thing. She came in and said, “He has not come late, you have come late! He has finished your breakfast. I was watching, but I saw that it was getting cold. Anyway, at least somebody ate it. You are some scientist! I cannot understand how you manage your science. You don’t even know who has eaten your breakfast and you are apologizing to him: ‘You came a little late, I am sorry…’”

Concentration is always the narrowing of your consciousness. The narrower it becomes, the more powerful it is. It is like a sword that cuts into any secret of nature: you have to become oblivious of everything. But this is not religion. Many people have misunderstood – not only in the West, but in the East too. They think that concentration is religion. It gives you tremendous powers, but those powers are of the mind.

For example, the king of Varanasi in India went through an operation in 1920 – just this century – and created news all over the world because of the operation. He refused to take any anesthetic. He said, “I have taken a vow not to take anything that makes me unconscious, so I cannot be put under chloroform. You need not be worried.”
It was a major operation – to remove his appendix. Now, to take out somebody’s appendix without giving him anesthetics is really dangerous; you may kill the man. He may not be able to bear the pain because it is going to be terrible. You have to cut open his stomach; you have to cut out his appendix, you have to remove it. It will take one hour, two hours – one never knows in what condition his appendix is.
But he was no ordinary man either – otherwise they would have forced him – he was the king of Varanasi. He said to the doctors, “Don’t be worried” – and the best doctors available in India were there; an expert from England was there. They all consulted: nobody was ready to do the operation, but it had to be done, otherwise any moment the appendix could kill him. The condition was serious and both alternatives seemed to be serious: if you left him without the operation he might die; if you did the operation without making him unconscious – which had never been done, there was no precedent…
But the king said, “You don’t understand me. There has never been any precedent because you have never operated on a man like the man you are going to operate upon. Just give me my religious book, Shrimad Bhagavadgita. I will read it and after five minutes you can start your work. Once I am involved in the Gita, then you can cut any part of my body. I will not be even aware of it; there is no question of pain.”
He insisted – and anyway he was going to die, so there was no harm in trying. Perhaps he was right – he was well-known for his religious practices. So it was done. He read the Gita for five minutes and closed his eyes; the Gita dropped from his hands and they did the operation. It took one and a half hours. It was really serious: just a few hours longer and the appendix might have burst and killed him. They removed the appendix and he was completely silent – not even a flicker of his eyes. He was somewhere else.
It was his life-long practice to read for just five minutes, then he was on track: he knew the Gita by heart, he could repeat it without the book. Once he started going into it, he was really in the Gita; his mind was there – it left his body totally.

That operation made news all over the world; it was a rare operation. But the same mistake was committed again. Every newspaper had it that the rajah, the king of Varanasi, was a man of great meditation. He was a man of great concentration, not of meditation.
He too was in the same confusion; he also thought that he had reached the state of meditation. It was not meditation. It is just that your mind is so focused that everything else falls out of its focus; you are unaware of it. It is not a state of awareness, it is a state of narrowed consciousness – so narrowed that it becomes one-pointed and the rest of existence falls out of it.
So before I answer your question “What is meditation?” you have to understand what it is not. First: it is not concentration. Second: it is not contemplation.
Concentration is one-pointed; contemplation has a wider field. You are contemplating about beauty… There are thousands of things which are beautiful; you can go on moving from one beautiful thing to another. You have many experiences of beauty; you can go on from one experience to another. You remained confined to the subject matter. Contemplation is a wider concentration, not one-pointed, but confined to one subject. You will be moving, your mind will be moving, but it will remain within the subject matter.
Philosophy uses contemplation as its method; science uses concentration as its method. In contemplation too you are forgetting everything other than your subject matter. The subject matter is bigger and you have more space to move; in concentration there is no space to move. You can go deeper and deeper, narrower and narrower, you can become more and more pointed, but you don’t have space to move around. Hence scientists are very narrow-minded people. You will be surprised when I say this.
One would think that scientists would be very open-minded. That is not the case. As far as their subject is concerned, they are absolutely open-minded: they are ready to listen to anything contrary to their theory, with absolute fairness. But except in that particular matter, they are more prejudiced, more bigoted than the ordinary, common man, for the simple reason that they have never bothered about anything else: they have simply accepted whatsoever society believes.
Many religious people brag about it: “Look, he is such a great scientist, a Nobel prize-winner,” and this and that, “and yet he comes to church every day.” They forget completely that it is not the Nobel prize-winning scientist who goes to the church. It is not the scientist who goes to the church, it is the man without his scientific part who goes. And that man, except for the scientific part, is far more gullible than anybody else – because everybody is open, available, thinks about things; compares what religion is good; sometimes reads also about other religions, and has some common sense, which scientists don’t have.
To be a scientist you have to sacrifice a few things – for example, common sense. Common sense is a common quality of common people. A scientist is an uncommon person, he has an uncommon sense. With common sense you cannot discover the theory of relativity or the law of gravitation. With common sense you can do everything else.

Albert Einstein was perhaps the only man in history who dealt with such big figures that only one figure would take up the whole page – hundreds of zeros following it. But he became so involved with big figures – which is an uncommon thing, thinking only of stars, light-years, millions, billions, trillions of stars, and counting them – that he became oblivious about small things.
One day he entered a bus and gave the conductor the money. The conductor returned some change. Einstein counted it and said, “This is not right, you are cheating me. Give me the full change.”
The conductor took the change, counted it again and said, “Mister, it seems you don’t know figures.”
Einstein remembers: “When he said to me, ‘Mister, you don’t know figures,’ then I simply took the change. I said to myself, ‘It is better to keep silent. If somebody else hears that I don’t know figures and that too from a conductor of a bus…’ What have I been doing my whole life? Figures and figures – I don’t dream about anything else. No women appear, no men appear – only figures. I think in figures, I dream in figures, and this idiot says to me, ‘You don’t know figures.’”
When he arrived back home, he told his wife, “Just count this change. How much is it?”
She counted it and said, “It is right.”
He said, “My God! This means the conductor was right: perhaps I don’t know figures. Perhaps I can only deal with immense figures; small figures have fallen out of my mind completely.”

A scientist is bound to lose his common sense. The same happens to the philosopher. Contemplation is wider, but is still confined to a certain subject.

For example, one night Socrates was thinking about something – one never knew what he was thinking about – standing by the side of a tree and he became so absorbed in his contemplation that he became completely oblivious that snow was falling. In the morning he was found almost frozen. There was snow up to his knees and he was standing there with closed eyes. He was almost on the verge of death; even his blood might have started freezing.
He was brought home and massaged, given alcohol, and somehow brought to his common senses. They asked him, “What were you doing there, standing outside in the open?”
He said, “I had no idea whether I was standing or sitting, or where I was. The subject was so absorbing that I went totally with it. I don’t know when the snow started falling or when the whole night passed. I would have died, but I would not have come to my senses because the subject was so absorbing. I was still not finished; it was a whole theory and you have awakened me in the middle. Now I don’t know whether I will be able to get hold of the unfinished theory.”

It is just as if you are dreaming and somebody wakes you up. Do you think you can catch hold of your dream again by just closing your eyes and trying to sleep? It is very difficult to get back into the same dream.
Contemplation is a kind of logical dreaming. It is a very rare thing. But philosophy depends on contemplation. Philosophy can use concentration for specific purposes, to help contemplation. If some smaller fragments in it need more concentrated effort, then concentration can be used; there is no problem. Philosophy is basically contemplation, but once in a while it can use concentration as a tool, as an instrument.
But religion cannot use concentration and it cannot use contemplation either because it is not concerned with any object. Whether the object is in the outside world or the object is in your mind – a thought, a theory, a philosophy – doesn’t matter; it is an object.
Religious concern is with the one who concentrates, with the one who contemplates: Who is this one? Now, you cannot concentrate on it. Who will concentrate on it? You are it.
You cannot contemplate on it because who is going to contemplate on it? You cannot divide yourself into two parts, so that you put one part in front of your mind and the other part starts contemplating. There is no possibility of dividing your consciousness into two parts. And even if there were a possibility – there is none, but just for argument’s sake I am saying if there were any possibility to divide your consciousness in two – then the one that contemplates about the other is you; the other is not you.
The other is never you. Or in other words, the object is never you. You are irreducibly the subject. There is no way to turn you into an object.
It is just like a mirror. The mirror can reflect you, the mirror can reflect everything in the world, but can you manage to make the mirror reflect itself? You cannot put the mirror in front of itself; by the time you put it in front of itself it is no longer there. The mirror itself cannot mirror itself. Consciousness is exactly a mirror. You can use it as concentration for some object. You can use it as contemplation for some subject matter.
The English word meditation is also not the right word, but because there is no other word we have to use it for the time being. Dhyana is accepted in the English language just as it has been accepted by the Chinese, by the Japanese – because the situation was the same in those countries. When Buddhist monks entered China two thousand years ago, they tried hard to find a word which could translate their word jhana.
Gautam the Buddha never used Sanskrit as his language, he used a language that was used by common people; his language was Pali. Sanskrit was the language of the priesthood, of the brahmins and it was one of the basic parts of his revolution that the priesthood should be overthrown; it had no business to exist.
Man can directly connect with existence. It need not be through an agent. In fact, it cannot be through a mediator.
You can understand it very simply: you cannot love your girlfriend, your boyfriend, through a mediator. You cannot say to somebody, “I will give you ten dollars – just go and love my wife on my behalf” A servant cannot do that, nobody can do it on your behalf; only you can do it. Love cannot be done on your behalf by a servant – otherwise rich people would not be bothered with the whole greasy affair. They have enough servants and enough money, they could just send a servant. They could find the best servants, why should they bother themselves? But there are a few things which you have to do yourself. A servant cannot sleep for you, a servant cannot eat for you.
How is a priest, who is nothing but a servant, going to mediate between you and existence, or God, or nature, or truth? In the pope’s latest message to the world, it is counted as a sin to try to have any direct contact with God – a sin!
You have to contact God through a properly initiated Catholic priest. Everything should go through the proper channels. There is a certain hierarchy, a bureaucracy; you cannot just bypass the bishop, the pope, the priest. If you simply bypass them, you are directly entering God’s house. This is not allowed; it is a sin.
I was really surprised that this Pope the Polack has the nerve to call it a sin, to say that man has not the birthright to be in contact with existence or truth itself; for that too, he needs a proper agency! And who is to decide the proper agency? There are three hundred religions and all have their bureaucracies, their proper channels; and they all say the remaining two hundred and ninety-nine are all bogus. But the priesthood can exist only if it makes itself absolutely necessary. It is absolutely unnecessary, but it has to force itself upon you as something unavoidable.
Just now the Polack Pope is again on tour. Yesterday I saw a picture of him in some Catholic country. He was kissing the earth. He was asked by the news media,
“What do you think of the welcome?”
He said, “It was warm, but not overwhelming.”
Now this man must be expecting something; he was not satisfied with warm, he must have been expecting an overwhelming reception, welcome. And when he says “warm” you can be absolutely certain it must have been lukewarm – he is trying to exaggerate it as much as he can. Otherwise a warm reception is overwhelming – what more do you want? Hot dogs? Then it will be overwhelming? A warm reception is enough. But I know what the problem is; it must have been lukewarm, or perhaps even cold.
This year he is going to call a synod – that is the Catholic senate – in which all the bishops and cardinals of the whole Catholic world will meet to decide certain urgent matters. And you can be sure of what those urgent matters are: birth control is a sin, abortion is a sin; and this new sin which has never been mentioned before – to make an effort to be in direct contact with God.
Now he is going to put the thesis that he has propounded before the synod to get their agreement; it becomes an appendix, almost as holy as the Bible. If it is unanimously accepted by the synod, then it has the same status. And it is going to be accepted because no priest will say that it is wrong, no cardinal will say that it is wrong. They will be immensely happy that he has a really original mind – even Jesus was not aware of this!
When I received the message that any effort to make direct contact with God is a sin, I wondered what Moses was doing. It was a direct contact: there was no mediator, there was no one present. There was no eyewitness when Moses met God in the burning bush. He was committing a great sin according to Pope the Polack.
Who was Jesus’ agent? Some agency was needed. He was also trying to contact God directly, praying. And he was not paying somebody else to pray for him, he was praying himself. He was not a bishop, not a cardinal, not a pope; neither was Moses a bishop, nor a cardinal, nor a pope.
They are all sinners according to Pope the Polack. And the synod is going to sign it – I can say that before it is signed – because all over the world the priesthood is in a shaky condition.
The truth is that it is your birthright to inquire into existence, into life, to enquire what it is all about.
Contemplation is theoretical, you can go on theorizing… It also takes away your common sense. For example, Immanuel Kant was one of the greatest philosophers the world has produced…

He remained his whole life in one town, for the simple reason that any change disturbed his contemplation – a new house, new people… Everything had to be exactly the same, so that he would be completely free to contemplate.
He never married. One woman had even offered, but he said, “I will have to think over it.”
Perhaps that is the only answer of its kind; ordinarily the man proposes. She must have waited long enough and when she found that he was not going to propose, she proposed. And what did he say? – “I will have to think over it.” He contemplated for three years on all the favorable points for marriage, on all the unfavorable points against marriage. The trouble was that they were all equal, balancing, canceling each other.
So after three years he went and knocked on the door of the woman’s house to say, “It is difficult for me to come to a conclusion because both sides are equally valid, equally weighty, and I cannot do anything unless I find one alternative more logical, more scientific, more philosophical than the other. So please forgive me. You can marry somebody else.”
The father opened the door and Kant asked about his daughter. The father said, “You have come too late; she is married and has a child now. You are some philosopher – three years later you come to give her your answer!”
Kant said, “Anyway the answer was not yes; but you can convey to your daughter my inability to find out. I tried hard to find out, but I have to be fair: I cannot cheat myself by putting up only the favorable reasons and dropping the unfavorable reasons. I cannot cheat myself “
Now, this man used to go to the university to teach at exactly the same time every day. People used to fix their clocks and watches on seeing him: you could be certain second to second – he moved like the hands of a clock. His servant used to declare, not “Master, your breakfast is ready,” no, but “Master, it is seven-thirty”; “Master, it is twelve-thirty.” There was no need to say that it was time for lunch: “Twelve-thirty…” only the time was to be told.
Everything was fixed. He was so absorbed in his philosophizing that he became dependent – almost a servant to his own servant because he would threaten him any moment saying, “I am going to leave.” The servant knew that Kant could not afford to let him go. Sometimes it would happen that because he was threatening, Kant would say, “Yes, you can go. You are thinking yourself too important. You think I cannot live without you? That I cannot find another servant?”
The servant said, “Try.”
But it did not work out with the other servant because he had no idea that the time had to be announced. He would say, “Master, lunch is ready” – and that was enough of a disturbance for Kant. He had to be awakened early in the morning, at five o’clock and the instructions to the servant were, “Even if I beat you, scream, and say to you, ‘Get lost, I want to sleep!’ you are not to leave. Even if you have to beat me, beat me, but pull me out of bed.
“Five means five. If I am late getting out of bed, you will be responsible. You have all the freedom to do whatsoever you want to do and I cannot say anything. Sometimes it is too cold and I feel like sleeping, but that is a momentary thing – you need not bother about it. You have to follow the clock and my orders, and when I am asleep you need not bother about what I am saying. I may say, ‘Go away! – I will get up.’ You are not to go away; you have to get me out of the bed at five o’clock.”
Often they used to fight, the servant used to hit him and force him out of bed. Now a new servant could not beat his master; and the very order seemed to be absurd. “If you want to sleep, sleep; if you want to get up, get up. I can wake you up at five, but it seems to be strange that there has to be this wrestling.” So no servant survived.
Kant had to go to the old servant again and ask him, “Come back! Just don’t die before me, otherwise I will have to commit suicide.” Each time this happened, the servant would ask for more pay. And that’s how it went on.
One day, when Kant was going to the university, it was raining and one of his shoes got stuck in the mud. He left the shoe there because if he tried to take the shoe out he would be a few seconds late, and that was not possible. He entered the class with only one shoe on. The students looked at him and asked, “What happened?”
He said, “One shoe got stuck in the mud, but I cannot be late: so many people fix their watches and clocks by me. My shoe is not that important. When I return home, I will get it back because who is going to steal one shoe?”
Now these people have lost their common sense; they are living in a different world. And as far as his theoretical world is concerned, he is a top logician; you cannot find any flaw in his logic. But in his life… It was just insane. Somebody purchased the house next door and Kant became sick, badly sick. The doctors could not find the problem because there seemed to be no sickness, but Kant was almost on the verge of death – for no reason at all.
One of his friends came by and he said, “There is no problem, as far as I see. The house next door has been taken by somebody and they have grown their trees, so Kant’s window is covered. It was part of his absolute timetable that he would stand in the window at the end of the day and look at the sunset. Now the trees have grown too high, they have covered the window. That is the cause of his sickness and nothing else: his timetable is disturbed, his whole life is disturbed.”
Kant got up. He said, “I was also thinking that something was wrong: ‘Why am I sick? The doctors say there is no sickness and yet I am on the verge of death.’ You are right, it is the trees: since those trees have grown, I have not seen the sunset. And I have been missing something, but I could not figure out what I was missing.” The neighbors were asked and they were willing: if just because of the trees such a great philosopher was going to die… They cut back the trees and the next day he was perfectly okay.

His timetable, his schedule – or should I say “skedule”? I don’t know what is right here. The first American girl I met was some time in 1960. She asked me, “What is your skedule?”
I said, “My God! What is a skedule?” In Britain, in India, it is “shedule.” I could not figure out that it had something to do with schedule.
She said, “You don’t understand what I am saying?”
I said, “I have never heard this word. Please try and explain to me some other way, use some other word.”
It is better to let me use “shedule”… His schedule was disturbed. If it was perfect, then he was absolutely free to contemplate. He wanted life to be almost robot-like so his mind would be absolutely free from ordinary mundane affairs.
Religion is not contemplation; it is not concentration. It is meditation.
But meditation has to be understood as meaning dhyana because the English word meditation again gives a wrong notion. First try to understand what it means in the English language itself. Whenever you say “meditation,” you can be asked, “Upon what? Upon what are you meditating?” There has to be an object: the very word has a reference toward an object: “I am meditating upon beauty, upon truth, upon God.” But you can’t simply say, “I am meditating.” The sentence is incomplete in the English language. You have to say upon what – what are you meditating upon? And that is the trouble.
Dhyana means “I am in meditation” – not even meditating. If you come even closer: “I am meditation” – that is the meaning of dhyana. So when they could not find a word in China, they borrowed the Buddhist word, jhana. Buddha used jhana; it is a Pali transformation of dhyana.
Buddha used the people’s language as part of his revolution because, he said, “Religion has to use the ordinary, common language, so that the priesthood can simply be dropped; there is no need for it. People understand their scriptures, people understand their sutras, people understand what they are doing. There is no need for a priest.”
The priest is needed because he uses a different language which people cannot use. He goes on enforcing the idea that Sanskrit is the divine language and not everybody is allowed to read it. It is a special language, just like a doctor’s. Have you ever thought about it? Why do doctors go on prescribing in Latin and Greek? What kind of foolishness is this? They don’t know Greek, they don’t know Latin, but their medicines and the names of their medicines are always in Greek and Latin. This is the same trick as the priesthood.
If they write in the common people’s language, they cannot charge you as much as they are charging now because you will say, “This prescription – you are charging me twenty dollars for this prescription?” And the chemist, the druggist, cannot charge much money either because they know that they can get the same thing from the market for just a rupee and you are charging fifty. But you don’t know what it is in Latin and Greek. If they write “onion” then you will say, “Are you joking?” But if it is written in Greek and Latin, you don’t know what it is; only the doctor knows or the chemist knows.
Their way of writing is also important. It has to be written in such a way that you cannot read what it is. If you can read it, perhaps you can consult a dictionary and find out what it means. It has to be quite unreadable, so you cannot figure it out. In fact, most of the time the chemist does not know what it is, but nobody wants to show his ignorance so he will give you something.
It happened once…

A man received a letter from his family physician; it was an invitation to participate in his daughter’s marriage. But the doctor wrote in his usual way, just habitually. The man could not read what the letter said. He thought the best way would be to go to the chemist: “Perhaps it is something important. If I go to the doctor, he will think that I cannot even read. It is better to go to the chemist.”
He went to the chemist and gave him the letter. The chemist simply disappeared with the letter and after ten minutes came back with two bottles. The man said, “What are you doing? That was not a prescription, it was a letter.”
The chemist said, “My God! It was a letter?” But he had figured out… The bride and bridegroom, he figured out were two bottles. So he prepared some mixtures and brought two bottles.

Buddha revolted against Sanskrit and used Pali. In Pali, dhyana is jhana. Jhana reached China and became chan. They had no other word, so they took this one – but in each language the pronunciation is bound to change: it became chan. When it reached Japan, it became zen; but it is the same word, dhyana. And we are using the word meditation in the sense of dhyana, so it is not something you meditate upon.
In English, it is something between concentration and contemplation. Concentration is one-pointed; contemplation has a wide area, and meditation is a fragment of that area. When you are contemplating on a certain subject, there are a few things which need more attention; then you meditate. That is what in English is meant by meditation: concentration and contemplation are two poles; meditation is exactly in the middle. But we are not using the word in the English sense, we are giving it a totally new meaning. I will tell you a story that I have always loved, which will explain what meditation is.

Three men went for a morning walk. They saw a Buddhist monk standing on a hill and, having nothing to do, they started discussing what he was doing. One said, “As far as I can see from here, he is expecting somebody and waiting for him. Perhaps a friend was left behind and he is waiting, expecting him.”
The second man said, “Looking at him, I cannot agree with you because when somebody is waiting for a friend who has been left behind, once in a while he will look back to see whether he has come or not, and how long he will have to wait. But this man never looks back, he is just standing there. I don’t think he is expecting anybody. My feeling is that these Buddhist monks have cows…”
In Japan, monks have a cow for the milk for their morning tea; otherwise they have to go begging for an early morning cup of tea. And Zen monks drink tea at least five or six times a day: it is almost a religious thing to do because tea keeps you awake, alert, more conscious; so they keep a cow in the monastery.
The second man said, “My feeling is that his cow is lost somewhere, must have gone to graze, and he is just searching for it.”
The third man said, “I cannot agree because when somebody searches for a cow, he need not just stand like a statue. You have to move around, you have to go and look from this side and that side. He does not even move his face from side to side. What to say about his face – even his eyes are half-closed.”
They were coming closer to the man, so they could see him more clearly. Then the third man said, “I don’t think you are right; I think he is meditating. But how are we to decide who is right?”
They said, “There is no problem. We are coming close, we can ask him.”
The first man asked the monk, “Are you expecting a friend who is left behind, waiting for him?”
The Buddhist monk opened his eyes and said, “Expecting? I never expect anything. Expecting anything is against my religion.”
The man said, “My God! Forget expecting; just tell me – are you waiting?”
He said, “My religion teaches that you cannot be certain even of the next second. How can I wait? Where is the time to wait? I am not waiting.”
The man said, “Forget expecting, waiting – I don’t know your language. Just tell me, have you left some friend behind?”
He said, “Again the same thing. I don’t have any friends in the world, I don’t have any enemy in the world – because they come together. You cannot sort out one and leave the other. Can’t you see that I am a Buddhist monk? I don’t have enemies, I don’t have friends. And please get lost, don’t disturb me.”
The second man thought, “Now there is hope for me.” He said, “I had already told him ‘You are talking nonsense. He is not waiting, not expecting – he is a Buddhist monk; he has no friends, no enemies.’ You are right. My feeling is that your cow is lost.”
The monk said, “You are even more stupid than the first man. My cow? A Buddhist monk possesses nothing. And why should I look for somebody else’s cow? I don’t possess a cow.”
The man looked really embarrassed: “What to do?”
The third man thought, “Now, the only possibility is what I have said.” He said, “I can see that you are meditating.”
The monk said, “Nonsense! Meditation is not some activity. One does not meditate, one is meditation. To tell you the truth, so that all you fellows don’t get confused, I am simply doing nothing. Standing here, doing nothing – is it objectionable?”
They said, “No, it is not objectionable, it just does not make sense to us – standing here, doing nothing.”
“But,” he said, “this is what meditation is: Sitting and doing nothing – not with your body, not with your mind.”

Once you start doing something, either you go into contemplation or you go into concentration or you go into action – but you move away from your center. When you are not doing anything at all – bodily, mentally, on no level – when all activity has ceased and you simply are, just being, that’s what meditation is. You cannot do it, you cannot practice it; you have only to understand it.
Whenever you can find time for just being, drop all doing. Thinking is also doing, concentration is also doing, contemplation is also doing. If even for a single moment you are not doing anything and you are just at your center, utterly relaxed – that is meditation. And once you have the knack of it, you can remain in that state as long as you want; finally you can remain in that state for twenty-four hours a day.
Once you have become aware of how your being can remain undisturbed, then slowly you can start doing things, keeping alert that your being is not stirred. That is the second part of meditation. First, learning how just to be, and then learning little actions: cleaning the floor, taking a shower, but keeping yourself centered. Then you can do complicated things.
For example, I am speaking to you, but my meditation is not disturbed. I can go on speaking, but at my very center there is not even a ripple; it is just silent, utterly silent.
So meditation is not against action. It is not that you have to escape from life. It simply teaches you a new way of life: you become the center of the cyclone. Your life goes on, it goes on more intensely – with more joy, with more clarity, more vision, more creativity – yet you are aloof, just a watcher on the hills, simply seeing all that is happening around you.
You are not the doer, you are the watcher.
That’s the whole secret of meditation: you become the watcher. Doing continues on its own level, there is no problem: chopping wood, drawing water from the well. You can do all the small and the big things; only one thing is not allowed, and that is that your centering should not be lost.
That awareness, that watchfulness, should remain absolutely unclouded, undisturbed.
Meditation is a very simple phenomenon. Concentration is very complicated because you have to force yourself; it is tiring. Contemplation is a little better because you have a little more space to move. You are not moving through a narrow hole which is going to become narrower and narrower.
Concentration has tunnel vision. Have you ever looked into a tunnel? From one side, where you are looking, it is big. But if the tunnel is two miles long, the other side is just a small round light, nothing else: the longer the tunnel, the smaller the other end will be. The greater the scientist, the longer the tunnel. He has to focus and focusing is always a tense affair.
Concentration is not natural to the mind. Mind is a vagabond: it enjoys moving from one thing to another; it is always excited by the new. In concentration, the mind is almost imprisoned.
In the Second World War, I don’t know why, they started calling the places they kept the prisoners, “concentration camps.” They had their own meaning – they were bringing all kinds of prisoners and concentrating them there. But concentration is actually bringing all the energies of your mind and body and putting them into a narrowing hole. It is tiring. Contemplation has more space to play around, to move around, but still it is a bounded space, not unbounded.
Meditation, according to me and my religion, has all the space, the whole of existence available. You are the watcher, you can watch the whole scene. There is no effort to concentrate on anything; there is no effort to contemplate about anything. You are not doing all those things, you are simply there watching, just aware. It is a knack. It is not a science, it is not an art, it is not a craft; it is a knack.
So you have to just go on playing with the idea. Sitting in your bathroom, just play with the idea that you are not doing anything. And one day you will be surprised: just playing with the idea, it has happened – because it is your nature. Just the right moment… You never know when the right moment is, when the right opportunity is there, so go on playing.
Henry Ford had said: “My success is through nothing but catching the right opportunity at the right moment. People either think of opportunities which are in the future – you cannot catch hold of them – or they think of opportunities which are past. When they are gone and only dust is left on the road, they become aware that an opportunity has passed.”
Somebody asked, “But if you don’t think of an opportunity in the future and you don’t think of an opportunity which has passed, how can you suddenly get hold of it when it comes? You have to be ready.”
He said, “Not ready – you have just to jump. One never knows when it comes. When it comes, just jump upon it!”
What Henry Ford said has tremendous meaning. He said, “You simply keep on jumping. Don’t wait; don’t bother whether an opportunity is there or not: just go on jumping. One never knows when it will come. When it comes, jump upon it and be gone. If you go on looking into the future: ‘When is the opportunity coming?…’ The future is unpredictable. If you wait, thinking ‘When it comes I will catch hold of it,’ by the time you become aware that it is there, it is gone. Time is fleeting, so fast, only dust will be there. Rather, forget about opportunities, simply learn to jump, so that whenever it comes…”
That’s what I say to you: just go on playing with the idea. I am using the word playing because I am a nonserious man and my religion is nonserious. Just go on playing – and you have enough time.
Anytime – lying in bed, if sleep is not coming, play with the idea. Why bother about sleep? It will come when it comes. You cannot do anything to bring it; it is not in your hands, so why bother about it? Forget all about something which is not in your hands. The time is in your hands, why not use it? Lying in your bed, on a cold night under your blanket, cozy and enjoying – just play with the idea. You need not sit in the lotus posture. In my meditation, you need not torture yourself in any way.
If you love the lotus posture, good; you can sit in it. But Westerners go to India and it takes them six months to learn the lotus posture; they are torturing themselves so much. And they think that when they have learned the lotus posture, they will have gained something. The whole of India sits in the lotus posture – nobody has gained anything. It is just their natural way of sitting. In a cold country you need a chair to sit on, you can’t sit on the ground. In a hot country, who bothers about a chair? You sit anywhere.
No special posture is needed, no special time is needed. There are people who think there are special times. No, not for meditation. Any time is the right time – you just have to be relaxed and playful. And if it does not happen, it does not matter. Don’t feel sad… I am not telling you that it will happen today, or tomorrow, or within three months or six months. I am not giving you any expectation because that will become a tension in your mind. It can happen any day, it may not happen: it all depends on how playful you are.
Just start playing – in the bathtub, when you are not doing anything, why not play? Under your shower, you are not doing anything; the shower is doing its work. You are simply standing there; for those few moments just be playful. Walking on the road, walking can be done by the body; you are not needed, the legs do it. Any moment where you can feel relaxed, non-tense, play with the idea of meditation the way I have explained it to you. Just be silent, centered in yourself and someday…
And there are only seven days – don’t be worried! So Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday, or by Sunday at least – within seven days – some day it is going to happen. Just enjoy yourself with the idea and play with the idea as many times as you can. If nothing happens – I am not promising you anything – if nothing happens, that’s perfectly good, you enjoyed yourself. You played with the idea, you gave it a chance.
Go on giving it a chance. Henry Ford said, “Go on jumping and when the chance, the opportunity comes, jump upon it.” I say just the reverse. Just go on giving a chance to meditation and when the right moment comes and you are really relaxed and open, it jumps upon you.
Once meditation jumps upon you, it never leaves. There is no way for it to leave, so think twice before you start playing!

============================================================

Osho,
What is initiation according to you?
The search for truth is as old as man himself.
But there are many kinds of seekers.
The first category I call the curious.
They are the most superficial. They are not read to do anything, sacrifice anything, make any effort. Their curiosity is just like a child’s curiosity – he goes on asking about everything. He does not even bother to listen to your answer; while you are answering him, he is asking about something else. If you don’t answer him, he does not persist in questioning. He has no involvement in it – it is just a little superficial, intellectual irritation, a kind of itching in his mind.
But the curious are many, the majority. They are not ready to pay anything for their question. They want answers given to them ready-made. They are not even ready to thank you for your answer…as if they have obliged you; as if just by asking they have made you important.
The curious go on their whole life like driftwood, just moving in any direction with no idea where they are going, with no sense of direction at all. Why they are going they don’t even consider. Their life is accidental. Somebody is going somewhere – they may start following, imitating. Somebody is asking about truth – they may start asking about truth. They are more like monkeys than men.
I am reminded of a beautiful story: There was one old man who used to sell caps, and in India particularly, in those days, a certain kind of white cap had become a symbol of revolution. The cap was called the Gandhi cap, although Gandhi himself never used it; you cannot find a single picture in which Gandhi is using that cap. But it became known as the Gandhi cap because the followers of Gandhi were using it as a symbol. The white cap became your declaration against the British Raj.
This old man was doing good business selling white caps to people, so wherever there was any kind of gathering, he would go to sell the white caps. Between two gatherings, two fairs, exhibitions, he would make as many caps as he could. It is a simple thing to make – the Gandhian cap may be perhaps the simplest cap in the world. It is just like a small bag; then you fold it three times, it becomes a cap. You open it, and you can use it as a small bag for carrying vegetables or anything. It is multipurpose.
The old man was earning enough, so his son was doing nothing. But the old man was becoming old and he told the son, “Now I am not capable of moving from one place to another place, walking from one town to another town, so you start. I will simply make the caps in the house, you go and do the selling.”
So the son went to sell the caps. On the way – it was too hot a day, and he was still miles away from the place where he was going – he thought to have a little rest under a big Bo tree. He kept all his caps that he was carrying in a bag by his side and went to sleep – and of course, he was wearing a Gandhi cap himself, just as an advertisement.
He didn’t see that the whole tree was full of monkeys. The monkeys became curious about the cap, and they came down; the man was asleep. They looked in the bag and found the caps. So all the monkeys put the caps on their heads, and they were really enjoying themselves, and they were looking cute! When the young man woke up he found his bag empty. He looked all around: who had taken his caps? And then he heard the laughter of the monkeys. When he looked up, all over the tree there was revolution: the whole army of monkeys against the British Raj.
Now there was no way to get those caps back. He came back home very sad and told his father, “I was a fool; I went to sleep and this happened. All the caps are lost, I did not reach the place…and those monkeys made such a fool of me! They were giggling and laughing and making all kinds of faces at me, and there was nothing that I could do.”
The father said, “It happened to me in my young days too. It was my fault that I forgot to tell you. You forget about it. I will tell you the secret – the secret that I also had to learn the hard way by once losing all my caps. And then I inquired of an old man and he gave me the secret; and this is the secret. Tomorrow go again under the same tree. Put your bag in the same place and go to sleep at least pretend, even if you are not sleeping – and let those monkeys take your caps.”
And it happened. He went; he pretended to sleep. The monkeys came one by one, and they were very happy that this man had come again with the same kind of thing. Yesterday’s caps they had lost already: it was just a curiosity, it was nothing of any interest to them. They had played a little with them and when the man was gone they threw the caps. But again he had come – seems to be very stubborn!
But monkeys won’t accept defeat so easily; they again did their thing. And when they all had their caps, the man woke up – he had been simply pretending – and opened his eyes. When they giggled, he giggled louder than them. They were a little shocked: what had happened? Yesterday this man was just ashamed, afraid.
They tried to make faces, but the man made faces at them. They tried to scream, the man screamed louder. They looked at each other: “What has happened? Something strange….” And then the man in great anger took his cap and threw it away.
All the monkeys in anger took their caps and threw them down on the road! “What does this man think – only he can throw? We can also throw.” The man collected all the caps, and laughing, he left. The monkeys were really at a loss; they have been befooled.
But that’s the secret with all monkeys’ minds: Imitation.
They simply imitated, with no idea what they were doing, with no idea why this man was throwing his cap. They simply did it to outdo him, with no thought but how to be on top of him; he could not be allowed to do something that they could not do.
He had defeated them by giggling, by laughing louder, by screaming, by making faces; and this was too much. Now they were not going to let him throw his cap while they just sat there ashamed, feeling impotent that they could not do anything. This is the quality of the monkey’s mind; whether it is in man or in animals does not matter.
The curious mind is monkeyish, the lowest kind of mind.
The second, a higher category, is the student.
He has an intellectual involvement. When he asks something it is not only out of curiosity, it is genuine interest. He wants to know, he is really in search of an answer, but it is still not very deep; it is intellectual, deeper than curiosity. Curiosity is not even intellectual; even idiots can be curious – in fact only idiots are curious. A man of intelligence will not waste his time and energy on unnecessary curiosity.
A Sufi mystic, Bayazid, lived for twelve years with his master. His master used to live behind a very big hall in a small cottage. The hall was for meetings, but Bayazid was continually coming to the master just to sit by his side.
In Sufism this is one of their methodologies: For years the master will not even ask, “Who are you? What is your purpose? Why have you come?” That sorts out the curious without any wastage of time. If the man is such that you go to him and he does not even ask, “Who are you? Sit down; why have you come?” then the curious are not going to remain there for a year or two years.
Twelve years is a long time. After twelve years the master asked the first thing of Bayazid. He said, “My son, just go in the hall. You must have observed that on the right hand there is a shelf containing a few books. You have to bring me this book and he gave its name.
Bayazid said, “I had no idea that on the right side there is a bookshelf because I have never looked to the right or to the left; I was just looking toward you. I was coming to you, I had no interest in looking at anything else. Why should I waste my energy in any way? My whole purpose was just to look at you as much as I could, just to be here with you as much as I could – just to drink your silent presence.”
The master was happy, and he said, “You are accepted. If you had brought the book you would have been rejected.” Very strict, too hard, too inhuman it seems…. The curious person has no place in the world of religion. He should go to circuses, carnivals, movies, television – and there are thousands of things all around the world football matches, volleyball matches, hockey matches, bullfights, boxing. For the curious, the whole world is available. He should not bother about truth, he should leave truth alone; that is not his business.
The student has an intellectual involvement. Intellect is not very deep, but in comparison to curiosity it is really very deep. The people who surrounded Socrates were intellectuals, students. They were asking questions Socrates was giving them answers; then they were asking more questions about his answers, and they were trying to go deeper and deeper into the question, into the answer. But it all remained a gymnastics of intellect.
Socrates is one of those unfortunate masters who wasted his life only with students. He was not a man meant to be just a professor, just a teacher; he was a man born to be a master. But Athens was not the right place for it – he should have been in India; he would have become another Gautam the Buddha – because in Athens the student was the last category, there was nothing deeper than that.
Socrates had giants of intellect come to him – Plato, Aristotle – but they were only intellectuals. A blind man can philosophize about light, there is no trouble about it; intellectually he can know everything about light. But to know light and to know about light are two totally different things.
Intellect is always about and about – it does not bother whether the man has eyes or not. Yes, the man can hear: you can talk about light, you can give him all theories about light, the latest developments of scientific progress, the latest discoveries about light, its nature, its constituents…. Everything can be explained to him. He is blind but that does not mean that he is without intelligence.
Most probably a blind man has more intelligence than those who have eyes, for the simple reason that the man who has eyes uses eighty percent of his mind-energy through the eyes. If he wants to know something about light, he will open the door and go into the open and see the sun. If he wants to know about colors he will go to the garden and see all the flowers and all the trees and all kinds of colors. He has eyes – there is no need to be very intelligent to work out what light is – but the blind man has only one way, and that is through understanding.
Seeing is not possible. And that eighty percent of energy that goes out from the eyes, if one has eyes, is not available for the intellect to use. That’s why blind people hear better than people who have eyes, because their ears get more energy. More energy is available, because otherwise eighty percent is used only by the eyes; twenty percent remains for your whole being.
And when one hundred percent is available…. The blind man’s touch has more energy, more feeling, more emotion, more warmth. It says something. The man with eyes can shake hands and you can feel that you are shaking hands with a dead tree or something. There is nothing, no message. He can hug you and you can feel pressed, that’s all, but there has been no transmission of any kind of energy.
People are without energy; only twenty percent is distributed to all the other senses, so every sense is starving because the eyes are monopolizing your whole energy. It is not without any reason that you become affected, impressed by the eyes more than by anything else. You can simply see that eyes are the most living part in your whole body. What makes your eyes most alive? It is the energy flowing through them. That constant flow of energy makes them so alive.
It is also not a coincidence that if you see a blind man you feel very sad for him. You don’t feel so sorry for a deaf man; you don’t feel at all sad for somebody who cannot smell. In fact, he is in a far better situation; to him nothing stinks. You don’t feel sad if any other sense is missing.
Even if somebody’s legs are missing, hands are missing, you don’t feel sad the same way as when you see a blind man. Why? Without knowing, without being clearly conscious about it, you feel that eighty percent of his life is cut off, he is only twenty percent alive. Naturally, a blind man gets more sympathy.
I have heard that a blind beggar was spreading his hands at the corner of the street and saying, “Give something to a blind man.” And the man who was passing was really generous; he gave him one rupee. And the man said immediately, “But this is not authentic.” In India, to find anything authentic is very difficult. Even if you want to commit suicide, the poison will not work. You cannot find even authentic poison. By the morning you will find yourself perfectly awake and surprised: “What happened to the poison?”
But the blind man saying that the rupee is not authentic…. Naturally the man said, “Are you blind or not? I know the rupee is not authentic, that’s why I have given you the rupee; otherwise who gives a rupee to a blind man? I did it because I could not give it to anybody else; wherever I wanted to purchase something, immediately it was returned because it was not authentic, and they even threatened that they would give me to the police! Somehow I said, ‘It is not my fault, somebody has given it to me, so please forgive me.’ So finally I thought, ‘It is better to get rid of it, otherwise somewhere I am going to get into trouble.’ So I gave it to you.”
The man said, “The real thing is that I am not really a blind man; the real blind man is my friend. Today he has gone to see the movie, and he told me to sit here so nobody takes his place. I am just pretending, I am not blind: the real blind man has gone to see the movie. But sitting in his place I have found that this is far better.
“I have been pretending up to now that I am crippled, but from tomorrow I am going to be blind. This pays far better, and people are more sympathetic. Nobody starts preaching to you that you should work and you should do this and that. People give more – and more politely and more nicely; they don’t treat you the way people treat a beggar.”
In India only the blind man is treated by people with respect; they will call him Surdasji even if he is a beggar. Surdas was one of the most important poets of India. He was blind, and because of his blindness his name became synonymous with blindness. His name does not mean blindness; surdas means a servant of music. And he was a great musician, a great poet, a great singer – but blind. “Ji” is used for respect. So people will not even call a blind man just Surdas, because that is not respectful; he will be called Surdasji.
The man said, “Today I have discovered that my friend is doing a far better job. I have been trying to pretend to be crippled and I have been treated as badly as you can imagine but his going to the movie has changed my whole life – I have decided.”
A blind man simply creates a sympathy in your heart because eighty percent of his life is missing. He has no idea of colors, no idea of light, no idea of beauty, no idea of faces. He is living in complete darkness – that’s what you think; but he does not know even darkness, because for that too, eyes are needed. To see darkness you need eyes.
The blind man has no idea what light is, has no idea what darkness is. That makes it even more strange. In what kind of a world is he living? In what kind of surrounding is he living, where there is no idea of light, not even the idea of darkness? But all his other senses are more alive.
The blind man hears better than you, he tastes better than you, he smells better than you, he touches better than you, and if he thinks, he thinks better than you. If he pours his mind into some subject, he has more intelligence available to do it than you have. Your intelligence is so divided between so many things. He has nothing to divide his attention.
The student is intellectually interested to find what this life is all about, but he is not willing to change himself in order to know anything. He wants to remain the way he is, and just mentally he wants to be fed knowledge. He can become immensely knowledgeable. That’s how all your professors, all your great thinkers are: knowledgeable. They know too much without knowing anything at all.
Existentially they know nothing. If you ask them to give a sermon on love, they can give a sermon on love. But if you ask them, “Have you ever loved? Do you know by experience what love is?” you will shock them, surprise them: What kind of question are you asking?
This was one of my problems when I was a student, because I am not a student, I don’t belong to that category. And every professor wanted me to be just a student – obviously; you enter the university to be a student. And I said, “My interests are deeper. They are not only intellectual, but existential. I simply don’t want to be fed like a computer, I want to experience and know.” And this was really very outlandish to them.
I was sent to the vice-chancellor with a note: “This student says that he is not a student, that he does not belong to the category of student. If he does not belong to the category of student – there are only two categories here, either there are professors or students – what to do with him, because he insists.”
The vice-chancellor said, “You insist that you are not a student?”
I said, “Yes, because I am not.”
He said, “Then why have you entered the university?”
I said, “I have entered the university not to be a student but to be a disciple. Don’t you accept disciples in this university? You give me that in writing, because I am going to make it available to the news media that in this university no disciple is accepted, that to be in this university you are not to be a disciple.”
He said, “My God! You want to create trouble for me. But what is the difference between student and disciple?”
I said, “You are a vice-chancellor and yet you have not come to know the difference between the student and the disciple? Please resign.”
He said, “I was thinking that your professors are a little too fussy and are exaggerating about you, but I was wrong. You are too much! You are asking for my resignation?”
I said, “Of course, because if a vice-chancellor has no idea what a student is and what a disciple is, what is he doing here? You just get out of this place, and take with you all those professors who don’t understand the distinction, because they are all still students.”
To be a student is good in comparison to being curious, but in comparison to the disciple it is simply of no value. It is bogus knowledgeability. And you can go on collecting all kinds of theories, ideologies, philosophies, and you can become a walking encyclopedia, but that will not change you even a single inch. You will remain the same old donkey – now carrying a big load of books too.
Do you think if you put on a donkey the whole set of the Encyclopedia Britannica – of course it will be too heavy and the donkey will be in trouble – do you think the donkey will become in any way a lesser donkey or a better donkey? No, no change is going to happen. He is simply a donkey and he will remain simply a donkey. The Britannica is not going to make any change in him.
Your head is capable of collecting the whole information that is contained in all the libraries of the world. The people who are interested in computers have become aware of the fact that perhaps we will never be able to create a computer that can contain so much as a man’s mind – and in such a small space! Your skull is not very big, but in such a small space you can put all the knowledge available in all the universities of the world. And that is not small.
Just the library of Moscow has enough books that if they are put in a line, the line will go three times around the earth. Perhaps the British Museum library will make four or five lines around the earth. And there are libraries in China and there are libraries in India and there are libraries in America – all over the world are libraries.
There are millions of scriptures in Tibet, Ladakh, Nepal, which are never printed. But all these can be contained in a single skull – such is the capacity of your mind. But it remains only a memory. It does not transform you at all, it has no way of changing you. Yes, you will be deluded by it; you will start hallucinating that you know. You will become respectable.
That was my continual fight with my professors: “All that you know is only verbal – your experience is nil. You may know everything about swimming – all the books about swimming you may have read – but the real test is to come with me and jump into the river. If your knowledge makes you swim, then I will accept it.” And I told this to a professor who I knew did not know how to swim.
So he said, “Only that test will prove it?”
I said, “Only that test.”
Just behind our college was a big lake, so I said, “You come. I have not read a single book about swimming; why should I when I can swim? Why should I waste time in reading a book about swimming when I can enjoy the same time swimming in the lake? Come on with me.”
He could not say that he did not know how to swim, because that would prove my point, so he came along with me. But it was dangerous to take the test…and a few other students came to see what happened. Finally he said, “I never thought that you would drag me to the very logical conclusion of it. I don’t know how to swim, although I can give lectures on swimming.” And he was thought to be the best expert; for those students who were training for competitions, the national competition, he was thought to be the best expert.
I said, “Just think twice before you speak again, because if you speak again I am going to come and throw you into the swimming pool. I will not think of the consequences, of whether you die or you live.”
It is very easy intellectually to hoard:
Intellect is a hoarder.
The second category is dominating the whole world, dominating the first category: the idiots are being dominated by the knowledgeable. These knowledgeable people become politicians, professors, doctors, engineers, scientists and they dominate the idiots, the monkeys with Gandhi caps.
To me, you have to understand the third category, the disciple.
The disciple is one who is existentially interested. He does not want just to know about love, he wants to taste what love is. He wants to experience…his whole concentration is experiential. He will not be satisfied by theories about love, theories about beauty, theories about truth. He wants something tangible – not theories, not empty words – something solid. And it is only experience that can be solid. It is the disciple…. It is a rare category because when you can become respectable just by being knowledgeable, why should you bother about existential knowing? It is risky, dangerous.
Knowledgeable you can become sitting comfortably in a library. But to know, you may have to change yourself drastically because there may be things in you which are preventing knowing. There may be barriers in you which have to be broken. There may be walls around your being which have to be removed. And the most difficult thing is that there may be things which you think are very valuable but which in fact are the hindrances to be removed before you can become a knower.
For example, if you want to experience love, you have to forget all about the love that you have learned from the poets and the so-called professors and writers. You will be surprised, but my own understanding is that the people who have been writing about love are the people who have never loved. Writing about love is their way of finding a substitute. They make beautiful poetry, but have you ever heard of a poet who was really deeply in love, who has experienced love?
For example, Omar Khayyam writes about women, wine, love. Reading him you will think this man must have been the greatest hedonist ever; and the beauty of his poetry is simply incomparable. But the man was a celibate, he never got married, he had no love affairs. He was a mathematician, he was not even a poet. He was a Sufi, and what he is writing when he writes about beauty…. You will think he is talking about the beauty of women – no, he is talking about the beauty of God.
To the Sufis, God is a woman, the beloved, and you are the lovers. When he is talking about love, he means love between you and God. Now, can you visualize what kind of love is possible between you and a God who does not exist at all, whom you have never seen? And he is talking about the beauty of God.
His books in Persian are illustrated and God is actually there as a beautiful woman having wine in her hands to offer to you. Sufis use wine as a symbol: to the man who loves God, God offers a kind of intoxication that does not make him unconscious, but makes him perfectly conscious an intoxication that wakes him up from his sleep.
Fitzgerald, the English translator of Omar Khayyam, had no idea of these symbols. He was a simple earthbound poet, and really a better poet than Omar Khayyam. When he translated, he simply understood that a woman means a woman, wine means wine, love means love. These were not symbols to him.
Fitzgerald made Omar Khayyam world-famous by his misunderstanding. If you try to understand Omar Khayyam in the original you will find such a gap between Omar Khayyam and Fitzgerald that you cannot conceive how Fitzgerald managed to create such beautiful poetry out of this mathematician’s mind.
Even great poets like Byron who continually talk about love have never known love, except casual, fleeting relationships with women – very casual. He was very young when he was expelled from England, not more than thirty. And he was expelled because he became a danger to all beautiful women, particularly to the royal family and the lords and their families. It is known that when Byron would…. He was beautiful also, really handsome, and had a charisma; and his poetry, his name, and his beauty, all together…any woman was ready to fall in love with him.
It was known that whenever he would enter a restaurant, husbands would take their wives’ hands and get out from the other door. Finally the government decided that he should be expelled – because his love affairs were not love affairs at all. He would meet one woman one night and it would be a great love affair; he could not live without her, and his whole life was now in her hands – and the next day he would not even recognize the woman; he had found another, and then the same dialogue…. It is said that sixty women confessed – perhaps there had been many more who had not confessed – sixty young girls confessed that he had deceived them. And when it became a well-known fact and women started talking about what he had said to them, then it was known that it was the same dialogue that he was using again and again on each new woman.
Will you call this man a lover? Can he know the depths of love? Love needs a certain intimacy, a certain time to grow, a certain closeness. It needs two persons to know each other in all ways, good and bad, dark and light. If you only know the person from one side you cannot say that love has yet ripened. The other person has not revealed to you his other side; he cannot yet trust you.
Lovers start opening themselves completely to each other when they know that now even their thorns will be accepted with their flowers, that as they are they are going to be accepted; there is not going to be any rejection, not even a partial rejection. But this needs time. Just meeting casually may be entertainment, but it cannot be love.
Yes, love has its own troubles – anything real has its own troubles. Many people have decided to avoid the troubles; and the only way is to avoid love – then casual relationships are good.
One very intelligent woman – she is English, she is my sannyasin – is married to a very rich man in the Philippines. She is married to his riches, not to him; she is not at all concerned with him, what happens to him. And she is happy because he is continually on tour; his businesses are all over the world, so only once in a while do they meet. She is free. He is moving around, she is moving around. She told me, “I would like to confess to you that I am afraid of love, and I have lived up to now only on casual relationships – so much so that I don’t want to know even the name of the other person, what to say about other qualities and attributes.”
She said to me, “My most beautiful experiences have been while traveling in a train. Suddenly you meet a person; there is no need to know about him because at the next station or after a few hours he will be gone, you will be gone. Perhaps you are not going to see each other again. There is no need for getting in any way personal – it is a kind of impersonal love.”
It is not love, it is simply sex; it is just bodily, biological. But I can understand. The woman is very intelligent. I asked her, “Then there must have been a tragic love affair in the beginning; otherwise, how did you conclude this?”
She said, “That is true. Not once, but three times I have been deceived. I thought it was love, it was not love; again I thought it was love, it was not. And life is short. Three times I trusted those people, but they were simply exploiting my sexuality; and once they were satisfied they became strangers. Then I decided that I have to do something; I am losing my life unnecessarily. So the first thing I did, I married a man whom I do not love, whom I never hope to love, but who has enough riches so that about money I am not going to have any trouble.
“Secondly, I chose this man because he is constantly on tour, so he will not constantly torture me, and we will not be together constantly to harass each other, to embarrass each other. He is free – wherever he wants to go, with whomsoever he wants to go. I am not concerned because I don’t love him, so there is no question of jealousy. And I am free. And when, even after loving a person for three years, ultimately it turns out that he is only a stranger, then what is the point of wasting three years?
“Strangers you can meet every day. And I decided to have relationships only with strangers, traveling in a plane, traveling in a train, meeting somebody in a tourist place for one day or two days or three days; and then to be finished, because more than that and you start becoming addicted to each other – then problems are bound to arise.”
I said to her, “What you are saying makes sense, but you don’t know that you have missed the experience of love completely, just because of its troubles. Just because of the thorns you won’t grow roses in your garden? That will be stupid. Roses will be missed just because of the thorns.
“Thorns can be accepted with the roses – you just have to be a little careful. And what harm can a thorn do? – at the most bring a drop of blood from your finger. But a rose is far more important than a drop of blood from your finger. You have chosen to protect your fingers and you have forgotten completely that you are missing the roses. Are you happy?”
She said, “I am not, that’s why I have come to you from the Philippines. I have everything – money, rich friends, casual relationships, respectability – but I am unhappy.” I said, “You are going to be unhappy, and you will become more and more unhappy because as time passes you will find more and more that what you have chosen is not the right thing.”
The poets who have been writing about love have only momentary relationships. That is thought to be something artistic, avant-garde. Painters, poets, musicians, singers – they are not supposed to have a long-term intimacy, that is against their profession. That makes them common people, ordinary people, household people – and they are superior people.
But these are the people who have given you all the ideas about love. The people who know nothing about love have given you all the ideas about love; and all their ideas are fundamentally wrong because they have come out of zero experience.
For example, all around the world the idea is accepted by all cultures and societies that love is something that happens only once. That’s absolutely wrong. It can happen as many times as you are capable of. It depends on you, on how much love you have in your heart. Yes, there are a few people for whom it happens only once because the quantity of love that they have is finished. Even in one love affair it is gone; then they are empty.
But love is not something that needs to be in such a small quantity. You can have many love experiences, but each experience has to be, for the time that it exists, total, intense. If you are from the very beginning careful – “it is just a momentary thing and tomorrow I say good-bye forever” – then there is no possibility of love happening. But if you think that this love is going to last forever, that for eternity you are going to love this man or this woman…. It may end tomorrow morning – that is not the point – but for the moment this is your feeling, that you have found the person for whom you have been searching, and your total heartbeat is in tune with the other person. For the moment there is nobody else in the world except your beloved. The whole world has disappeared, and you are ready for this moment to become your eternity.
Then even in a single moment you can have the taste of love. It may last for years, it may not last, that is irrelevant – who knows about tomorrow morning? But if somebody asks you this moment, you are ready to promise for the whole of eternity – not just for tomorrow morning, but for all the tomorrows to come.
But the people who have given the ideas about love have given very wrong notions. One notion that they have given is that if you love a person then you have to love the person forever – if it is real love. That is their criterion. If some day after ten years you find your paths separating, then the criterion that you have been carrying in the mind says, “All these ten years you were in a false love and you thought it was real.”
I want to say to you that the reality of love has nothing to do with its longevity. Is the flower not real just because by the evening it fades? Is only the rock real because it will remain tomorrow and the day after tomorrow and the day after that, because the day you were born it was there, and the day you die it will be there? Is only that rock real; and the flowers, thousands of flowers that came and disappeared, came and disappeared, were they unreal? Do you make length of time the criterion of reality? I don’t see any relationship between the two. But because of this idea many people go on hanging around each others’ necks because their love has to be real. They are killing each other to make the love real. If they separate that means their love was not real.
I am not saying that they have to separate to make the love real – don’t move to the opposite extreme, that you have to separate. It will depend on each individual case separately. It is possible that two persons may love their whole life without ever looking anywhere else. It is possible that one may love one person for the time being and then suddenly find that energy is no longer there.
It had come from the unknown.
It has gone to the unknown.
It was not within your power to love somebody; it is not in your power to prevent love from disappearing. You cannot do anything about it, you are simply helpless; so is the other person. Don’t blame anybody. Because of the wrong idea of love, lovers go on blaming each other: “You are destroying it.” Nobody is destroying it. It is a free breeze; it comes, goes – you cannot hold it. And if you close all the windows and all the doors to hold the breeze, it is no longer the same cool breeze. Soon it will be stale as all marriages are – stale, dull.
Both the partners are trying to escape through some place – some window, some door – but the other is keeping watch. The other is also trying to escape from some door but the other is keeping watch. Soon husbands and wives become each others’ jailers. Love has to be for the whole of life, then only is it real – this is stupidity. And because of this idea in the name of love, marriage had to be invented. It is a more stable thing, permanent, legal, social – just like the rock. It is no longer a flower.
The idea has come through people who have not experienced. The same is the case about other ideas – for example, truth. People who know nothing about truth go on talking about it. It is an experience, it is not some object somewhere which one day you are going to find and catch hold of and put in your safe or in a bank.
Truth is not some thing, it is an experience.
You cannot talk about it – you can talk it.
It can be in your very gestures.
It can be in your eyes.
It can be in your presence.
But you cannot talk about it, because when you know truth you know it is your very being, it is – you. It is not somewhere else. You cannot give any description of it, you cannot draw a picture of it. No words are capable of describing it.
Every language falsifies the truth.
Every expression destroys it.
Then what to do? What has the disciple to do? – because he wants to know truth existentially. Then there comes initiation.
Initiation is not needed for the curious – he cannot stay that long. I have been traveling in India for so many years and I was puzzled…. Once I was going to catch the train and somebody came running and said, “Just a minute – does God exist?”
I said, “You must be mad – my train is leaving! What do you want? Do you want Him to exist or not? – because I have to catch my train; I cannot at this moment discuss God’s existence.” He said, “Just a minute – the train is not leaving for three minutes more – just a minute, a single question. I have been trying to find you, and today at last I have found you, but you are in a hurry to catch a train, and you don’t see that I want to know about God.”
I said, “You come to my place…be with me.”
But he said, “That is a little difficult because to come a hundred miles…and then I will have to take leave from my firm, from my office.”
I said, “Then first take care of your office, and your family. Then when you are finished with all these things, and if I am still alive, you come about God…because you are not interested in God, you simply want a man who is running to catch the train. And you don’t see your stupidity – is this the time to ask about God?”
But there are people who are just curious like that. Initiation is not for them, there is no question of initiation. For the student there is no initiation either, because intellectually he can attain knowledge from the universities, from the libraries. There, no initiation is asked for – just of course, registration.
When they asked me to go to the office of the registrar to register, I said, “But I have come to be initiated, not to be registered.” And the man who has invited me to his university, Doctor S.S. Roy, wanted desperately that I should come to the university where he teaches.
For four years continually I had been coming to his university to participate in an inter-university debate, and he was always one of the judges. For four years he had listened to me, and each time he listened to me he invited me, after the debate, to his house. And he would say, “Only one thing: You just leave everything – just come. I want a student like you. My whole professorship is going just rotten. Why don’t you come here? I will make all the facilities possible for you.
“And I cannot help you in any way in some other university because I don’t have any power there. Here, I am the head of the department, dean of the faculty; any day I can become the vice-chancellor. And even if I don’t, the vice-chancellor is my friend, and I will arrange everything.
“I want to remember later in my life that you were my student. And I feel so helpless when you come once a year – I wait the whole year until the university again arranges an inter-university competition. I am always one of the judges…and you can’t see my trouble, that I cannot give you a hundred percent because that will look as if I am favoring you – so I give you only ninety-nine percent. But even then all the judges look at each other, because each year I give you ninety-nine.”
So he had invited me, and finally, after my graduation, I said, “Okay, I am coming for post-graduate work to your college, to your university, and to your department.”
He told me, “You go to the registrar’s office, fill in the form and be registered.”
I told him, “Professor Roy, I have not come here to be registered. What kind of a third-rate word do you use here – registered? Is it an army office or is it a university? Where is the man who is going to initiate me?”
He said, “I knew that you would be a trouble and that I am asking for trouble. You are not yet part of the university and you have started creating trouble! I knew, because for four years I have been listening to the way you use words, the meaning you give to words. I can see “registered” is just ugly; it should be initiation, you are right. But what to do? There is no initiator here, nobody. You will have to get registered.”
I said, “This is simply ugly, because I have come to be a disciple, not to be a student. Isn’t there anywhere a place for a disciple who wants existentially to know?
But there is no place in your ordinary universities because they don’t go beyond the student.
Initiation comes only when somebody is ready to take a great quantum leap from intellect to existence, from words to experience.
You ask me, “What is initiation according to You?.”
The first thing that is needed:
The person should be ready to be a disciple.
So let me explain it to you. A disciple means one who is ready to change himself to know the truth…because as you are you cannot know it; otherwise, you would have known it. As you are, something is basically wrong, upside down, not in the right place.
The disciple is one who is ready and available and gives himself to the master, saying “Do whatsoever you want to me. If you want to cut my head off, cut it, but I have come in order to know the truth.”
A disciple is ready to pay the price whatsoever it is, because at any cost, truth is cheap. Even if you give your whole life, then too you get it for nothing. What is your life? What value has it? It is just a soap bubble – soon it will burst.
But truth will transform you from a mortal into an immortality.
From time, it will take you into eternity.
From all that is tense, full of anguish, a hell, it will pull you out into a state of blissfulness.
The disciple has to be ready to change.
Krishnamurti has been trying his whole life to work with people without initiation – that has been his failure. Of course he could get hold only of students; he could not go deeper than that. He had something to give to those who can go deeper than students, but he himself was preventing disciples from coming to him. Those who had come, he was condemning them. He was forcing them to remain students, just on the intellectual level.
So for sixty years there have been people, thousands around the world, who have listened to him year in, year out; read him continually, and have become completely full of his ideas, but have not changed in any way. They are the same people they were sixty I years before. And now he feels frustrated – but the whole fault is his own. He seems to feel as if people are not intelligent enough. That is not the case.
The people are intelligent enough but you debarred the real intelligent people and you raised and praised high the intellectuals – who are not the real intelligent people. The intelligent person will say, “I am ready to change, but I want to know, not verbally – I want to experience it. And I am ready to do anything, unconditionally.” That unconditional commitment I from the disciple is an absolute necessity for initiation. The word initiation is a very profound word.
It means something that cannot be said, cannot be verbalized; something that is impossible to impart through mind…but still there is a way to imbibe it. And that is the way of initiation. Initiation means the disciple is ready to be available, open to the master, to his presence, his being, his silence.
I say unto you; do not be too much concerned with what I say, but be concerned with what I am.
What I say is only the circumference, what I am is the center.
When a disciple is ready to join with the center of the master, initiation happens. It is an entry into the house of the master.
The doors are opened for the disciple to come in because the disciple has opened his heart for the master to come in. It is on both sides an opening – availability, vulnerability.
And when both sides are open – the master’s side is always open, even to those who are not open; it is only a question of the disciple, because he is continually defending, afraid. That’s what the whole society has been teaching him: “Be on the defense, otherwise somebody is going to exploit you. Be alert, don’t be gullible. Keep yourself ready; if somebody is trapping you, you can escape.”
If this mind is there then you can’t go beyond the stage of the student.
To be a disciple you have to be ready – knowingly, with your eyes open – to step into the unknown, dropping all fear, because the master is the most unknown and unknowable thing in existence. It is not his body, it is not his mind. It is his vibe, his presence – not his person. And to enter into his presence you have to drop all your defense measures. That is initiation. It may take any formal structure. That is not essential; that is just to make it visible.
You are given a red robe, a mala; they are not essential. They are just to make your initiation visible to others, because if it is visible to others they will remind you. Standing before a mirror you will be reminded; continuously you will be reminded that you are a disciple and you have to behave like a disciple. It is just an outer protection.
But the real initiation is something inner, something that triggers in your heart…a moment when the master’s heart and your heart beat in the same rhythm.
When there is a moment when your breathing and your master’s breathing are one, when the twoness is lost, and oneness is felt – that feeling of oneness with the master is initiation.
Disciplehood is a necessary condition for initiation.
And as your initiation becomes ripe, as it becomes easier, natural, spontaneous, then comes the fourth category: the devotee.
Between the disciple and the devotee is the bridge of initiation. The disciple is on the other shore, the master is on this shore. But the disciple is ready to cross the river, to risk his life. To him there is nothing more important that to be with the master. Whether it is a river of water or fire makes no difference, he is going to pass through it.
That very decision changes him from a student into a disciple. That very decision, and immediately – the master may be on the other shore, but he starts pulsating with him – a synchronicity arises. He starts feeling as if he is part of him, not separate. Slowly the bridge is built. More and more your defenselessness, without any effort, just becomes natural to you. The day it becomes natural, you have crossed the bridge: the disciple disappears and the devotee appears. That is the highest category in the world of seeking.
A devotee is one who has nothing to ask, nothing to seek. He has found the master, and that’s enough. He has left himself in the hands of the master, and now he is at ease.
It is just like a small child walking with his father hand-in-hand. The father may be afraid – it is a thick jungle, and the night is coming – but the child has no fear. He is enjoying himself and he is talking about all kinds of things, and the father wants to say, “Shut up! Just walk fast – the night is coming.”
And the child says, “But look at the trees, and look at that tiger!” He is not afraid because he knows his hand is in his father’s hand.
A moment comes when the disciple starts feeling the same way with the master.
Then he is a devotee, then it is a love affair.
Now it has nothing to do with seeking, searching, finding, not finding; there is no question of going anywhere.
Now wherever the master is, is home, is paradise.
You have lost yourself totally in your master’s being.
And the strangest phenomenon is: the moment you are lost utterly in the master’s being, for the first time you have found yourself, and found who you are.

============================================================

Osho,
Do values like love, religiousness, authenticity, happiness, change as human consciousness grows upward?
The movement of human consciousness from darkness to light, from unconsciousness to consciousness, is the greatest revolution there is.
Everything in human life changes, even with a slight movement in consciousness. All depends on where your consciousness is. But this is something which has never been explored. If you look into the dictionaries you will not find three meanings of love there should be. You will not find three meanings of religiousness; there should be. You will not find three meanings of happiness either; there should be. Let us move step by step. Love, for the person who lives in the darkness of his instincts, is not even worth calling love. It is simply sex, a strategy of nature to go on reproducing itself.
You are being used as a means – that is the ugliest part of it. You are not the master of it, you are in the hands of biology. And whatever you are doing, it is not your doing either: you are forced by your instinctive nature to do it – there is no option, it is not your choice. You cannot choose – as far as instincts are concerned, their grip on you is absolute; you are simply a prisoner.
But you go on befooling yourself: you think it is something that you are doing – it is something that is being done through you.
There is a story in India…. In Jagannathpuri, one of the sacred places of Hindus – jagannath means the lord of the world; the temple in Jagannathpuri is the temple of the lord of the world. Because of the temple, the city has grown around it, and because of the temple, the whole city is called Jagannathpuri.
Every year there is a great festival; millions of people gather. The statue from the temple is taken on a chariot for people to see, and it goes around those millions who have gathered. The chariot is drawn by beautiful horses, twelve, of the same color, pure white – the color of the lord of the world. The chariot is golden, of immense value.
Once it happened – this is how the story goes – that a dog started walking in front of the chariot, in front of the horses. Now, when millions of people were there, who was going to bother about a dog who is walking in front of the chariot? People were falling on the ground, prostrating, to give respect to the lord of the world. And the dog thought, “This is great! I have so many followers – I had no idea before. Such a multitude of disciples…I must be some great master.”
Obviously – the logic is simple – the disciples were there and everybody was prostrating to him. He was not aware of the lord of the world, who was behind. Even if he tried he could not see, because the statue was high in the chariot, and then there were twelve horses. It was not possible for the dog to find out to whom…and they were almost touching his feet. And when somebody is respected by millions of people in this way, the very idea of thinking that this respect is being given to somebody else who is behind is impossible – it is against the ego. And the evidence is so clear, anybody can see.
This is the situation of man as far as biology is concerned. The chariot of biology is behind you, carrying the lord of nature, and you think everything is being done by you. Just a little alertness is needed and you will be able to see that it is nothing to do with you. Nature wants to fulfill itself – you are being used as a means.
The antagonism of religion against sex is ninety-nine percent stupid, but there is one percent of truth which I cannot deny. But I have never talked about that one percent of truth to you because there is the danger that the one percent truth may deceive you and you will forget the ninety-nine percent which is untrue. So I have been hammering on the ninety-nine percent. But to make my picture complete…these are my last touches to the picture, so I cannot leave anything out.
That one percent of truth is significant; in fact because of that one percent, all religions became anti-sex. And that truth is that sex makes man a fool, gives him the idea that he is the master of it, while he is only a slave. And the slavery has to be broken – he has to be pulled out of this ditch. But if he thinks that that ditch is a palace then you cannot pull him out. You cannot even persuade him to come out of it; hence, the condemnation of sex by all the religions.
But they overdid it, and they forgot the ninety-nine percent dangers just for the one percent. It could have been done very easily without taking the risk of ninety-nine percent falsehood. But they saw the danger of man being simply a means, and that is the lowliest position possible; you are just a means, not an end. You are being used by some unknown force of which you have no idea. And you go on thinking in your mind that all these prostrating people are prostrating to you.
The man living on the instinctive level only has an hallucination of love. That hallucination is created by nature, by biology, chemistry. You have in your body drugs which are released when you are making love, and you start moving into euphoria. That is one of the reasons why people who become addicted to drugs slowly slowly become uninterested in sex.
The hippies and yippies and all kinds of people – when they became too interested in drugs, they lost their fervor for sex completely, because now they had found a better way of getting into a euphoric state. Now sex seemed to be nothing compared to it. That can give you a clue that both are drugs.
Nature has been using that drug in a very minute quantity; there was no need for more up to now. Perhaps nature will have to think again – find out better drugs, create better chemistry, bring its level up to date; it is lagging far behind. Man’s mind has created things like LSD far superior; so superior that a man like Aldous Huxley thought that LSD gives you samadhi – that it is actually what Kabir and Buddha and Rumi and all the mystics of the world have been talking about. But they had bullock-cart methods to reach to this state.
Now science has given us very advanced drugs, there is no need for yoga and tantra and other things – you just take an injection. You yourself push the injection, there is no need for somebody else to do it. And for hours you are in a euphoric state which is certainly superior to what you call orgasm, because orgasm is so momentary that it only creates more desire for it; it never gives you any satisfaction.
The second symptom that it is a drug is its power of addiction: people become addicted to sex. And a very strange thing about addiction is that if you have the drug, it is nothing; if you don’t have it, you are missing. You never think what you are missing because when you have it, it is nothing. Each time you have it you feel that it is just a futile effort, nothing comes out of it. You don’t move a single inch in evolution. You just jump for a moment in the air and with a thump you fall back on the ground.
That’s why people don’t like to make love publicly, there is no other reason. The reason is nobody wants to look so foolish. Now, in California, which is the most advanced stupid place in the whole world, they have hotels for peeping Toms – you have to pay for it. Inside two fools are making love, and many around the room are sitting and looking and enjoying what the two fools are enjoying. They are enjoying how the couple are making fools of themselves. People pay for it, but those two people are not aware of it; they have also paid.
One man, the first day, was inside the room, but coming out he found many people really hilarious. He asked them, “What is the matter?”
They said, “The show was so good!”
“Which show?” he asked.
They said, “You don’t know? Come tomorrow – it is worth seeing.” The man was such an idiot, and he had been doing such idiotic things, it was worth seeing. The next day the man came with these friends. Now he was outside the wall – and then he found what the matter was: the previous day he had been inside and all these people had enjoyed him. This was tricky – now he was enjoying somebody else!
All the cultures around the world have prohibited, in some way or other, lovemaking in public places, for the simple reason that if you want to be idiotic then at least find some privacy. Don’t make yourself unnecessarily a public show free of charge. A crowd will gather and they will enjoy. Nobody can pass by that place; they will all stop there. And they know they all are doing the same kinds of things. But it is an unconscious state.
Love, at the instinctive level – which is the lowest level – is just a dream created by nature so that you can pass through this arduous job of making love. If there is no euphoria around it, you are going to refuse: “I am not going to make a fool of myself.” Nature has given you a certain allurement.
So in the unconscious state where instinct functions, love is only a name. It means nothing, it simply means foreplay…because just going to a woman and asking her, “Are you ready to come with me to bed?” looks so sudden and so inhuman that the woman, even if she wanted to come with you, is going to slap you. Instead of sleeping with you she is going to slap you then and there.
No, you have to follow a certain procedure – and that procedure you call love. It is not that you do it deliberately to cheat the woman, no: you are being cheated as much as she is being cheated by the same biological forces. The same force is making you say beautiful things to her, what you call “sweet nothings,” whispered into her ear. And the same force is managing things from the other side also, so that she believes you. Whatever you are saying – even if the woman is the ugliest that you have seen, if you say to her, “You are the most beautiful woman in the world, perhaps another Cleopatra,” she is going to believe it! And it is not that you are saying it to cheat her, to deceive her in any way; in that moment you are really true.
One of my friends, a very rich man, who presented me with almost everything…. He made it a point that nobody could present anything before him, so everything that I needed or could have needed anytime he managed to present to me – things which I never used. I asked him also “What am I going to do with this?”
He said, “That is not the point. The point is, nobody is going to present you anything before me. Later on they can go on presenting you with things – and millions will be presenting you things out of love – but they will always be after me. Nobody else can be first.”
And I was very reluctant, because if there was something I was not going to use, if it was no use to me, he was unnecessarily wasting money. And he was so particular and such a perfectionist that only the best satisfied him. If I would not take something then he would find ways somehow to smuggle the thing into my house. Once, when I was leaving – I used to stay with him at least three days every year, that was a commitment. So three days I used to stay with him every year, and when I was leaving he said to me – which he had never said before – “Just be a little careful about your suitcase.”
I said, “I have come so many times, and so many times you have come to the train to say good-bye to me, but you have never said to me, ‘Be careful about the suitcase.’ What is the matter?”
He said, “Nothing is the matter,” and he gave me the key.
I said, “Strange – why are you keeping the key? If it had been left with you, then I would have been in trouble” – and it was a thirty-six-hour journey from his place to Jabalpur.
He said, “No, I was not going to forget it.”
As the train left, the first thing I did, I opened the suitcase: what was the matter? The suitcase was full of one-hundred rupee notes. I thought, “My God! What has he done?” And there was a slip in an envelope: “This is for a new Fiat car. Purchase it immediately. And you cannot say no to me because that will hurt me my whole life.”
I said, “This is strange.” I am continually traveling – in Jabalpur I remain only for five to seven days a month at the most, and that too, not at one stretch. But he will be certainly hurt.” And as I reached home, immediately my phone was ringing. He said, “You have to do first things first. I have already arranged it. I have contacted the Fiat company in Jabalpur – and the car is ready there. Just take the suitcase and take delivery of the car.”
I said, “You don’t leave anything for me!” The car was already standing there ready and the man said, “We have been waiting for you.”
I said, “What to do? The train was two hours late.” And my friend must have been phoning according to the timetable. In India it is said that that’s why the timetable is published – so you can find how late the train is; otherwise how will you find out by how much the train is late? The timetable is absolutely a necessity. Only once it happened that I got into a carriage at the exact time. Traveling for thirty years continually, that was the only time the train arrived exactly on time; it was a miracle. I went to the guard and thanked him; I said, “This is a miracle.”
He said, “It is not a miracle. You don’t know – this is yesterday’s train! We are twenty-four hours late, we are not on time.”
I said to the man at the garage, “What could I do? – the train was late, so two hours….”
He said, “Your friend was very particular about everything; a radio had to be in the car.” And he had made sure of everything, insurance…. And he asked the garage owner to arrange a license for me because otherwise the car might just stay parked at my place. He gave me the first tape-recorder, the first camera – everything that he could find, he would immediately bring to me.
This man was rare in many ways. He was a miser – such a miser that beggars simply bypassed his house. If any beggar ever stood there, other beggars thought, “This seems to be a new man – standing before Rekhchand Parekh’s house, begging!” He had never donated to any institution in his life, never given a single pai to any beggar.
His wife had taken me to introduce to her husband because she said, “He is so miserly, and he has so much money. And we have only three daughters, who are married and have rich houses, so there is no problem. And there is no son, there is nobody after us, but he goes on collecting – even I don’t know how much he has.”
They lived in a place, Chanda, in Maharashtra. She said, “He had purchased almost one-third of the houses of the city – it seems he is going to purchase the whole city. If there is any house for sale, he is not going to let anybody else purchase it. And his only joy seems to be just accumulating money. I have brought many Jaina monks” – because they were Jainas, and they were Gandhians – “and I have brought many great disciples of Gandhi, thinking perhaps somebody will change his mind. But he is very straight and does not give any chance for anybody to even touch him.”
So I said, “Okay, I will come. I cannot guarantee anything; I don’t know what type of man he is, but he appeals to me.”
He had come to receive me at the station. While we were going to his house – he was driving – I told him, “One thing I should tell you is that your wife has brought me here to persuade you not to be miserly. She wants you to donate to institutions who are doing a public service, to religious institutions, to schools, to hospitals. I am not interested in all of these things; I have just come to meet you because you attracted me. You are a rare man! Never in your life have you given to a beggar, never have you donated a single pai?”
He said, “Never, because I am waiting for the man who is worth to be given everything.”
When we reached his house, his wife was surprised because never before had he taken to his sitting room any saints that she had brought. And he told the servants that I would be staying in his guest house, in his sitting room; that I would be there: “And tell my wife she need not worry about this man.” His wife was at a loss: What had happened?
A sudden synchronicity, he told me – not the word synchronicity, he had never heard that, but he told me, “It is strange, the moment I saw you, I felt, ‘This is the man.’” And even after we had known each other for twenty years, there was not a single question from him – no question, no doubt, no argument – whatever I was saying was truth to him.
I asked his wife only one question. After being there for the first time for three days, I asked his wife, “Is your husband interested in sex or not?”
She said, “Not at all, and it is not that he represses, he is simply finished. And you can see now that he is a strange man. He has told me, ‘If you are not finished you are free; you can have sex with whoever you want. I am finished with it.”‘
The moment a man is finished with sex as an instinct that is forcing him to do something, he becomes in a certain way a master of himself and he starts having insights, visions which the unconscious, instinctive man cannot have.
Just looking at me – not a single word had been said – he said, “I have found the person.” And then whenever I needed any amount of money, for myself or somebody else, I had just to inform him, “Give this much money to this man.”
He never asked, “Who is this man and why is so much money needed for him?” He simply gave it. His wife was simply shocked. She could not believe that this miserly man…how suddenly he had completely become just the opposite.
I told her, “There is no problem. He is not miserly – it was your misunderstanding. He never wanted to give to those people who are not worthy of it. And coming from the station to the house he said to me, ‘I have found you; now all that I have belongs to you. Whatsoever you want to do with it you can do.’ He is not a miserly man, it was your misunderstanding. It is difficult to find such a man, so generous.” But from where was his generosity coming? His generosity was coming from a certain mastery over himself.
The instinctive man clings to everything: to sex, to money, to power – to everything.
I asked him, “Why do you go on purchasing all the houses?”
He said, “Some day you may like to have a commune – then from where am I going to suddenly give you a commune? By that time I will have purchased the whole city. I know that you will take a little time before you need a place – I am preparing it for you.” Now, nobody would have thought that he was purchasing houses…that even before knowing me, he was purchasing them for somebody who was going to come into his life, who one day may need this whole city.
And many times it happened…he used to come with me once in a while for a tour. Anybody would think that he was a miser because he was such a rich, super-rich man, but he would always travel third class on the passenger trains. Never express trains, mail trains, no; never first class, air-conditioned – out of the question. But whenever he would travel with me, he would say, “You can travel in the air-conditioned class; I will travel in the third class.”
Once I asked, “Why do you insist on traveling third class?”
He said, “I have my own ideas. People think I am a miser – I don’t care a bit about money. What am I going to do with the money? Soon I will die and all this money will be lying here. But to travel in the third class is an experience: the crowd, the people, the gossips, and things that go on happening in the third class of an Indian railway train….” He had traveled all over India, and he had friends at every station; he would call the coolies by their names. And he knew every place where you could get the best milk, where you could get the best tea, where you could get the best sweets.
He said, “With an express train, a mail train, this is not possible, because they stop only at a few stations and I want to stop at every station, because at every station I have friends and I have things to do. The passenger train stays longer at every station. If other trains are passing, then the passenger train will be delayed; no other train will be delayed, so you always have hours on your hands. And all these stationmasters are my friends, the guards are my friends, the drivers are my friends – because I call all of them when I know that a particular sweet is made the best at that station. So they say to me, ‘Parekh, enjoy yourself! Unless you enter the train, the train will not move.’ “
And he said, “I like to be the master rather than the servant – not that they give the whistle and you run, no.”
That was his reason: “I want to be the master. When I enter the train, then whistling and flagging and everything happens – but first they have to see that Parekh has entered.”
He was an old man – I was only thirty-five, he was fifty at that time – but he would take me out of the station, and he would say, “Come outside. The mango trees are great here.”
I would say, “The train is there – are we going to pick mangos? And then if we miss the train…. I have my appointment.”
He would say, “Don’t be worried. Until I enter the train, the train remains in the station. You can go up the tree, I am also coming; we will go up the tree and pick mangos.”
One day it happened: we were picking mangos and Parekh said to me, “Just look upward,” and there was another man. He said, “He is the driver. He knows that I will come to pick mangos so the train has to stay. So why waste time? – collect a few mangos, and these mangos are really sweet! In fact, the guard will be in some other tree…. It is all under my control.”
This man had no instinctive force. He was not in any way interested in any particular food; he liked all kinds of food, he liked all kinds of clothes. In fact he was so disinterested that anything would do – no special liking, disliking. But he was a man full of love.
Once in a city in Rajasthan, Biawar, he was with me, and I had a fever. The whole night he remained by my side. I told him, “Parekh, you go to sleep. Because of you I cannot go to sleep!”
He said, “That is up to you – that is your problem. I am not saying to you, ‘Don’t go to sleep’; I am trying to help you to go to sleep. As far as I am concerned I cannot sleep knowing that you have a fever. The fever may increase in the night and I may be asleep. That is not permissible.”
And actually it happened: in the night the fever increased; at two o’clock it was one hundred and five. He said, “Do you see the point? You would not have awakened me.”
I said, “That is true.”
He called the doctor and he said to me, “This is not the time for you to leave the body. If you can make some arrangement, I am willing to leave the body and you remain in the body – because you have much to do, and I have nothing to do.” This is love of a totally different kind – a caring, a friendliness.
The instinctive love can become any moment hate. The man who was ready to die for you can kill you. The woman who was so caring toward you, so loving toward you, can poison you; literally she can poison you. Love, if it is instinctive, is not in your hands; you are just a slave. The unconscious is very easily convertible into its opposite, and you cannot do anything about it.
But when love comes to the conscious level – that is, when it comes to the level of intellect, not instinct – then it has a different flavor. Then it has no biological purpose.
What biological purpose can music have? What biological purpose can poetry have? or painting? or philosophy? But Socrates is ready to die for his philosophy. There seems to be a tremendous love affair with his own system that he has created. He knows perfectly well that his death is not going to destroy his philosophy, but if he compromises just to go on living, that may destroy his whole philosophy. The very compromise – because that was one of his teachings: never compromise.
Truth is truth, and untruth is untruth.
And there is no possibility of compromise.
Just the other day I received a very beautiful, nice, elegant letter from a council of priests, bishops, Christian theologians. They have a certain council in America, and they have written that they have been discussing me now for almost two to three years – reading, discussing. I have become their center of discussion. They have invited me to come, and they will take every care; they want to exchange thoughts with me. That’s where the trouble is.
The whole letter is beautiful. And in this too – they have not consciously written anything rude – they are unconscious people. An exchange of thoughts is not something bad, but they don’t know that you cannot exchange thoughts with me; I don’t deal in that business. If you know, then I will not bother. If you don’t know, then how is the exchange going to be? What are you going to give me in exchange? Either you know or you don’t know; there is no third position. You cannot say, “A little bit I know,” because truth cannot be divided into fragments.
You cannot know truth a little bit; either you know it, the whole of it, or you don’t know it, the whole of it. So what exchange?
Now, I may look rude to them. I am not ready for any exchange because as far as I am concerned I don’t need anybody’s ideas. It was so difficult to get rid of them, now again to exchange…. It took me twenty-one years to get rid of other people’s ideas. I am not interested. Even if God invites me for an exchange of ideas – nothing doing! You can have your ideas, and I don’t have any ideas to give you.
I can share myself, but it is not going to be an intellectual discussion. It is going to be an intelligence communion; but for that, that council cannot be ready. They have already decided what is right, who is the messiah. They have already decided that God exists. Now what remains to be exchanged?
You have your whole theology already decided, by others, not by you. You have borrowed it and now you are feeling in confusion because of my ideas. If my ideas are so confusing, that is proof enough that you don’t know what truth is; otherwise, what is the point of discussing for three years? Who am I? – I have not been discussing those fellows, not even for three days, what to say about three years. And they must have written great theological books….
There is no possibility of exchange; but at the instinctive level, everything is an exchange. You give something, you take something – and there is every effort to take more than you give. That’s the whole difficulty of all the couples around the world. The wife goes on saying, “I love you, but you don’t love me.” The husband says, “How to prove it? I love you.” But nobody can convince the other.
It is not a question of convincing. But why does the question arise that “You love me less,” or “I love you more”? At the instinctive level, love is a quantity. You can measure it – how many kilos you give and how many kilos you get in return, in exchange. And you can see who is a loser. It is a business deal. And people are continually quarreling, and trying to manage to snatch as much from the other as possible.
But when love moves to the conscious level, when it has no biological slavery, when it is free of biology…that does not mean that you cannot make love to someone. You can make love to someone, but now it will have a totally different quality. It will not be in any way a bondage, an enforcement by nature. It will be out of your freedom; you can share.
The right word to use will be…it will be just playfulness. Yes, you can play with somebody’s body. You like the body, you enjoy the body, you enjoy the warmth of the body, you enjoy the contours of the body. You can be playful, there is no business deal.
In fact that is why – along with many other reasons, this is also one of the reasons – I am in favor of birth control methods, while all the religions are against it. You will be surprised to know what is going on in the minds of the popes, shankaracharyas, imams, rabbis. You may not have thought of it in that way, perhaps they are not even aware themselves, but I want it to be clear to you and to them. This is the fact that is going on in religious people’s minds:
If birth control methods become more prevalent, then sex will be a playfulness.
Then you cannot call it sin.
There is nothing involved, no sin at all. Two persons enjoying each other’s warmth – there is no problem in it. They cannot condemn sex, they cannot condemn you, that you are in bondage, a slave. They cannot say to you, “You are only a means in the hands of biology,” because birth control methods make you capable, even if you are not conscious, they make you capable of turning sex into playfulness; and that is the danger. Their whole theology will collapse because no religious scripture had the idea that there were going to be birth control methods.
They were happy with the slavery of sex because then they could condemn it and you could not argue – it is so clear that it is a slavery, and nobody wants to be a slave: So repress it, get out of it. But the dilemma is that the more you repress it, the more you try to get out of it, the more you are caught in it. Only by playfulness is there a possibility one day, suddenly, to get out of it, because it is no longer a serious business.
One fundamental you have to remember: if you fight with something you will have to remain on that level to fight; otherwise how can you continue the fight? If you are fighting sex, then you cannot move beyond your instinctive level – impossible – because then who will fight? If you start moving upward then all those wolves in your unconscious will run amok. You cannot leave that place, you have to be there constantly fighting, repressing. How is transformation possible for a man who is fighting with his own nature? It is impossible.
Take it as a categorical principle; there is no exception to it. With whomsoever you fight you will have to remain with that person, with that state, with that space. But if you are playful, then it is a totally different thing. If you are on the war front you cannot say to the soldiers on the other side, “Now I am feeling tired; we will go home now and start tomorrow.” You cannot say that. If you turn your back that fellow is going to shoot you then and there, and finish all your tiredness.
On the front you cannot do that, but if you are playing with somebody, playing cards, you can say, “Now I am tired. Tomorrow we will start; we can start even from this point where we are stopping.” There is no problem in it, it is only a play.
Let your instinctive world become a playfulness….
And that’s the fear of all the priests in the world. They are condemning me continually for the simple reason that I am giving you a chance to get out of the grip of your instinct. But that is also the grip of the priest; that is also the grip of the pornographer.
If you get out of your instinctive level, you are free from the priest, the pope, and the pornographer. The pornographer and the priest are using the same methodology. And they are partners, whether they know it or not, in the same business.
You will be surprised to know that in aboriginal tribes you cannot make anybody interested in a nude, pornographic picture. You cannot make anybody interested. I have lived in Bastar, and gone there again and again…because in India a few tribes are left which are five thousand years old. And they have not kept pace with time; they have stood still. So it is good for a visit into history, five thousand years old; there is no other way to visit history, to go back in time.
But in Bastar it is not the twentieth century. You can touch a woman’s breast and ask, “What are these?” and she will say, “You don’t know? These are tits for children to drink milk.” She is not offended by that, that you touched her tits. She is simply surprised that you don’t know such a simple thing.
They are almost naked. They only wrap a cloth around when they come to the cities, down from their hills, out of their forests; otherwise they are all naked. How can you make an aboriginal of Bastar interested in a Playboy magazine or Stern? He will be simply surprised: “What is this?”
It is like a magazine on fruits advertising tomatoes half-clothed, tightly clothed A man who grows tomatoes will be simply surprised: “Are these people mad? If you are advertising tomatoes, then advertise tomatoes, but why these strange clothes, tight around the tomatoes?”
These pornographers are using what the priest has done before. The priest is the head partner, perhaps the major shareholder. He represses sex; he makes people interested in sex beyond all rationality – he drives them irrational about sex. Then comes the pornographer, and naturally, the repressed person would like at least to see the photographs. He is not allowed to see living human beings, that is a sin. At least The Bible has not said, “Cursed are those who will see pornography. They will inherit the kingdom of hell.” I think pornographers will be needed in heaven too, because all your monks will die…. They may have already found a way to smuggle in Playboy, Stern, and all kinds of third-rate magazines from around the world.
You may even be surprised to find God looking at a Playboy magazine, because He is the original source of this whole business. And it is natural, because He has not even a girlfriend – what to say of a wife, not even a girlfriend. In the name of a girlfriend he has the Holy Ghost. Just think of yourself with the Holy Ghost as your girlfriend; you would like better to live alone. You would ask the Holy Ghost, “Leave me alone, you go somewhere else.”
The priest creates the business basis: repression.
Then the pornographer uses it.
I am destroying their business completely.
Sheela informed me from New Delhi – she had taken our latest publication, This Very Place The Lotus Paradise, to show to people – that one minister, the finance minister of India, came to see her. She showed him the book. K.D. was with her, and K.D. could not believe what that man was doing…. Because in The Lotus Paradise we have a few pictures of our nature institute; naked women walking by the lake or massaging each other, or just sitting and giving an interview.
Sheela was sitting in front so she could not see, but K.D. was at the side so he was amazed when he saw that the man was touching the bottom of a girl in the picture! And these are the people who are in power.
He is one of the persons who has been creating all kinds of hindrances for our commune in Pune and still goes on doing it. In parliament he spoke against me. In parliament the man said it is good that I have left the country, because “this man was dangerous; he was preaching sex as if he is doing something religious.”
Now, this man is simply insane. But who has driven him insane? A picture is just printed paper. There are not any buttocks or anything, but he is trying to touch the buttocks and feel them. And K.D. saw such a greasy feeling on his face – as if this man could rape a woman if he had a chance. He can rape even a picture! If he can touch the buttocks in the picture, can’t you imagine him raping a picture of a naked woman? He is capable.
This is what the priests have done to the world.
Now these people are all turned into customers for pornographers.
And our pictures in that book are not even pornographic, because a naked picture by itself is not pornography. A naked child – can you call him pornographic? A naked Mahavira, can you call him pornographic? – then all the temples of the Jainas in India are pornographic. But no – if you go and see Mahavira’s statue standing naked, you cannot say that it is pornography. There is no pornography at all; he is simply nude. But he is not exhibiting his nudity; he is not trying to pollute your mind and poison you. He is not trying to attract you sexually – and in fact, facing a statue of Mahavira naked you will never feel sexual.
He has a beautiful body, very proportionate, but it is impossible even to think of pornography. Children are there, women are there, men are there – they are all worshipping the naked Mahavira, and there is no question….
Pornography needs something more. It is not just a naked body. It needs to place the body in such a situation, in such a posture, with such clothing that it releases your imagination. Just a naked body cannot release your imagination. In fact it stops it; where to go? A naked woman is standing before you; what to do? How long can you look at a naked woman or a naked man? Soon you will say, “Shit! I am going home. What nonsense is this?”
But the pornographer’s art is to make the woman naked enough so that you feel attracted and covered enough so that your imagination is allowed to discover what is hidden, what is covered. The real art of pornography is in the balance: the body should not be too naked, otherwise you will soon be bored; it should not be too covered, otherwise you will soon be bored. It should be covered in such a way that your imagination can start working on it, so that you can close your eyes and you can contemplate what is hidden. And in your contemplation you can make it as beautiful as you want it is your imagination.
All religions are pornographic in this sense because they are partners in the same business, they are the major shareholders. They create the situation to be exploited. But they are afraid if you are free from the sexual instinct and other instincts which are minor, if you are free then they are committing suicide.
As you come to the level of intellect – and the only way, I told you, to come to the level of intellect and consciousness is not to repress, but to enjoy everything that nature has given to you, playfully, non-seriously. And you will – be soon beyond it; you cannot go on playing with it your whole life.
It is just like teddy bears. There are a few people who in many ways need teddy bears even in later life – very important people even.
I have met one very famous saint, Shivananda. He had many followers in America and around the world, and he was thought of as one of the greatest living yogis. Seeing him, I was simply in shock that this man – he used to eat so much that perhaps he must be the weightiest man in the world. He was just like an elephant, not like a man. His hands were so heavy he could not raise them himself. Two persons were needed to hold his hands when he stood up, they were so heavy, so thick. When I saw him I said, “My God! This man is a yogi?”
But what had happened – he had repressed when he was young. His master was continually forcing his fasting, fasting; so he fasted, starved himself. When the master died and he became the successor, then naturally, the first thing he did – anybody can imagine it – the first thing he did, he started eating as much as he could. All those years of starvation had to be compensated. His body was the ugliest; he could not carry his own weight.
And this man was talking about becoming fearless because fear keeps you worshipping wrong gods; out of fear you start worshipping anything. Yoga does not believe even in God. That’s one of the beauties of yoga, that it is very scientific.
The yogis never mention the fact that yoga does not believe in God. They simply ignore the statement or camouflage it in commentaries, and this and that; but the statement is clear. What I am saying is what yoga says. Yoga says God is a hypothesis. There is no need to believe in it, there is no need not to believe in it; it is just a hypothesis. It can be used for certain purposes. But God is not some existent thing.
It is just like I don’t want a child to go out because it is so cold; the child will not listen so I say, “Wait, outside there is a ghost. Now if you want to go, you can go.” Now the child will sit just by my side. I will say, “You go out, the ghost is waiting.” Now the ghost is a hypothesis, but it has a function. Yoga says God can be used just like a hypothesis, for certain purposes in practice. It is perfectly good for a child. He has been saved from the cold.
I wanted Shivananda’s disciples to give more information about Shivananda – what he eats, how much he eats, when he gets up, when he goes to sleep. In that information I found one item which was just hilarious. He sleeps keeping one foot in a plastic bag full of salt. I have read all about yoga but I have never come across this exercise.
They said, “This is not a yoga exercise; this keeps ghosts away.” There is in India a belief that if you keep one leg in salt then ghosts can’t come and kill you. This man is continually teaching fearlessness, and in the night…. Of course ghosts don’t listen to the sermons of the yogis; and who knows? – they may be there. It is better to be on the safe side.
I told one of his chief disciples, “I would love to see it.
He said, “There is no problem. When he goes to sleep I will leave the window open; you can simply slip in and see.”
So I opened the window and saw: he was there lying on the bed with one of his feet tied inside a bag. I said, “If you are not finished, playfully, with your unconscious then it is going to come up in some way or another. You can teach beautiful things but you can’t have the quality of those things.”
As you move up, playfully, exhausting the biological sources, fulfilling what biology wants you to do, it relieves you; you are freed, you become conscious. And conscious love is a totally different thing. It is just friendliness.
You don’t fall in love – no more fall – you rise in love. The more you love, the more you feel you are going higher in your consciousness. And the same is true about other values: authenticity, religiousness, happiness.
Happiness on the instinctive level is only pleasure; happiness on the level of intellect is joy. When you listen to great music, or you see a beautiful painting – a sudden upsurge of joy. No animal can enjoy a painting. He can eat it, but he cannot enjoy it.
No animal is capable of enjoying anything that belongs to the second level – your consciousness – because no animal rises to that level; only man…and not all men either. Few men are capable of enjoying things which have no biological purpose. What biological purpose does a painting serve? – or music? or poetry? There is no biological purpose. That’s why no parent wants you to become an artist.
One of my uncles is a poet, but the whole family was against him; they destroyed him. They did not allow him…they withdrew him from the university because they saw that if he passed from the university then all he was going to do was write poetry. But if he had no certificates, then he had no way to escape anywhere; he had to sit in the shop.
And I have seen him – when I was small, I saw him sitting in the shop. And if there was nobody else, only I was there…he knew that I never disturb anybody’s business. You just have to be aware not to be disturb my business; then it is a contract. And it was a contract between me and him that he should never interrupt anything, whatsoever it was.
He said, “Okay, but don’t you report anything about me.”
I said, “I am not concerned.”
What he used to do – a customer would come and he would simply wave his hand as if the customer where a beggar: “Just go!” He would not speak because somebody might hear, so he would just make a gesture with his hands: “Move on!” My father, my grandfather, they were all puzzled: “Whenever you sit here, no customer comes in.”
He said, “What can I do? I can sit here but if nobody comes it is not my fault.”
He was not interested in business at all; while sitting in the shop he was writing poetry. But soon they arranged his marriage. And I went on telling him, “You are getting trapped. First, why did you come back from the university? Don’t you have any guts? You could have done anything – pulled a rickshaw, been a coolie at the railway station. You could have done anything.”
I told him, “Your poetry is just lousy. They stopped sending money to you so you are back; now they are arranging your marriage and you don’t know that that is the end of your poetry. At least right now you can shoo away the customers and go on writing a little bit. You will not be able to do that when your wife is here.”
He said, “But my wife will be in the house, and I will be in the shop.”
I said, “You just wait…because I see what happens to my father. My mother only sees him when he is there for his lunch or his supper. He simply goes on eating, his eyes down, and she goes on hammering him about all kinds of things. And she screams, ‘You don’t say anything, no or yes. I know you are not listening to me.’ And he will say, ‘I can do only one thing at a time – let me first eat.’ But she will say, ‘Once you finish you escape; then again at supper time – I see you only twice.’”
And she had problems. She was not very old but the whole family had fallen on her head, because my father’s mother died after his marriage. And my grandfather was a problem because he was continually inviting people, all kinds of people; he had so many friends. He had no other business, he had left the business to my father. He had only one business – to make friends. And the best way to make a friend is to invite him for lunch, supper, dinner, anything.
And my mother was angry, perfectly logically: “You should at least inform me how many people you are bringing because from where can I produce food suddenly? You simply come in the kitchen with a dozen people, and I have no idea even that a dozen people are coming.” So she had her problems. But my grandfather was not a man to listen to anybody; he would do whatsoever he wanted.
He had created a great stir…. Just the other day I was telling you about Haji Baba of Pakistan, who is now nearly one hundred and ten years old. He was present at my father’s marriage and he had come with the marriage party to my mother’s place. It created a great stir in the whole Jaina community, because it is a tradition that when the bridegroom comes to the house of the bride they have to be received on the boundary of the town, and the chief of the family has to be garlanded. A turban, a very valuable turban, has to be put on his head, beautiful shoes made of velvet have to be put on his feet and he is given a robe, specially made for him.
My grandfather said, “Haji Baba is the chief of our family.” Now, a Mohammedan, chief of the family of a Jaina…my mother’s father was at a loss – what to do? Haji Baba was saying, “Don’t do this.” But my grandfather was never able to listen to anybody. He said, “It doesn’t matter. Even if we have to go back, we will go back, but you are my family’s chief I have always been like your younger brother, and how can I be received when you are here?”
There was no other way; my mother’s father had to receive Haji Baba as the chief of the family. I asked my mother – because in his letters he goes on writing to her, “How is my Bahurani?” Bahurani means bride-queen, and that is used only for young brides when they are just married. Now she is seventy-five and he goes on asking, “How is my Bahurani? Does she remember me at all?”
So I asked my mother, “Why does he write to you as Bahurani?”
She said, “He is the only man who can write to me as Bahurani, because I was only seven years old when he came as the chief of your father’s family with the procession. I was only seven years – for him I am still seven years. For him your grandfather was a brother, your father was a son, you are a grandson.”
So I told my uncle, “You don’t know your father but he is my friend and I know the whole trap, what is going on – the whole conspiracy. But I have also a pact with my grandfather that I will not reveal any rumors in the house. But this is something serious; they are going to trap you. They have just found a really beautiful woman for you, there is no doubt about it”…because my grandfather had taken me to choose her. He said, “I have become too old, and you are so sharp. Find out whether this girl will do or not.” And he had found really a beautiful girl.
So I said, “He has found a beautiful girl but the reason why he is trying to find a beautiful girl is so that you forget all your poetry.” And that’s what happened. Once he got married then most of his time he was with his wife or he was in the shop – and slowly slowly his poetry started disappearing. And his wife started dominating him for the simple reason that she felt guilty because everybody in the house, children included, knew that “your husband is just a do-nothing, useless, just a wastage.”
So she was nagging my uncle, “You forget about all poetry.” She burned the copies of his poetry, his years’ work, and she told him, “No more poetry for you – because I feel ashamed, everybody laughs at me.” They destroyed his poetry.
I asked my father, “Why are all you people against my poor uncle? He is not doing any harm. Poetry is not harmful, it is not violent. He is not writing war songs or anything like that; he writes beautiful love poetry. Why are you against him?”
They said, “We are not against him; all that we want is that he should stand on his feet. Now he is married, tomorrow he will have children; who is going to feed them continually?” And that’s what happened. Now he has a shop and now he no more moves people on. His children are married; they have children.
The last time I went, in 1970, I asked him, “What about the customers?”
He said, “There is nothing about the customers – all my poetry is gone. And you were right that my wife would be real trouble. Neither my grandfather, nor your father, nor my other brother – nobody was such a trouble. But my wife continually nagging…finally I had to decide. Either I have to become a monk renounce the world – but that too is difficult: a Jaina monk cannot write poetry because poetry belongs to ordinary people. And poetry is something basically connected with the affair of love, so what can a monk write?”
I said, “You can write sutras, religious bhajans devoted to some god – songs, devotional songs.”
He said, “But I am not interested in any god, in any devotion. I want to write what I feel in my heart.”
I said, “That is finished – your heart is married!” And in India at that time divorce was not legal either. And even though now it is legal it rarely happens, and only in Bombay, Calcutta, Madras, New Delhi – nowhere else. They destroyed his poetry to keep him tethered to the lowest part of his being.
All the painters, all the poets, all the musicians have faced a world which is against them. Why? – because what they are doing is something which has no relationship with the whole world and its life. The love they are talking about is not the love that people are living. They are talking about love which is something airy-fairy, not of the earth. They are doing some great creative work. To paint a Picasso you need a certain quality of consciousness; to be a Leonardo da Vinci you need something that is missing in ordinary mortals.
What has he got? The whole grip of biology is not on him. That’s why he can devote his whole energy to a new kind of creation – not children, but paintings, poetry, songs, dances, statues. This is non-biological creation. This is conscious creation; he is the master of it. It serves no purpose as far as nature is concerned, but it certainly serves some purpose as far as human consciousness is concerned.
Just watching Mahavira’s statue you may fall into a meditative state. That was their original function. They were not made to be worshipped, they were made to make you aware of a certain state. The statue is of a certain state, not of a certain man; that man is irrelevant.
It happened that some photographer took a picture of Ramakrishna. That was his first picture and the photographer was very happy. He brought the large framed picture to present to Ramakrishna who was sitting with his disciples. He took the picture in his hand and kissed the feet in the picture. The photographer could not believe it! Is this man sane or insane? His own picture, and he is kissing the feet!
Vivekananda, his chief disciple, was sitting by the side. He said, “Paramahansadeva, what are you doing? This is your own picture. Have you seen it or not?” He thought he had not looked at the picture – Just that the man had given it to him, and he must have thought it was some god’s picture, so he had kissed it.
Ramakrishna said, “Is it so? Let me look.” He looked and he said, “Yes, it is my picture,” and he kissed the feet again!
Vivekananda said, “Now this is too much.”
Ramakrishna said, “I am not kissing my own feet. This is a picture of a state, it has nothing to do with me. Just look at the picture,” he said, “It is a picture of a certain state. The body is just the outer lines, but look into the eyes, look into the face. And I remember perfectly where I was when this picture was taken: I was in samadhi, so it is a picture of samadhi. And I say to you that only this picture should be distributed, no other picture.”
So only that picture hangs in the houses of people who worship Ramakrishna, because that picture was worshipped by Ramakrishna himself. It is absurd logically, but just a little bit of patience and you can see the point. It is a picture of a state. It is immaterial whether Ramakrishna was in that state or Mahavira was in that state or Buddha was in that state. It is immaterial – what matters is that consciousness.
Good music, good poetry, can raise your consciousness. They can create the situation for the entry into the third. Very few musicians have been there very few poets, very few painters, and very few sculptors are capable of creating such artifacts that can give you a resonance inside you.
Gurdjieff has called such art, objective art. He has given it a special name. All art is not objective art. The Taj Mahal is objective art. It was made by Sufi mystics – they were the architects, they designed it. The whole structure is made in such a way that on the full-moon night, exactly at nine in the night, if you sit silently there, you will fall into a deep sleep – which is not sleep. You will be aware. You will experience what I have been telling you about: hypnos. And from there meditation is very close.
The man who guards the Taj Mahal is traditionally a Sufi mystic. If you meditate, at a certain moment you can inquire of him, What else to do to change the hypnos into meditation? And he will give you the method, how hypnos can be changed into meditation.
Now, Gurdjieff has called the Taj Mahal objective art. And I agree with him because I have been to the Taj Mahal hundreds of times and I have watched it in every part of the night – dark nights, moon nights, full-moon nights, no-moon nights – and I can tell you that in each different period it gives you a different taste, a different flavor. It is not just an ordinary building, not just a beautiful marble memorial. That was only an excuse; hidden behind is the secret of meditation.
So when your state changes, your love changes, your religion changes, you cannot remain a Christian or a Hindu or a Buddhist.
In the conscious state you have to find out your own religion, you have to choose.
You cannot be born in a religion; that is sheer nonsense. Religion is not something one can be born with.
It is a search, you have to find it. It is a risk – you have to go a long way and to risk everything. Only then can you get it.
Your religion will be different.
Your authenticity will be different.
An unconscious man has no authenticity. Not that it is his fault. He is many persons at the same time; how can he be authentic? He says one thing – tomorrow he is not the same person, somebody else has come on top of the wheel. There are spokes on a wheel – exactly like that there are many personalities on the wheel. The wheel is moving, and the wheel is you. Now which personality has promised? The other spoke has no idea about it; it may simply say, “I have never said anything to you.”
When you become conscious you become conscious of this wheel. You become conscious also that these spokes are not you, and you should not allow them to speak on behalf of you. For the first time you start speaking on behalf of yourself. Then there is authenticity, sincerity, honesty, truth – and these, I am saying, only on the second level. As you reach the third level…these things will help you to move to the third. Then things are beyond description.
It is on the third level, the highest level – intuition – where Lao Tzu feels nothing can be said. Only up to the second can something be said, because intellect is still functioning. On the third, you have gone beyond intellect. Now things cannot be said, but can only be showed. That’s my expression – because all these people have said, “Nothing can be said.” True, but much can be showed.
I may not be able to say something about the beauty of the moon but I can catch hold of your hand and take you to the window, and I can raise my fingers toward the moon. I am not saying anything, but I am showing something.
On the intuitive level, only fingers showing the moon…everything becomes inexpressible. But everything becomes visible, tangible.
Yes, even love, religiousness, authenticity, truth – they all become tangible. They are no more theories philosophies, they are realities. You can live them, you can become them.
All that is needed is that you move to the third level. And that is not a great thing, it is a simple process.
Live completely the first level, then energy starts moving on its own toward the second, and starts hitting the third. Soon it will make a way in the jungle.
Your work consists only in the first story of your life; the second story and the third story happen of their own accord. All the scriptures describe only up to the second; the third can only be said by silence. But silence is expressive enough if you are ready to listen in silence. Then, from the master to the disciple, any moment the jump happens.
That transfer of flame from the master to the disciple is what I call the very soul of my religion.

============================================================

Osho,
Did you drift away on many points yesterday?
I am constantly drifting away every day. It is something in the very nature of things I am talking about. I cannot help it. With each word spoken, I have so many dimensions available; I have to choose one. Which one I choose makes no difference, the others are left. And then there is no way of coming back to them because each new word will be bringing new implications. So you have to go on reminding me – don’t feel shy about it.
I am reminded of a story because I told you about reminding me…. That’s how I go on drifting! Now what do you say, should I tell it or…? Because if I tell it, then I have gone again. If I don’t tell, then too…. It is better to tell it. Whenever it is a question of doing something or not doing something, it is better to do it.
In a small church, the priest was very much annoyed, disturbed, irritated by an old man who was the most respected member of the congregation. He was the richest man of the town; he had donated so much to the church, and he was always donating to all kinds charities. Of course, he was sitting in front every Sunday, and even before the priest would start speaking he would start dozing away. And if he was only sleeping while the priest was speaking, it would not have been such a big problem. The real problem was, the moment he went to sleep he would start snoring so loudly – and the church was so small and the congregation was so small, there was no loudspeaker even.
And he was snoring just in front of the priest.
But the old man used to come with a young child, his grandson. The priest thought of an idea. After the service was over, he took the little boy aside, and told him, “I will give you half a dollar per Sunday if you go on keeping your old man awake. All that you have to do is, the moment he snores you push him and wake him up.”
He said, “Done – in advance?”
The priest said, “You are as smart as your old man – in advance.”
The little boy said, “In advance – I don’t believe in people. You give me half a dollar and you see: next Sunday I will not let him sleep or snore.”
The next Sunday was really a beautiful day because the boy did not allow his grandfather to sleep or to snore. But the old man was very angry with the boy. After the sermon he said, “What happened to you? Why did you go on waking me up? – you disturbed my whole day. In fact, this is the only time when I sleep, and sleep well. In the night I don’t have that good a sleep – so many thoughts and so many problems…. And here, listening to that idiot – the same sermon, the same monotonous voice – it gives me such a good sleep. I have tried all medicines and nothing works like him.
“What happened to you? You have always been sitting silently, but today you went on poking me and waking me up.”
His grandson said, “Business is business.”
The old man asked, “What business?”
He said, “The priest has given me half a dollar in advance and today I am going to take another half dollar for the next one, because I believe in payment in advance.”
The old man said, “Don’t be worried: I will give you one dollar, and I will give it in advance.” The boy took one dollar from the old man and the old man said, “You just sit silently as you used to sit before and don’t disturb me. It is not costly; this good sleep for one dollar I can afford.”
The priest was very puzzled. The next Sunday, many times he looked at the boy and even indicated to him to do something, but the boy simply said, No, and the old man went on snoring. He really snored better than ever because one Sunday he had missed – just compensation.
After the service, the priest called the boy and said, “You are a cheat. You took the advance payment but still you were sitting silently; and that old man went on snoring and disturbing my sermon and everybody else. Nobody could listen because of his snoring.”
The boy said, “Business is business.”
The priest said, “What business?”
He said, “The old man has given me one dollar in advance, and he is going to give me one dollar per Sunday. If you are interested, then the rate will be higher now.”
The priest said, “I am a poor priest, I cannot compete with that old man, because how much can I give to you? He will always be giving more. It is better I should talk to the old man.”
He went to the old man and he said, “This boy is cheating us both. It is better to be clear about it: you are disturbing my sermon.”
The old man said, “Your sermon is just meaningless – you are disturbing my sleep. Which is more costly? – your sermon or my sleep. I wait seven days for your sermon in church on Sunday mornings. This makes me refreshed. And you are trying to sabotage it through my own grandchild. And as far as I am concerned, I am going to sleep.”
The priest said, “You can sleep, we have no objection; in fact many other people sleep also. But they have also objected, not to your sleep but your snoring because that wakes them up. And you have such a great snore.”
The old man said, “I can’t help it, because when I am asleep what can I do about snoring? If I am awake I can stop it, but when I am awake it doesn’t happen – it happens only when I am asleep. But you can’t expect an asleep man to do something about snoring. I am helpless. So please continue as we have continued before.”
I am also helpless. I know perfectly well that many things are being left out, but there is no other way. This is the problem of language. Language is linear, and existence is multidimensional. If I were only a thinker I would not be drifting at all because thinking is linear, just like language. Thinking is in language, in words. So the words move in a row – it can be miles long but it is linear.
But existence is multidimensional. From each point…as if it is a sun with millions of rays moving toward infinity. Each ray can lead you to infinity, but if you choose one, of course you have to leave others; and you can choose only one. You cannot even ride on two horses, what to say about two dimensions? You cannot ride on two boats, what to say about two dimensions? – because they are going to diverge more and more, more and more; as you go further, there will be an infinite unbridgeable gap between them. At the source they are one. From there you can choose any one, but once you have chosen a line then others are dropped.
I have been drifting my whole life. You have to be alert. And if you can remind me that somewhere I have drifted, I can catch hold of a dimension that has been left behind. But you should not expect that I will stop drifting, because in catching hold of the other dimension, again I will be leaving many more.
On each step there is a problem of choosing, because I am an existential person, I am not a thinker. It is not a logical syllogism that I am propounding to you. It is my experience that I am trying to share with you – and experience is so vast that I can only show you a little part of it. But you are always welcome to remind me. Yes, I remember I had drifted on many points; perhaps a few I can manage to catch back again.
One was religion – religion at the lowest level of mankind, the instinctive level. All primitive tribes, aboriginals, are still living under that first kind of religion, which theologians call “magic.”
It believes that if you sacrifice to a god, if you do a certain ritual, a certain dance, a certain prayer, then the god is satisfied with you and reward will be coming. For example, when it is not raining – these are the problems of primitive people – when it is not raining, what will the primitive tribe do? It will arrange a ritual, perhaps a sacrifice of a living human being – their god is very bloodthirsty. Or, if the tribe has evolved a little, then instead of a man it will choose an animal. If the tribe has evolved a little more then it will choose not even an animal, not even a man, but something similar.
Now, for example, in India they break a coconut. The coconut is very similar to the skull of a man. It has a little beard, a mustache, two eyes, a little nose. In fact, in Hindi the skull is called khopri and the narial ‘a coconut’ is called khopra. The similarity is so much that both have the same name. Breaking a skull was the ritual originally, but now it would be criminal. They have found a good substitute, a coconut, but the idea is the same.
They think whatever makes them feel pleasure also makes their god feel pleasure in the same way. A naked, beautiful girl will be placed before the god, all kinds of foods will be prepared and placed before the god, and they will go into a mad dance: it is a way of pleasing the god.
God is displeased, that’s why rains are not coming. If he is pleased, rains will be coming – and rains, sooner or later, do come; then their ritual is proved valid, the rains have come. Once in a while it happens that rains don’t come at all. Then the god is really very badly displeased and needs more sacrifice, more ritual.
This is the lowest kind of religion – call it magic-religion – the belief that just by chanting a few words, doing a few actions, you can change the course of existence. It is simply stupid. Existence has no need of your sacrifices, existence has no need of your dances – and nothing reaches to existence. But the instinctive man, the primitive man, cannot do more than that. That is the limit of his understanding.
That primitive man has not died completely, even in so-called civilized people. You also think in the same logic. You don’t sacrifice somebody, but even civilized people, cultured, educated people, when they are in a difficulty, immediately their primitive man comes up. Your wife is sick and the doctors say, “All that we could do, we have done. Now only a miracle can save her.” Even the doctor is becoming primitive.
He is telling you, “Only a miracle, only something magical…. Medicine has failed, science had failed; whatever we could do, we have done. Now if she is saved it will be through the grace of God or the grace of a saint, so now you go to the temple, to the mosque, to the synagogue, to the church, or go to some priest or go to some sage.” The doctor has fallen into primitive religion.
And the man, of course, is absolutely willing to go anywhere, to do anything, because he wants to save his wife. This is not the time for him to think over philosophical matters – whether it is right or wrong, whether it is primitive or civilized, whether it is stupid or intelligent. This is not the time. He runs! He had never been to a saint but now he goes and falls at his feet and prays, “Save my wife!”
The primitive man is still within you because the unconscious is still within you. The primitive man disappears only with the disappearance of the unconscious. When your unconscious and conscious become one, your whole mind becomes consciousness; then there is no way to fall back to the primitive man. Otherwise, nine times more than the civilized man is the primitive man inside you. Any time your conscious mind starts failing, your intellect starts failing, you fall into the mumbo-jumbo of the primitive.
Religion of the intellect – the second category, the higher category – is pseudo-religion. Christianity, Judaism, Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism, Mohammedanism – these are all products of the intellect. They are not magico-religious. They have theologies: they have thought about existence, its creation, why it has been created; how one can get out of this wheel of life and birth. They have been thinking about it, pondering over it for thousands of years, and each religion has developed a theology.
The word theology means logic about God. It is a contradiction in terms. God is not a logical proposition: you cannot prove it by logic, you cannot disprove it by logic. Logic is utterly irrelevant to God. But pseudo-religions cannot do more than that, they can only think about. And they have great imagination to portray God. Their scriptures say God created man in his own image. The reality is just the reverse: man creates God in his own image. That’s why there are so many gods – because there are so many men, so many races, so many different faces – eyes, nose…so many different kinds.
You cannot think of a Negro inventing a white god. You may not have thought about why your devil looks like a Negro, why your devil is black. The Negro’s god will be black; and of course the devil has to be pure white. And the white man has proved devilish enough. The Negroes have not only an argument in favor of it, but history also, giving all the evidences of what the white man has done to the colored people of the world. It must have been the greatest evil that has happened in history.
How can a Chinese think of God in any other way than as a Chinese? When Marco Polo went to China, he was the first Western man to reach China. China was under the great empire of Kublai Khan, son of Genghis Khan. Perhaps Kublai was one of the greatest emperors in the world because he ruled over all China, middle Asia, the Far East.
When Marco Polo reached China, he wanted an audience. Kublai Khan was a man of great intelligence. His prime minister said, “A man who looks like a monkey wants to see you. It will be absolutely unprecedented – no emperor has ever given audience to a monkey.” A white man looked like a monkey to them.
Kublai Khan said, “No need to be worried. If he can speak he cannot be absolutely a monkey; there is something human. You bring him in.” And he became interested in Marco Polo. Marco Polo was a very intelligent young man, and he became very intimate with Kublai Khan. When he came back to Europe he reported to the pope, “In China they worship a different God, who looks like a Chinese, and they think of us Europeans as monkeys.”
To us they look a little strange. They have a very little beard – a few hairs, you can count them – flat noses, very outstanding cheekbones. You cannot think of a more ugly face – but they think that is beauty. A man or a woman who does not have those outstanding cheekbones will find it hard to get married; so would a man with a nose that is typical of the Aryan races: Indians, Germans, English, French, Scandinavians, Dutch, Russians…. These are all one race, and to them a pointed nose, a long nose, is thought to be beautiful. But in China that is ugly; and they cannot make their God ugly.
Marco Polo said, “This makes me think that perhaps we are all imagining about God. Nobody knows how he looks.”
The pope was very angry and he said, “You must be imagining things. You are creating a fiction so that you can be thought of as a great explorer of a new land. I cannot believe that anything bigger than Christianity exists anywhere.”
Marco Polo said, “Buddhism is far bigger; it has millions of monks, thousands of temples and monasteries. Beside it your Christianity is nothing.” But he was alone. What proof did he have? He had brought a few things which were taken away from him and burned to destroy the evidence.
This is the pseudo-religious mind. The pseudo-religious mind believes in its own imagination, in its own thinking, and is afraid of anything that goes against it or is even a little different from it. Otherwise, religions would not have been fighting for thousands of years.
This is something strange: all religions teach love, and all religions end in hatred. All religions teach the brotherhood of man, but they only create enemies of each other.
All religions teach that every man has a potential right to reach God, but practically they say: Only our religion is the true religion. Yes, every man can reach God but he has to reach through our way: Unless you follow Jesus Christ you have no chance. But the same is said by Krishna: “If you surrender to me, leaving everything aside, I will take care of you, you need not worry.” And the same is true about all other religions. They seem to be competing shopkeepers – everybody is trying to sell his thing: his holy book, his messiah, his god.
Pseudo-religion is always basically afraid, because deep down the pseudo-religious person knows that it is only his imagination, he has no actual experience. He himself is not convinced; hence, he needs to convince others. He goes on sending missionaries to other countries to convince, convert more and more people into Christianity, into Mohammedanism. Why? Why this great urge to convert? Psychologically it is of tremendous importance to understand.
The person who wants to convert anybody is a person who is suspicious of his truth. He is really trying, by converting people, to convince himself that he is right. If he can convert so many people that gives him enough support: “So many people cannot be fools. I may be a fool but so many people cannot be fools. Such intelligent people…and they have come to believe in my belief My belief is bound to be true.”
Christianity seems to be the most bogus of all religions because it is more interested in converting people than any other religion. In fact, Judaism and Hinduism, which are the two ancientmost religions, are not interested in converting anybody. You have to understand the psychology of it.
Why are Jews not interested in sending missionaries and converting people to Judaism? A Jew is born, not converted. Have you seen any converted Jew anywhere? It is simply absurd. Jews will not take anybody through conversion. If God has not made you a Jew then there is no other way; they are the chosen people of God. By converting all kinds of rubbish, can you improve upon God’s choice? If God has not made you a Jew that means that you are not meant to be a Jew; you are already rejected. So for thousands of years they have never thought about converting people into Jews.
The Hindus have the same idea – that they are the only people to whom God has chosen to give the first holy book in the world. Certainly their Rig Veda is the ancientmost scripture in the world and certainly it is the scripture of the most ancient religion. They have four castes: the brahmin, the priest; the kshatriya, the warrior; the vaishya, the business man; and the sudra, the untouchable. Now, it was a problem: how could they convert anybody? And in which caste were they going to put him?
Hinduism is not one piece, it is four castes. The brahmin is the highest. You cannot convert anybody into a brahmin. He represents God, hence the name. The name of God in India is Brahma, and brahmin means one chosen by Brahma, appointed by God himself. There is no way for anybody to become a brahmin. It is decided by birth, because birth is decided by God, it is not in man’s hands to decide such things.
Now, the kshatriya also will not allow anybody in. He is the second most important, and it is a traditional thing for him to be a warrior; just anybody – X, Y, Z – cannot be a warrior. It needs a long tradition, training. You have to have the blood of a warrior, you cannot be converted.
The only people who can absorb you are the untouchables. The business people are the third, but they are higher than the untouchables. Only the untouchables can absorb you, but without the permission of the brahmin they cannot do anything. Conversion – such a religious phenomenon – is beyond their capacity. They are outcasts themselves.
Hindus and Jews are born so. That’s why both these religions are the most egoistic. Naturally, other religions have to rely on conversions, otherwise from where are they going to get their customers, their clients? God has made Jews, God has made Hindus; now the whole world is divided into two chosen people of God. From where is Jesus going to get his people? From where is Buddha going to get his people? They had to depend on conversion. From where is Mohammed going to get Mohammedans?
These are latecomers. The old shops have credibility; they are already established, and established by God himself. These others are newcomers in the market. Naturally they have to attract clients from the old shops; otherwise no customer is going to come to them. And they have to create new allurements, cheaper prices, better reward. And you can see that….
The god of the Jews is a very tough guy. But the god of Christians is pure love. You don’t know…it is such a simple mathematics: the god of the Jews can be a tough guy, but Jesus has to convert people, so he has to create a better image of God, more polished, more refined, more humane, so he can make the Jewish god outdated.
Whom is he going to convert? Rich people certainly are not going to be converted because they are already established, respectable, on the highest level of the society. They are not going to follow a vagabond. They are not going to become a laughingstock – for what? Hence all those beatitudes of Jesus: “Blessed are the poor for they shall inherit the kingdom of God…” because you can only get hold of the poor. The poor are already angry, jealous of the rich, and here comes a man who says, “My God is love. And my God allows only poor people in heaven; rich people have no place there.”
This is simple business tactics – nothing profound in it. But nobody has bothered to watch how new religions have tried to pull customers from the old shops to their own shop. They are all in favor of the poor. Strange – Jews don’t have a single statement in which the rich are condemned and the poor are raised high just because of their poverty. Jews have not a single statement in which poverty is something sacred; Hindus also don’t.
The rich man, according to Hinduism, is rich because he has been religious, virtuous, in his past lives. It is a reward from God. And the poor man is poor because he has been evil, unreligious, in his past lives. He has been punished for it. Poverty is a punishment, richness is a reward. Hindus or Jews, who are established already – why should they bother about the poor and the downtrodden? But Buddha, Jesus, Mahavira, Mohammed – their whole interest is in the poor, the downtrodden.
It is a simple thing: these are the people who can be converted, these are the people who are vulnerable. They have nothing to lose and everything to gain. For example, if a sudra becomes a follower of Buddha, immediately he is no longer untouchable. If a sudra becomes a Christian he is no longer untouchable. This is a very strange world.
I had a friend who was the principal of a theological college in Jabalpur, Principal Mackwan. I was saying this thing to him – “Why are you Christians interested only in the poor?”
He said, “Please come to my house” – I was sitting in his office. He said, “My house is just behind the college; come to my house; I want to show you something.”
He showed me an old man and woman’s picture. They were certainly beggars, in rags, dirty; you could even see it in their faces – so hungry. You could see that all their lives they had suffered; it was written in the lines on their forehead. He said, “Can you recognize who these are?”
I said, “How can I recognize them? – I have never seen these people, but they look like beggars.”
He said, “They were beggars. He is my father, she is my mother. And not only were they beggars, they were sudras, untouchables. They became converted, in their old age, to Christianity because they were so old, tired of begging; and now they were concerned about their children – particularly this boy who is now principal of Leonard Theological College. What would happen to him if they died? He would also become a beggar.”
Because they were sick they entered a Christian hospital, because no other hospital will take poor people and give them free medicine, food, care, doctors. So they entered, they had to enter, a Christian hospital. And there the whole methodology is: with the medicine to go on giving as much of The Bible as possible; with each injection a little Bible. With food, the doctor talks about it, the nurse talks about it; the priest comes every day to inquire about their health, how they are.
For the first time they felt that they were human beings. Nobody had ever asked them about their health. They were treated like dogs, not like human beings. And had they remained Hindus they would have died like dogs, dying on the street corner. You don’t know, because that is not the way in the West. In the West, dogs have a better death, a better life, because any dog who is not owned by somebody is to be killed. The dog has to be owned by somebody, a collar proclaiming the ownership. But in the East you cannot kill anybody. There may be a dog spreading sickness and disease, but you cannot kill it – killing is sin.
It happened…. I am drifting – just remember!
In Lucknow there is a temple of Hanuman, the monkey god. Strangely enough that temple is surrounded by big trees, and all the trees are full of monkeys – you will never see so many monkeys together. Perhaps it is for the simple reason that whatsoever is offered to the monkey god those monkeys eat, so by and by they have become permanent residents there. And the temple has such fame that people come to it from far and wide, from faraway places because it is thought that whatever you wish there it will be fulfilled. So they wish something and they take the oath before the monkey god that: “If our wish is fulfilled then we are going to bring fifty-one rupees worth of sweets” – or anything they want to bring, or whatsoever they can afford.
So every day so much food is being offered – and it is not anything to do with the monkey god. If a hundred people come to ask, at least one-third of them – just by simple arithmetical rules – one-third of them are going to get their wishes fulfilled. Even if they had not come they would not have been losers, but now they believe that the wish has been fulfilled because of the monkey god. The two-thirds whose wishes have not been fulfilled have moved to some other temple – naturally, because this monkey god does not seem to be kind toward them.
You cannot ask any reason or anything, but it is sure that your wish is not fulfilled, so you move to some other temple. And there are hundreds of temples in India with wish-fulfilling trees. You just go and ask…and you just have to give a small bribe. But the one-third of the people whose wishes have been fulfilled…. And what kind of wishes people make: “That my son passes in his matriculation examination; or “That my son gets the job he has applied for”; or “That my daughter gets a husband because I don’t have much money to give”; or “My wife is sick, please make her healthy again”…just simple, mundane, human trivia.
They are not asking for some miracles, “That when I pass through the ocean it should separate like it did for Moses.” Then they would know whether the monkey god can do anything or not. But that your son passes his matriculation…and thousands of people are passing matriculation without the help of the monkey god. In fact the monkey god was not a matriculate himself! And even if he does the examination, he is not going to pass; you cannot hope he will pass.
But these people feel that their wishes are fulfilled so they bring…. So monkeys have slowly gathered – the whole road, on both sides, is full of monkeys. And for a strange reason, monkeys and dogs are all against uniforms. Perhaps in their past lives they have been revolutionaries: any kind of uniform – postmen in India have a uniform, the policeman has a uniform, the army, the sannyasins…. Anybody in a uniform, and dogs and, monkeys are against them.
Perhaps seeing so many people in different clothes different styles, and then suddenly seeing somebody in uniform, they feel a danger: “This man does not look like a man, something is wrong somewhere”…and they are on the attack. It is not the discovery of Machiavelli that attack is the best way to defend, that if you want to defend yourself, then attack. Don’t wait for the other party to attack, because then you will be already late in defending. Don’t give them that chance.
So monkeys and dogs attack uniformed people. It is simply my feeling that they are afraid; these people look a little strange, not just like other human beings. Millions of human beings are there, and they are not attacking them. And they don’t attack these people either if they are not in uniform; they attack the uniform. The uniform gives them some idea that something is fishy about this man.
So it started at the temple that the monkeys began to attack policemen, postmen, army people…and the monkeys were in thousands. Perhaps somebody had triggered their anger; nobody knows how it started, because they have been there for hundreds of years, many generations. The temple is very ancient and they had never done this, but just ten years ago, one day suddenly a riot broke out between monkeys and all uniformed people.
It became very dangerous because so many monkeys…even one monkey is enough for you to freak out, but when many monkeys, hundreds, are just roaming on the road…. The road was blocked, nobody was passing on the road. It was a main road, so Lucknow was divided into two parts; the monkeys wouldn’t allow anybody to cross.
It became a question in the assembly of the state of Uttar Pradesh – Lucknow is the capital – that “these monkeys have to be shot. They have disturbed the peace of the capital. People cannot go to the other side, people cannot come to this side. Offices are closed because many people live on that side; many offices are on that side and people live on this side. Somebody who had gone to that side for some work had been detained, he could not come back here. Something has to be done immediately.”
One man stood up and he said, “If a single monkey is shot then there is going to be great bloodshed, be cause the monkey is a Hindu god: you are shooting a Hindu god. It will not be tolerated.” He was a Hindu chauvinist belonging to a Hindu chauvinist party. And although the whole parliament was privately in favor of their being shot – what else could be done? – the resolution had to fail because they knew that what this man was saying was going to happen. Immediately there would be a massacre.
And that’s what they want: all politicians want some trouble somewhere, because only then are they needed. If everything goes right, if there is no news, nothing is going wrong, the politicians start feeling lost.
I have not been in India for four years now. Now the journalists are missing me. Strange people! – they were all against me; when I was there, they were all against me. They were writing against me, not even bothering whether it was true or untrue; ninety percent of it was absolutely untrue. They were writing it but it was news, sellable news. Now they are missing me because the news that they were making around me they cannot make any longer, and there is nobody to replace me.
Journalists, politicians – these types of people are in search of some spot which can become dangerous, some man who can prove dangerous, some situation which can become a problem. Then they will all try to make it a problem as quickly as possible.
The resolution could not pass; for almost two weeks the road remained blocked. Monkeys don’t have long memories; they must have forgotten and they cooled down slowly slowly. First the devotees started coming with sweets and offering the sweet to the monkey god, and then the traffic started again….
But you cannot kill. You cannot kill dogs; killing is not allowed. But these religions have been killing each other. They cannot kill a dog, they cannot kill a monkey, but they can kill a man. That is very strange. I have been asking Hindus, Mohammedans, “You cannot kill animals but you can kill men without any problem, as if man has no life?” No, the thing is business. Man can be converted to be a Mohammedan – a dog cannot be. Dogs are beyond the reach of your preachers and missionaries.
Professor Mackwan told me, “This is my father and mother. They would have died like dogs and the municipal truck would have thrown them out of the city with all the garbage that it carries every day, because there is nobody to carry a beggar to the funeral pyre. Who bothers about a beggar? Beggars are not men, not human beings.”
And then he took me to another picture of his daughter and his son-in-law. I was looking at three generations: the father and mother, almost below human beings; Mackwan, who has gained status and is now in a very respectable post, highly salaried. Now brahmins come and shake hands with him, not knowing at all that he is the son of two beggars who were sudras. I know his daughter, one of the most beautiful women I have seen; she is married to an American.
Looking at the three generations…such a change. You cannot connect the daughter with the grandmother and how can you connect the son-in-law with her grandfather? There seems to be no bridge. The son-in-law is a well-known scholar, professor – six months teaching in India, six months teaching in America. Saroj, the daughter herself is a professor. They are all well-educated; the son is a principal. They have moved in a completely different direction by being converted to Christianity. I could not object. I said, “Your father and mother did well.”
Hindus and Jews are established. Christians, Mohammedans, Buddhists are not established. They try to convert people; but in their conversion, deep down what is going on? The established religion has a past to support, thousands of years of past, which means millions of people have been on the path; you are not alone. But when you follow Jesus you know only that this guy has got these fantastic ideas. Who knows? – you are following a fool or really a son of God? He can be either this or that; there is no third alternative. Either he is a perfect idiot….
In fact Fyodor Dostoevsky has written a book, The Idiot; that is the title of his book. But the idiot, the character, is almost Jesus-like: very innocent, simple, who has never done any harm to anybody. In fact, he is better than Jesus. But Dostoevsky has titled the book The Idiot.
Jesus needs converted people. He himself may be feeling shaky about what he is saying and about whether it is true or not. In fact, why did he want Jews to accept him, his messiah-hood? Why was he so insistent that they had to crucify him? He must have nagged them, tortured them with the idea. They must have got so fed up that they decided, “This man won’t leave us in peace – he has to be crucified, otherwise he will go on torturing us.”
And he was getting more and more fanatic. He started calling the great temple of the Jews, “my Father’s house,” and “…I have come to clean my Father’s house.” And he really wanted to clean it of all the priests and all the rabbis: What is the need of all these people when the only begotten son is there? He
I had become a nuisance. He must have been thinking in some silent moment, “Perhaps I am just mad. I have not been able to convince a single rabbi.”
In fact, I have never tried to convert anybody, but there are a few rabbi sannyasins. That is strange! And not ordinary rabbis, famous rabbis. And I have not been in any way trying to convert anybody because I don’t have any doubt. Why should I bother about converting anybody? I don’t have to convince myself that I am right. I am!
If not even a single person is with me, I will be as right as I am now. My rightness does not grow with the growing number of people around me does not increase with the increasing number of people around me. My rightness is from my experience.
Jesus seems to be worried, and all Christians have carried his sickness in their minds. They are all worried. I cannot think that the pope really believes that he represents God, it is impossible – unless you are mad, then everything is possible.
Pseudo-religions are continually trying to convert people or they are so ancient that the question of conversion had never arisen. They are the beginners; from the very beginning they caught hold of the customers. Because of this idea of converting people there are constant fights, crusades, jihads, holy wars.
And pseudo-religions go on creating more and more theology; nobody reads it. I have never seen in my life anybody reading a theological book. I have visited hundreds of libraries but I have never seen anybody, in any library, reading a theological book. I have looked into university libraries and government libraries and asked the librarians one question, “I would like to know whether any book from the theological section is taken out by people?”
They said, “You are the first person to inquire about it. The theological section? – nobody bothers. People are interested only in novels. Who is going to bore himself with a theological book?” One took me to the theological section. That was the only section where you could see that all the books were untouched by human hands, so clean.
Hundreds of theologians continually creating more and more books…. For what? – because the basic questions have not been answered yet. They go on improving upon the books, but whatsoever they do, the fundamental questions remain at the same place, because intellect has no answer for them.
A simple thing has not occurred to them, that if in five or ten thousand years of theological thinking you have not been able to demolish a single question, now it is time to stop: perhaps you are not moving in the right direction.
Religion in the second stage of consciousness, of the conscious mind, intellect, is theology. I call it pseudo-religion – just words about truth, God, love, but no experience to support it.
When religion reaches the third, the highest peak, then only is it religiousness.
So the first I call magico-religious
The second I call pseudo-religion.
And the third I call religiousness.
Then it is a quality, then it has no adjective to it.
Then it has no tradition.
Then it has no scripture, then it has no theology.
Then the origin is not in the past.
And paradise is not in the future.
Then both are within you.
Then you have a fresh experience, and that experience will express itself in lovingness, friendliness, compassion.
This religion will not bother about God:
Its concern will be compassion.
This religiousness will not bother about heaven and hell.
Its concern will be how to share its blissfulness.
This religion is not interested at all in converting you to believe certain dogmas; its only interest is to say to you, “I have found it. If you are interested, I can share my experience. There is no condition that you, have to accept it, there is no condition that you have to believe me. It is simply my joy to share it with you. Then it is for your consideration whether you want to do something with it or not. Either way I am happy and grateful that you allowed me to share something so intimate.”
A religious man, functioning from the highest point of consciousness intuition is just like the fragrance of a flower.
There is no question of your being converted. Even if nobody passes by the side of the rose, the fragrance will still be spreading around, moving…somewhere, somebody may get it. And even if nobody gets it, it doesn’t matter; it is simply natural for the flower to explode into fragrance.
I was explaining to you how happiness appears. At the instinct level it was pleasure, I told you yesterday. At the intellect level it was joy. But I drifted and forgot the last – what happens at the level of the intuition. There, happiness is blissfulness.
Pleasure is momentary, very momentary. In a split second it is gone. It only leaves a memory. You never catch hold of it when it is there – it comes so quickly, and goes so quickly, and you are not that swift.
I have seen a painting – but just keep reminding me…. It was one of the most beautiful paintings, but very strange. It was the painting of a man whose hair had grown all over his face, and his skull was completely bald, with no hair. I thought, “This seems to be a strange painting.”
I inquired about the painter, who was present at the exhibition. He came and I asked him, “What kind of painting is this?”
He said, “This is a painting of time.” I said, “That makes sense.”
He said, “But will you please tell me what sense it makes to you, because I have made it but it makes no sense to me. The idea just came to me and I made it, but I don’t have any…. If somebody asks what it means I simply say, ‘It is time,’ and people just stop asking and move on. You are the only one who says it makes sense.”
I said, “Yes, it makes sense because time you can catch only when it has not come, from the front. By the time it has passed behind you it is a clean-shaven head; you cannot catch hold of it. It is just gone.”
He said, “This is great! Can you someday spare time and come to my studio, because there are many paintings which I don’t know the meaning of. Perhaps you can make some sense of them – because now this makes sense: You can catch hold of time before it, comes.” But how can you really catch it before it comes? It has not come, you cannot catch it. And when it is gone it is just a skull, so clean-shaven there is nothing to catch; your hand just slips.
That’s what pleasure is. You are waiting and waiting and waiting…and it is gone! You were just waiting, and now it is a memory. Pleasure is momentary, very momentary. Joy is much profounder, much deeper. You can enjoy a beautiful song for years. And each time you can go on stepping deeper into yourself.
One song I have with me, sung by some Nirmala Devi. All my life, around India, I have been inquiring about the woman because I want her other songs too. But I have not been able to find who the woman is, where she disappeared. And I have no memory either of who sent me this tape. People go on sending me tapes; whenever I have time, I listen. This song remained with me in Pune for seven years but I never listened to it. I had never heard of the name, so whenever I came across the name and the tape I simply put it away; someday I would…. Nirmala Devi – nobody had ever heard the name.
Here, one day, I thought, “The woman has waited too long, and perhaps she has something. There is no harm – let me listen.” Her singing is something tremendously beautiful. Since then I have not missed a single day of listening to it. And each time I listen there is something more to it, a new layer, a new meaning – not only in the words but in the voice, its subtle nuances.
The song is simple but profound, immensely profound. She is singing a song which means, “Just let me get ready….” She is talking to death. It is understood, it is not said in the song, but she is saying to death, “Just wait a little. Let me sing my last song.”
This very idea, to say to death, “Just wait a little, and let me sing my last song…. I have lived in sadness and sorrow so long. Let me dance a little before I join you. I have been crying and weeping; my whole sari is soaked with my tears. Just wait a little. Let me at least dry my sari, let me at least regain, remember, recall my smile. Just a little…so that I can get ready. I would not like to go with you in this sad miserable condition. I would like to go with you dancing, smiling, singing.” A simple song, but her voice, the ups and downs of her voice, the beautiful turnings of her voice give it so much beauty, color and depth.
Happiness at the second level is joy. Pleasure you cannot share with anybody. It is something so tiny, so fleeting, so small, there is no question of sharing; but joy you can share. At the third level, happiness becomes bliss. Joy you have to share; blissfulness you need not share – it simply surrounds you. Whoever is courageous enough to come close to you will have it.
Bliss is not something that you have to do anything about; it is already there around you, it is your milieu.
The blissful person – you can call him the awakened, the enlightened, you can give any name…the blissful person is simply showering his bliss continuously.
Whoever is thirsty can drink of it.
It is not a question of his making an effort to share:
He is blissfulness itself.
Just be with him in close intimacy, and you will have the taste of it, the silence of it, the beauty of it.
And one thing finally you have to remember:
The highest always contains the lower.
The highest is not against the lower. It is all-comprehensive.
What you have known in pleasure, you will know in bliss – but, ancient scriptures say, one thousandfold. I cannot say that, because that sounds as if the difference is only of quantity. The difference is of quality. But whoever has written that, that bliss is one thousandfold the pleasure of sexual orgasm, was trying. He failed in what he was saying, but he was trying just to give an idea of what you are missing. No, it is not even ten thousandfold, or one hundred thousandfold. It is simply so different…but the flavor of pleasure is there, contained in it. The higher always contains the lower; the lower cannot contain the higher
Just draw a small circle – that is pleasure. Draw a bigger circle around it – that is joy. Draw another, bigger circle around it – that is bliss. It contains joy, it contains pleasure, and much more, which is inexpressible but not inexperienceable.
I may not be able to say it to you, but I can pour it into you; you just have to allow me.
All depends on your vulnerability, defenselessness. All depends on your love, trust, courage to open your heart.
You all have been brought up in such a way that you have become defensive, continually defensive…always afraid somebody is going to cheat you, somebody is going to kill you, somebody is going to mistreat you, humiliate you. And in a way you are right, because this is what has been happening to everybody in society. You have to be always on guard.
But if you meet a master, then don’t be on your guard. That is the secret of being with a master.
Don’t be on your guard. Let the guard go on a long, long leave! Unguarded, open, defenseless…And it is going to happen. Nobody can prevent it.

============================================================

Osho,
Would you like to throw some light on politics, according to the three different levels of consciousness?
The world of politics is basically of the instinctive level. It belongs to the law of the jungle: Might is right. And the people who get interested in politics are the most mediocre. Politics needs no other qualifications except one – that is, a deep feeling of inferiority.
Politics can be reduced almost into a mathematical maxim:
Politics means will-to-power.
Friedrich Nietzsche has even written a book, Will To Power. It is very significant because will-to-power expresses itself in many ways. So you have to understand by politics not only the politics that is known by the name: wherever somebody is trying a power number, it is politics. It does not matter whether it relates to the state, the government, and matters like that….
To me, the word politics is much more comprehensive than is generally understood. Man has been trying throughout history a political strategy over women – that she is lower than him. And he has convinced the woman herself. And there were reasons that the woman was helpless and had to concede to this ugly idea which is absolutely absurd. The woman is neither inferior to man, nor is she superior. They are two different categories of humanity – they cannot be compared. The very comparison is idiotic, and if you start comparing then you will be in trouble.
Why has woman been proclaimed inferior by man all over the world? – because this was the only way to keep her in bondage, to make a slave out of her.
It was easier. If she were equal then there would be trouble; she should be conditioned to the idea that she is inferior. And the reasons given are: she has less muscular strength; her height is less; she has not produced any philosophy, any theology; she has not founded any religion; there have not been significant women artists, musicians, painters. That shows that she has not enough intelligence, she is not an intellectual, she is not concerned with higher problems of life; her concern, is very limited: she is only a housewife.
Now, choosing to compare this way, you can easily convince the woman that she is inferior. But this is a. very cunning way. There are other things also to be ~; compared. A woman can give birth to a child, a man L cannot. He is certainly inferior; he cannot become a mother. Nature has not given him that much responsibility, knowing that he is inferior. The responsibility goes to the superior. Nature has not given him a womb. In fact, his function in giving birth to a child is nothing more than that of an injection – a very momentary use.
The mother has to carry the child for nine months and take all the trouble of carrying the child. It is not an easy job. And then to give birth to the child…that is almost as if one is passing through death. Then she is involved in bringing up the child for years together – and in the past she was continually giving birth to children. What time have you left her to become a great musician, a poetess, a painter – have you given her any time? She was constantly either pregnant or taking care of the children to whom she has given birth. She was taking care of the house so that you were able to contemplate on higher things.
Just for one day, for twenty-four hours, change your work: Let her contemplate, create poetry or music; and for twenty-four hours you take care of the children, of the kitchen, of the house. And then you will know who is superior. Just twenty-four hours will be enough to prove to you that to take care of so many children is just to be in a madhouse.
They are not so innocent as they look. They are as naughty as you can conceive, and they are doing all kinds of mischief They will not leave you for a single moment; they want attention continuously – perhaps that is a natural need. Attention is food.
And just one day of cooking the food for the family and the guests, you will know that in twenty-four hours you have experienced hell. And you will forget that idea that you are superior, because in twenty-four hours you will not think even for a single split second about theology, philosophy, religion.
Think of it in other ways; the woman has less muscular power, because for millions of years she has not been given the work that creates muscles. I have been to aboriginals in India where the woman is muscular and the man is not. So it is not something natural, it is something historical. But for so long women have not been given muscular work that their bodies, by and by, naturally have lost the capacity for muscular development.
But in these aboriginal tribes the man is almost a housewife, and the wife is really the husband because she goes to work. She chops wood, she hunts for food; and the man simply sits, drinks alcohol, bums around, takes care of the children and the house. And for centuries he has been doing that; naturally, he has shrunk, he has lost his muscles. Strangely enough, with the muscular power gone his height has also dropped; the woman is taller.
When I first entered such an aboriginal tribe, I could not believe my eyes. I had never thought that this was something historical, that it had nothing to do with nature. And why has man in those aboriginal tribes chosen this way? That too is cunning – because those tribes allow you to have as many wives as you want. This is a beautiful thing. A man marries five or six wives and then he just relaxes, drinks, and the women have to work.
The women have been working at all kinds of things that man is supposed to do. Naturally, they have become stronger. And you will be surprised to know that it is the woman who plays on the musical instruments, who dances, who tries to make beautiful artifacts, sculpture. Anything beautiful that is done is done by the woman. She spins and weaves the clothes with beautiful designs.
The man has done nothing; for millions of years he has been uncreative in those tribes. He has just lived the life of a drunkard, and because he is so often drunk he cannot even take care of the children or prepare food. So when the wives return they have to prepare the food too and take care of the children, collect them from wherever they are – because the husband is flat on the ground. And he can afford to be flat on the ground because he has married…the only great thing he has done – he has married six or seven wives. Now, what more do you expect of him? He has done his job.
The society of these aboriginal tribes is matriarchal because the chiefs of the society are women. They have a committee to decide about problems concerning their lives. It is not the men who have the decisive power.
You have to think from other angles too. The woman has more resistance – power than man. Now that is a medically – established fact. Women fall sick less than men; they live longer than men, five years longer. It is a very stupid society where we have decided that the husband should be four or five years older than the wife – just to prove that the husband is more experienced, elderly, to keep his superiority intact. But it is not medically right because the woman is going to live five years longer. If you think medically, then the husband should be five years younger than the wife so that they can die at the same time, almost at the same time.
On the one hand the husband has to be four or five years older, and on the other hand the woman is not allowed to marry again, in almost all cultures and societies. It is a new development that she is being allowed; and that too only in very developed countries. You don’t allow her to marry so she is going to live at least ten years of widowhood. This is medically unsound – just the arithmetic is not right. Why enforce ten years of widowhood on a poor woman?
The best way would have been that the wife should be five years older and the man should be five years younger. That would have settled the whole matter. They would be dying almost simultaneously, at the same time. There would be no need for widowers and widows, and the problems that arise out of that.
Now if you think that a woman lives five years longer than a man, then who is superior? If she falls sick less, has more resistance, then who is superior? Women commit suicide fifty percent less than man. The same ratio is true of madness: fifty percent less women become mad than men. Now, these facts have never been considered. Why?
Why does man have to commit suicide at double the rate of women? It seems to be that he has no patience with life. He is too impatient and is too desirous, expectant; and when things don’t go his way then he wants to finish himself. He gets frustrated very soon. That shows a weakness: he hasn’t the courage to face the problems of life. Suicide is a cowardly step. It is escaping from problems, it is not solving them.
The woman has more problems – her problems and the problems that her man creates for her. She has double the problems, and still she manages to face them courageously. And you go on saying that she is weaker. Why do twice as many men as women go mad? That simply shows that his intellect is not made of strong materials – he pops off anytime.
But why has it been insisted continually that the woman is inferior?
It is politics. It is a power game.
If you cannot become the president of a country – it is not easy because there is so much competition. You cannot become a messiah because it is not so easy; the moment you think of becoming a messiah, crucifixion comes to the eye.
Just the other day I saw an advertisement from some Christian mission for new recruits, with Jesus hanging on the cross; and the advertisement says: “You need guts to be a priest.” Great advertisement! But that means except for Jesus…what about all other Christian priests? They are not priests, that advertisement is proof enough. So there has been only one priest.
All these popes, and cardinals, and bishops what are these? These are not priests…because when Jesus proclaimed his ideas, the cross was the answer. And when these popes go around the world…red carpets, warm, overwhelming welcomes from presidents of the countries, prime ministers of the countries, kings and queens – this is strange. You should not misbehave with popes and bishops – yes, it is misbehavior; you are proclaiming that he is not a priest. Crucify him! – that will be the only certificate that he was a genuine Christian. Crucify as many priests as you can. It is not my idea, it is their idea. They publish the advertisement that “you need guts,” with a picture of Jesus on the cross.
It is so simple to be a politician. One need not be concerned only with government, the state and connected affairs. Any power trip makes you a politician. The husband trying to be superior to the wife – it is politics. The wife trying to be superior to the husband…because the wife simply cannot accept the idea…. Even though for millions of years she has been conditioned, she finds ways to sabotage it.
That’s the whole reason why the wife goes on nagging, throws tantrums, starts crying over any small matter, makes a fuss over anything – things that you could not even have imagined would create a fuss. Why does all this happen? This is her feminine way to sabotage your political strategy: “You think you are superior? Go on thinking you are superior, and I will show you who is superior.” And every husband knows who is superior; still he goes on trying to be superior. At least outside the house he straightens up, makes his I tie right, smiles and goes on as if everything is good.
In a small school, the teacher was asking the students, “Can you tell me the name of the animal who goes out of the house like a lion and comes back like a mouse?”
A small child raised his hand. The teacher said, “Yes, what is your answer?”
He said, “My father.”
Children are very observant. They go on looking at what is happening. The father goes out almost like a lion, and when he comes home he is just a mouse. Every husband is henpecked. There is no other category of husbands. But why? Why has this ugly situation arisen? There is a male form of politics, there is a female form of politics – but both are trying to be on top of each other.
In every other area, for example in university…the lecturer wants to be the reader, the reader wants to be the professor, the professor wants to be the dean, the dean wants to be the vice-chancellor – a constant struggle for power. At least one would think it should not be so in education. But nobody is interested in education, everybody is interested in power.
In religion it is the same: the bishop wants to be the cardinal, the cardinal wants to be the pope. Everybody is on a ladder trying to climb higher, and others are pulling his legs downward. Those who are higher are trying to push him so that he cannot rise up to their level. And the same is being done to those who are on a lower rung of the ladder: some are pulling their legs; others are kicking and hitting them to keep them down, as low as possible. The whole ladder, if you see it just as an observer, is a circus. And this is happening all around, everywhere.
So to me politics means an effort to prove yourself superior. But why? – because you feel, deep down, inferior. And the man of instinct is bound to feel inferior – he is inferior. It is not an inferiority complex; it is a fact, a reality – he is inferior. To live the life of instinct is to live at the lowest possible level of life.
If you understand the struggle, the fight for being superior, and you drop out of the fight – you simply say, “I am myself, neither superior nor inferior….” If you just stand by the side and watch the whole show, you have entered into the second world – the world of intelligence and consciousness.
It is only a question of understanding the whole rotten situation in which everybody is caught. You have just to give a little patient observation to the whole situation: “What is happening?…And even if I reach to the highest rung of the ladder, what is the point?” You are just hung up in the sky looking like a fool. There is nowhere else to go.
Of course, you cannot come down because people will start joking about you: “Where are you going? “What happened? Are you defeated?” You cannot come down and you cannot go anywhere else because there is no step higher, so you are hung up in the sky pretending – smiling a Jimmy Carter smile – that you have arrived, that you have found the goal of life. And you know that you have not found anything. You have been simply a fool and your whole life is wasted. Now there is no way to go up; and if you go down then everybody is going to laugh.
So anybody who becomes a president of a country or a prime minister of a country – his only prayer is that he should die at his post…. Because lower you cannot go – that is very insulting, humiliating; higher, there is no way. You are stuck; only death can release you from the dilemma.
One of the chief ministers of Madhya Pradesh was very intimate with me. I was very young, but he loved me and he liked to discuss things with me. I told him many times, “You should discuss with people who are capable of understanding politics. I don’t know politics.”
He said, “That’s why I discuss with you – because I cannot say these things to anybody else. I can only say them to you because you will not tell them to anybody – in fact, you won’t be able to figure out what the problem is. But just talking to you I feel relieved.”
I said, “Okay, if you feel relieved I am ready to listen.” And this was the basic problem coming up again and again: “The only thing I hope is to die as chief minister. I don’t want to die in retirement.”
I asked him, “But what is the joy of dying remaining at your post? You can relax, you can retire – you are old enough.”
He said, “Never suggest that, because if I am without power then it is going to be a humiliation. The moment you lose power, everybody forgets you. I want to die with all the honors of a chief minister; with honors from the army, the government, the police – all the honors that are appropriate.”
He was the first chief minister of Madhya Pradesh, and he remained clinging to the very last. He died still the chief minister, and he was very happy.
Just one day before he died I went to see him, and I asked, “How are you feeling?”
He said, “I am feeling very good because it seems the time has come and I am still at my post.”
It seems sad. This man for his whole life struggled! to become chief minister. He was just a schoolmaster. It was a long way from being a high-school teacher to pass all the politicians – and all of them great, cunning, clever, trying in every possible way to prevent him – but he was determined, and finally he managed.
But he lost his whole life just to receive a great celebration, with a military parade and twenty-one guns, and a seven-day holiday all over that state. And all the flags were down for seven days in his honor. But what is the point? The man was dead! Whether you throw him in a municipal truck or you do all this, it makes no sense. Just for this army honor he lived and died.
If you watch you will be simply surprised; it must be something crazy in man’s mind that gives him continuous energy to go on rising higher and higher. I know for certain that the man who first reached the top of Everest was not the man that is known to the whole world. The real man who reached first the world will never know because he was just a servant: Tensing, a Nepalese, a poor man.
He reached first…because it was a very unsafe place. Hundreds of people had died within a hundred years just trying to reach the top of Everest. Of course the man who was arranging and investing money in it would not take the risk of being first because Everest is just a peak. Only one man can stand there, and that too, not for long, because the wind is so strong and the height is such that if you step one step this way or that way, you are gone, miles down. You will never be found again – nor what happened to you.
But the poor servant tried first, and when he found that it was safe, then he came back. Then the great explorer, and the “first” man to reach the top of Everest, Hillary, stood there ready to pose for a picture. And he put up the flags of Britain, India, and Nepal, because all three countries were concerned. So three flags he left there, but he was there not more than ten minutes; to be there longer was dangerous.
But the poor man who had really reached first, history will never know. And of course Hillary gave him enough money to keep his mouth shut. He opened a great institute, and made Tensing the principal of the institute for training people to climb mountains, mountaineering, the art of mountaineering. But such things cannot be hidden – because it was not only Tensing, there were at least fifty other servants also carrying every kind of instrument, tents, food, clothes. They all saw who had reached first. They all had been bribed, but when fifty persons see such a thing it is very unexpected if the rumor does not spread.
I have met one of the persons who was part of the team, and he said, “This is a truth – but we are poor people, and we are just servants.” He said, “It is just like when two armies fight and soldiers kill each other: one party wins, one is defeated, but the name of the victor is always the commander who never really fights, who remains far behind the soldiers, keeping enough distance so that in any dangerous situation he will be the first to move away from the dangerous spot. But when victory comes then he gets medals and everything. But this is how the world goes.” He said, “We are poor people and we have no complaint because he has given us enough money.”
Man is continuously trying in every possible way to be somebody higher, special, superior – but this is all politics. And according to me only the mediocre people are interested. The intelligent people have something more important to do. Intelligence cannot waste itself in struggling with third class, ugly politics, dirty politics. Only the third class people become presidents, prime ministers. An intelligent person is not going to be distracted by such a desert which leads nowhere, not even to an oasis.
So on the instinctive level politics is just, Might is right – the law of the jungle. Adolf Hitler, Joseph Stalin, Mussolini, Bonaparte, Alexander, Tamerlane – all these people are more like wild wolves than human beings.
If we want a real humanity in the world we should cross out these people’s names completely. We should forget that these people have existed; they were just night mares. But strangely, the whole of history is full of all these people.
I went to the history class in my college for only one day. When I had gone to fill in the form, the principal asked, “What subjects do you want to study? Four subjects you can choose.”
I said, “I will fill in the form, I will sign it and I deposit the fee, but I would like a little taste of all the professors who are teaching – because to me, the teacher is more important than what he is teaching. And moreover I have to be acquainted a little bit with what kind of subjects these people are teaching.”
He said, “This is a very unprecedented thing. This is something that you have to fill in first, only then can you enter the college.”
I said, “You will have to make an exception, otherwise I am ready to appear before the committee who I runs the college, to let me convince them. How can I choose subjects which I don’t know? and I don’t want much – just a little sample here and there of all subjects. I want just two weeks’ time: I will move around the whole college, and in all the subjects – I will have a little taste of the subjects, of the students, of the teacher, and then I will fill in the forms.”
He said, “Okay, but you had better keep quiet. Don’t say anything to anybody, because I think you would convince the committee.”
I said, “Obviously, because even if a person goes into the market to purchase an ordinary earthen pot, he goes to a few shops, knocks and feels.” In India at that time it was only one or two paisa for a beautiful earthen pot, but still you checked whether it had a hole or not. If it has a hole it makes a certain sound; if there is any crack, it has a different sound. and if it is really perfect then it gives a musical sound. “Even for a two-paisa earthen pot, people move around the whole market – and I am going to decide about four years of my life. You want me to fill in the forms without knowing what I am doing?”
The principal said, “Okay, I will keep it in my file. For two weeks go around, but don’t create any trouble, because if I am caught with this form then I will be in trouble.”
I said, “Don’t be worried.”
The first class I attended was history, because just accidentally that was the first classroom I came to as I entered the building. So I said, “Okay, this is good: start with history.” The lecturer was giving a general introduction, and all the people he was talking about were these idiots: Nadirshah, Tamerlane, Genghis Khan, Babur, Humayun, Aurangzeb – all the invaders of India.
I asked him, “Are you teaching us or are you simply reminding us that we are born to be slaves? Are you teaching us history or are you simply reminding us that we have been slaves for thousands of years and we are always going to be slaves – because a country so big has been conquered by small armies, barbarous, uncivilized.”
I said to him, “If you have any sense of dignity please stop all this nonsense. Can’t you find something that gives dignity to man, that makes him feel that the past has not been just idiotic and stupid, that there is something in the past which makes him feel that he inherits something of beauty, of grandeur, and makes him hopeful about the future?”
He said, “Have you come here to change the whole syllabus of history?”
I said, “Totally, because only then can I study here. I have come just to check whether it is worthwhile wasting time, because all these nightmares…. What have I to do with Nadirshah? And why should I want to know about him? There is something far more beautiful. Can’t you talk about Buddha, Bodhidharma Nagarjuna, Shankara, Parshvanatha, Mahavira, Vasubandhu? Can’t you talk about these people?”
He said, “My God! I have never heard these names! Vasubandhu? I am a doctorate, a degree-holder in history, but Vasubandhu? – I have never heard the name.”
I said, “Then you come down and sit here, and I will teach something about Vasubandhu. And this is not the only name that you don’t know. I will tell you a few other names that you don’t know either. Do you know Dharmakirti? Do you know Chandrakirti?”
He said, “No. Are you inventing these names?”
I said, “I am not inventing them – these are the real people. But they are not even in your footnotes because they never killed anybody, they never invaded any country, they never made any empire, they never massacred people, they never slaughtered people, they never raped women, they never burned people alive.
What is history? Just cuttings from newspapers of ancient times. If you go and help somebody, no newspaper is going to publish the story; you go and kill somebody and all the newspapers are full of it. And what is your history about except these people who have been a nuisance, who have left wounds on human consciousness? This you call history?”
I said, “If this is history then it is not for me, because I have a different dimension of history. What you are teaching is really the history of politics. You should change the name of your subject. This is not history, it is political history. And what I am talking to you about is the history of human intelligence and ultimately the history of human enlightenment.”
He was simply in shock. He just told the class, “Now I am not in a position to say anything. First I have to see the principal about this boy.”
I said, “There is no need to see the principal – I have seen him. He knows what I am doing. And I am not going to come again so you need not be worried; you go on teaching about all these idiots. You have only this garbage in your mind. It is very strange that the real flowers of intelligence are not even mentioned.”
It was so difficult for me to find out about these people. I had been looking in so many libraries, trying to find out something more about these people who; are really the creators; they have put the foundations. But we know only one kind of world, the world where might is right.
No, on the second level, right is might. Intelligence believes in finding what is right.
There is no need to wrestle with swords or bombs and kill each other, because might does not prove anything right. Do you think that Muhammad Ali boxing with Gautam Buddha…of course he will be the winner – in the first round. There will not be a second round, the first hit will be enough; poor Buddha will be flattened! And seeing the situation he himself will start counting: one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten. He will not wait for the referee to count. And he will not move from the ground; Lying flat on the ground he will count up to ten. And he will say, “It is finished – you are the winner.”
But might does not prove right. It is perfectly okay in the world of animals and in the world of instinct. Intelligence reverses the whole role: Right is might – and right has to be decided by intelligence, by logic, by reason, by argument.
That’s what Socrates was doing in the court. He was ready to answer any question that the juries and the judges wanted. He asked, “What are my crimes? Just start telling me them one by one – I am ready to answer.” They knew that it was impossible to argue with this man; but vague crimes – they thought perhaps Socrates could not answer about these. And even if he did the jurors were not going to be convinced, because it would go against their whole conditioning. The first thing they said was, “The greatest crime that you have been committing is that you are corrupting the minds of the youth.”
Socrates said, “That’s true, but it is not a crime. And what you call corruption I call creation. You have corrupted those peoples’ minds; now I have to destroy that corruption. And if you are right then why don’t you open a school, an academy, just as I have my school and academy? To whomever is right, people will be coming there.”
Since Socrates had opened his school all the schools of Athens were closed, because when a man like Socrates is teaching, who can compete? In fact, all the teachers who had been running schools became students of Socrates. He was a real master.
Socrates said, “You present before me a single young man who is being corrupted by me…. And what do you mean by corruption?”
They said, “You teach that there is no God or gods.”
He said, “Yes – because there is no God, no gods. What can I do about it? It is not my responsibility. If God does not exist, are you corrupting the mind of youth or am I corrupting the mind of youth? I am simply telling the truth. Do you think truth can corrupt the minds of the youth?” The debate continued for days. Finally the judges decided that “As far as intelligence is concerned he has shut the mouth of you all” a single man alone against the whole mediocre society of Athens – “so we should not argue any more; we will simply ask for a vote.”
Socrates said, “Voting cannot prove what is right and what is wrong. In fact, the greater possibility is that the people will vote for that which is wrong, because the majority consists of mediocre people.”
Socrates was trying to establish that right should be decided by intelligence. That’s what finally created the whole evolution of science. Socrates should be known as the father of all science, because in science it is not a question of: “You are powerful, that’s why you are right.” The question is: anybody can prove right; howsoever powerful you are does not matter. The question has to be decided by logic, by reason – in the lab, with experiments and experience. So on the second level of consciousness politics is a totally different matter.
India has been for two thousand years in slavery – for many reasons, but one of the reasons and the most fundamental reason is that all India’s intelligent people turned their back on politics of the lowest, the third class, the instinctive level. All intelligent people were, simply not interested in politics or power. Their whole interest was to decide what is true, what is the meaning of life. Why are we here?
At the time of Gautam Buddha, perhaps around the whole world, the second level of consciousness came to its highest peak. In China, Confucius, Lao Tzu, Mencius, Chuang Tzu, Lieh Tzu – these were the people, contemporaries. In India, Gautam Buddha, Mahavira, Makkhali Gosal, Ajit Keshkambal, Sanjay Vilethiputta – they were overpowering, giants. In Greece, Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Plotinus, Heraclitus, Pythagoras – they touched the very peak of intelligence. All over the world, suddenly it was as if a tidal wave of intelligence came. Only idiots remained fighting; all the intelligent people were deep into finding ways how to decide what is right and what is wrong.
In India it was a tradition for every philosopher to travel all over India, challenging others. Challenge was not inimical – you have to understand that. On the second level there is no enmity, both challengers are seekers. It is a friendly phenomenon, it is not a fight; they both want the truth to win. Neither of them is trying to win over the other. That is not the question at all.
When Shankara began his discussion with Mandan Mishra, he touched his feet and asked his blessing, that truth wins. Now, to touch the feet of your enemy – what does it show? There is no question of conquering the person; he is old and respected all over the country. Shankara is just a young man, thirty years old; Mandan Mishra is of his grandfather’s age. Shankara touches Mandan Mishra’s feet, because it is not a question of defeating him; and he asks for a blessing, not so he should be the winner, but that the truth should win. And truth is nobody’s property.
That was happening all over the country. And such great intellectuals were born that even today we cannot find that quality, that sharpness – for the simple reason that all the intellectuals have moved toward science. Philosophy is deserted. At that time, all those people were in the world of philosophy.
But you have to remember, it is a fight but no longer a personal quarrel – not a desire to prove oneself superior, but an inquiry to find the truth. The whole emphasis has changed: the victory of the true…. The famous dictum in Indian history of philosophy – is: Satyameva jayate – ‘Truth should win, no matter who defeated.’ It is not arising out of an inferiority complex but it is coming out of a really superior intelligence.
The tradition went to China, to Japan, and it spread to other fields also. That is why if you see two Japanese boxers or aikido fighters or jujitsu or judo fighters, you will be surprised – first they bow down to each other with tremendous respect. There is no question of enmity.
This is one of the teachings of judo and all martial arts in Japan, that when you are fighting with somebody it is not a question of personal enmity. If it is personal you are already ready to be defeated because it is based in ego – you are falling to the lower level.
In the art of judo, whosoever proves the art of judo superior is the winner, not the person; it is the art that wins. Just as in philosophy it is the truth that wins is now the art that wins. Not even for a single moment should you remember yourself and your victory because that will be the moment of your defeat.
And it has happened many times – which nobody else can understand except one who has understood whole tradition of the Eastern way. Sometimes there are two equally non-egoistic fighters; then nobody wins. The fight continues for days, the end goes being postponed, but nobody wins. Every day they come and they bow down to each other – with great joy, with great respect. In fact they are honored by the person because he is not an ordinary person; just to fight with him is honor enough.
And the fight continues. Finally the judges have to say “Nobody can win. Because both are equally egoless – nobody can find the way to defeat the other.” Ego is the loophole. Ego is a kind of sleep in which you can be defeated. Just for a moment a thought can come in, and that’s the end of you. The art of judo, jujitsu, aikido – they are all similar, with only little differences, subtleties, but the basic foundation is one. And the basic foundation is that when you are fighting, you should not be there but utterly absent; then no sword can cut you. And if you see two swordsmen fighting, you will simply amazed….
One of my friends – he became my friend after he came from Japan – was caught in the second world war. He was in the British army, a colonel. He was a Sikh, a Sardar; Chanchal Singh was his name. He was caught by the Japanese as a war prisoner. And then one of the Indian revolutionaries, Subhash Chandra, went through Adolf Hitler to Germany, and then to Japan; and with Adolf Hitler’s recommendation Japan allowed all the Indian war prisoners to be trained by Subhash to fight against the British army.
The Japanese thought this a good idea; otherwise they were unnecessarily a burden. Subhash was fighting for the freedom of their country so he was easily able to convince the Indian prisoners. For them too it was good. In the first place, who would not like to fight for one’s own country? Secondly, it was better than being a prisoner. There was a chance to escape too!
Subhash trained them in all martial arts. After the war, when the prisoners were released, Chanchal Singh came back. I was simply sitting in a hotel with a friend discussing about the freedom of the country and I was telling the friend, “Just throwing out the British kingdom does not automatically mean freedom. Freedom is a positive concept. You can throw away the Britishers but if your mind remains the mind of a slave then anybody who rules – he may be Indian, but you will not be free.
“Yes, rulers will change: white skin gone, black skin comes in its place; but do you think by the change the color of the skin, slavery can become freedom? Freedom needs some positive change and transformation of mind. If you have the mind of a slave, you will be a slave; whoever is on the throne makes no difference.”
And I still hold to that argument because forty years have passed and India is still a slave, more than ever. At least when it was under the British Raj there was a possibility to throw the responsibility on the Britishers, that they were responsible. Now they don’t even have that excuse.
Just the other day, information came to me about something which can happen only in a country whose mind has become so accustomed to slavery that whatever you do it cannot accept itself as free. The information was that a truckload of all the secret files of the Indian government was caught crossing the country border going into another country – all the secret files! The driver was Indian, the conductor was Indian, and the truck belonged to a very big industrialist. And this industrialist…when the truck was caught, this industrialist was caught; then more, almost a dozen people have been caught, and it was found that perhaps this was the last truck of many. It is wondered whether India has been left with any secrets.
This has never happened in history. All the secrets were being sold by – Indians! No agents from other countries were doing it; they were being contacted by Indians – the slavery and its mind! – and asked, “Do you want the secret file about the nuclear plant that India is making?” And a plant worth fifty million was sold for fifty dollars! – the whole secret file, the whole plan, the place, everything.
A French private detective was purchasing all information. He had no purpose against India, but if such secrets are being given so cheaply they are worth collecting; any moment you can earn millions. If India goes to war with China, then China will be ready to pay anything for these secrets. If Pakistan goes to war against India, Pakistan will be ready to pay anything: Whatever you ask, you will get.
The most miraculous thing is that Russia tries to send spies into America, and America sends spies into India…. Then too it is not an easy job to find secrets. And the French agent gave the news to the media that “in the afternoon something was decided by Indira Gandhi and by the evening it was in my hands – just within three, four hours at the most. Any secret that was discussed in Indira’s cabinet was in my hands within three hours.”
So it is not only some industrialist and some other people, but even the cabinet ministers, the topmost…because a few secrets were discussed only with the three topmost cabinet ministers and the president. Only four persons knew about them, yet they were being sold in the open market everywhere. So who betraying? And what kind of people are these? Slavery has become part of their blood. They need a complete change and transfusion of new blood. They need a new mind.
I was discussing this slavery with some friend and this Sardar was also listening; while drinking tea, he was listening. Finally he could not resist the temptation and he came over and said, “Can I sit here? – because the discussion is really interesting. If you allow me to sit down – and let me introduce myself to you, because I have been a freedom fighter. I have been in Japanese jails and British jails – first I was a major in the British army – and I have just been released; because the British government has left the country, all the prisoners have been released. And I am searching for some job, some work, because I don’t know anything except fighting. But I do know Japanese martial art. Perhaps you can help me; I could open a class for students of martial arts.” And he became a friend.
We managed to open a school for him, and he was really deeply involved in it. And he used to show us small things once in a while just as an entertainment. He said, “In Japan they have a certain training for the voice. If somebody attacks you with a sword and you don’t have any arms, you just make a certain sound and he sword will fall from his hand.”
I said, “It seems to be really something! I have a wrestler-friend,” I said; “he does not know about swords, but with a staff…. And it is good because if you miss or something goes wrong then he will cut off your head. I will unnecessarily be in trouble – you will be gone but I will be in trouble unnecessarily, so it is better to try with a big staff.”
And I used to know a wrestler too. So I found the wrestler I used to know and told him about this thing. He said, “There is no problem. I will split open that Sardar’s head into two parts; just one hit, and that’s enough.” He was a strong man, and when he went to hit Chanchal Singh – just as he raised his hand to hit Chanchal Singh gave a shout, and the staff dropped from the wrestler’s hand as if his heart had stopped beating! Whatever happened, his hand lost all its power – just the sound!
I said, “How do you make that sound? – because it is nothing special; it can be learned very easily.”
Chanchal Singh said, “The sound can be learned very easily; the thing behind it is that you should not be there. That is the most difficult thing. I have been in Japan for all these years: everything is simple, only that is the trouble – that you should not be there. And at a time when somebody is going to make two parts of your skull, at such a time you are absolutely needed there!”
Even at such a time you are not to be there – only the sound with no ego behind it. Suddenly the man will forget what he is doing; he will be completely at a loss. Even his memory for a moment has slipped. He is not aware of what is happening, of what he is doing, of what he was doing. It will take a little time for him to recover. Just your ego has to be absent. That absence creates a certain change in the mind of the person, certain kind of break, a sudden break.
But if both persons are egoless then it is very difficult. Then a strange thing is known to happen in Japan, an everyday thing: before you take up your sword to hit the other man, the other man’s sword is already ready to defend. It is not taken up after your move, no, but before you have even thought of the move. It is as if in that split second when you think of the move, before your hand makes the move, the thought has reached him and the man is ready to defend.
That too happens only if you are absent. Then the sword is not separate from you. You are not doing anything; you are simply there, absent, allowing things to happen. But if both are egoless then it can go on for days. Nobody can hit, even scratch, the other person.
This is not the ordinary, instinctive level. You have moved to a higher level, even higher than the second you have moved to the third level, the intuitive. Just as it can happen with swords or boxing or Eastern – style wrestling, the same can happen with intelligence on the third plane.
One of my professors I have told you about.. I have loved only two professors in my whole career. I have troubled many, and I have not left even these two alone, but I loved them. About one, Doctor S.K. Saxena, I have said something to you. The other was Professor S.S. Roy. He had written his doctoral thesis on Shankara and Bradley – a comparative study. He presented the first copy of it to me. I said, “This does not look good: I am your student and you are presenting me with the first copy of your thesis, as it came from the press.”
He said, “In my opinion, you deserve it.”
I said, “But in my opinion your whole thesis is…even the title is wrong because you are comparing two men of two different levels. Bradley is an intellectual, a great intellectual…. He dominated, in the beginning part of this century, the whole world of philosophy. He was the topmost intellectual. Shankara is not an intellectual at all.
“Of course they both come to similar conclusions, that’s why you have compared them; you see the conclusions are similar. But you don’t see that they come to similar conclusions from different routes. And that my objection to it – because Bradley simply comes to those conclusions through logic while Shankara comes to those conclusions through experience.
“Shankara is not just arguing about them as a philosopher. He argues as a philosopher too, but that is secondary. He has experienced a truth. Now, to express that truth he uses logic, reason, intellect. Bradley has no experience, and he accepts that, that he has no experience, but intellectually he finds these conclusions the most tenable, the most valid.”
So I told Professor Roy, “If you ask me, you have compared two totally different persons who are not comparable.”
He said, “That’s why I have given you my first book. I know that if anybody will even think about it, go deeply into it, it is you. I will present this book to the vice-chancellor, to the head of the department and all my friends, but I don’t even hope that anybody else is going to object just seeing the title.”
I said, “You should go through it again because I will be reading it, and there are going to be a hundred and one questions. So you go through it again. You may have completely forgotten…. You have been working on the thesis for five or six years.”
And there were other points, but the basic point was continually, again and again, coming up. It is possible to come to a conclusion just logically, and it may be right, may not be right; you cannot be certain about its rightness. But to Shankara it is not a question a whether it may be right, or may not be right: it is right. Even if you prove logically that he is wrong, he will no move from his position. Bradley will; if you can prove to him that he is wrong he will move. I simply gave Professor Roy one example that I remembered.
Bradley says that the universe, the existence – he calls it “the absolute”…. Shankara calls it “Brahma,” but the definition is the same – the absolute. I drew, circle and asked S.S. Roy, “If this circle is perfect the there is no possibility of any development, evolution any progress. Perfection does not allow any change. I existence is absolute, perfect, then it is dead. If you want it to be alive, then keep it open, don’t close the circle; let it grow, move, evolve.
“I don’t agree with Bradley because he will not be able even to answer a simple argument such as: ‘Is your universe dead or alive?’ Of course he cannot accept that it is dead. If it is dead, then I am dead, Bradley is dead, everything is dead. Who is arguing? – and for what? There should be complete silence – everything dead. He cannot concede that. But if he accepts that is living then certainly he will have to accept that it not absolute yet, and it will never be absolute, ever.
“My conclusion is that it is always coming closer and closer to the absolute but is never going to become absolute. It will be always coming, coming, coming, but never arriving at the absolute: it will remain alive.
“Bradley will have to change his idea. And you being a disciple of Bradley” – and Professor Roy was philosophically a disciple of Bradley – “you have to accept this on behalf of Bradley, otherwise I am ready…. Tell me, How can you save the idea of an alive universe with a ‘perfect, absolute’ idea?”
He said, “That’s true, I have never thought about it; Bradley cannot be defended.”
But I said, “Shankara is also saying that God, Brahma, truth, is absolute. He cannot defend his argument either because the argument is the same. But the difference is that Bradley will have to change his standpoint and Shankara will simply laugh and say, ‘You are right. My expression was wrong and I knew that somebody who knows will find out that the expression is wrong. You are absolutely right, my expression is wrong.’ But Shankara will not concede that he is wrong. His position is that of experience, it is intuitive.”
There is no fight at all at the intuitive level. The politician on the instinct level is just a wild animal. He does not believe in anything except being victorious. Whatever means are needed to be victorious, he will use. The end justifies all his means, howsoever ugly they are.
Adolf Hitler says in his autobiography, “Means don’t matter; what matters is the end. If you succeed, whatever you have done is right; if you fail, whatever you have done is wrong. You lie, but if you succeed it will become truth. Do anything, just keep in mind that success must be at the end; then success, retroactively makes everything right. And defeat…you may go on doing everything right, but defeat will prove everything wrong.”
On the second level there is a struggle, but now the struggle is human; it is of intellect. Yes, there is still a certain struggle to prove that what you are holding to is true, but the truth is more important than you: If you are defeated in favor of greater truth you will be happy, not unhappy. When Shankara defeated Mandan Mishra, Mandan Mishra immediately stood up, touched the feet of Shankara and asked to be initiated.
There is no question of fight. It is a human, far superior world of intelligence. But still somewhere in the name of truth a little politics is lurking behind. Otherwise, what is the need even to challenge this man? If you know the truth, enjoy it! What is the point of going around the whole country defeating people? If you know the truth, people will come to you.
There is some very subtle politics in it. You can call it philosophical – religious politics but it is still politics – very refined.
Only on the third level, when intuition starts functioning, is there no fight at all. Buddha never went to anybody to conquer them, Mahavira never went to anybody to conquer them, Lao Tzu never went to anybody to conquer them. People came; whosoever was thirsty came to them. They were not even interested in those who came to challenge them for an intellectual discussion.
Many came – Sariputta came, Moggalayan came, Mahakashyapa came. All these people were great philosophers with thousands of disciples and they came to challenge Buddha. His simple process throughout his whole life was: “If you know, I am happy. You can think you are victorious, but do you know? I know, and I don’t think that I have to challenge anybody…because there are only two types of people: those who know and those who don’t know. Those who don’t know – how can I challenge those poor fellows? It is out of the question. Those who know – how can I challenge those rich fellows? That is out of the question.”
He asked Sariputta, “If you know, I am happy; but do you know? And I am not challenging you, simply inquiring. Who are you? If you don’t know, then drop the idea of challenging me. Then just be here with me. Some day, in some right moment, it may happen – not through challenge, not though discussion, not even through expression.”
And people were really honest. Sariputta bowed down and said, “Please forgive me for challenging you. I don’t know. I am a skillful arguer and I have defeated many philosophers, but I can see you are not a philosopher. And now the time has come for me to surrender and to see from this new angle. What am I supposed to do?”
Buddha said, “You have just to be silent for two years.” That was a simple process for every challenger who came – and many came: “Two years’ complete silence and then you can ask any question.” And two years’ silence is enough, more than enough. After two years they have even forgotten their own names, they have forgotten all challenge, all idea of victory. They have tasted the man. They have tasted his truth.
So on the intuitive level there is no politics at all. In a better world the people of intuition will be the guide lights for those who can at least understand them intellectually. And the intellectual politicians – professors of politics, the intelligentsia, theoreticians – they will be the guide for the instinctive politicians. Only this way can the world be at ease, live at ease.
The light should come from the highest level. It will have to be passed through the second category because only then may the third category be able to catch hold of something of it; the second category will function as a bridge. That’s how it was in ancient India – it happened once….
The really intuitive people lived in the forests or in the mountains, and the intellectuals, the professors, the pundits, the scholars, the prime ministers, used to come to them with their problems, because, they said, “We are blind – you have eyes.”
It happened to Buddha. He was holding his camp by the side of a river, and on both sides armies were standing. There were two kingdoms and the river was the boundary, and they had been fighting for generations over which kingdom the river belonged to, because the water was valuable. And they had not been able to decide – so many times they had made the river red with blood and the fight had continued. Buddha had his camp there and the generals of both the armies came to him. Just by chance, at the same time they entered his camp and saw each other. They were shocked at this strange coincidence, but now there was no way to go back.
Buddha said, “Don’t be worried; it is good that you have come both together. You both are blind, your predecessors have been blind. The river goes on flowing, and you go on killing people. Can’t you see a simple fact: you both need water, and the river is big enough.
“There is no need to possess the river – and who can be the possessor? – all the water is flowing into the ocean. Why can’t both of you use it? One side belongs to one kingdom, the other side belongs to the other kingdom – there is no problem. And there is no need even to draw a line in the middle of the river because lines cannot be drawn on water. And use the water; rather than fighting….”
It was so simple. And they understood that their fields and their crops were dying because they had no one for them. Fighting was first: who possesses the river? First water had to be possessed; only then could you water all your fields. But the stupid mind thinks only in terms of possession. The man of insight thinks of utility.
Buddha simply said, “Use it! And come to me again when you have used all the water. Then there will be a problem, then we will see. But come to me again only when you have used all the water.”
The water is still flowing after twenty-five centuries. How can you use all the water? It is a big river, thousands of miles long. It brings the water from the eternal snows of the Himalayas and takes it to the Sea of Bengal. How can you exhaust it? And those kingdoms were just small kingdoms. Even if they wanted to exhaust it, there was no way.
The insight should come from the intuitive person. But the insight can be only understood by the intelligent, and the intelligent can help the politician of instinct, for whom the only desire is power.
This I call meritocracy because the ultimate merit dominates and influences the lower rungs and helps them to rise above their level. It has no vested interest, and because it has no vested interest, it is free and its insight is clear. It will be difficult for the intuitive person to explain anything to the instinctive person because they are so far apart, belonging to two different dimensions without any bridge. In the middle, the intellectual can be of immense help.
The universities, the colleges, the schools should not only teach political science – it is such a stupid idea to teach political science! Teach political science but also teach political art, because science is of no use; you have to teach practical politics. And those professors in the universities should prepare politicians, give them certain qualities. Then the people who are ruling now all over the world will be nowhere at all. Then you will find rulers well-trained, cultured, knowing the art and the science of politics, and always ready to go to the professors, to the scholars. And slowly it may be possible that they can approach the highest level of meritocracy; the intuitive people.
If this is possible then we will have, for the first time, something that is really human – giving dignity to humanity, integrity to individuals.
For the first time you will have some real democracy in the world. What exists now as democracy is not democracy – it is mobocracy.

============================================================

Osho,
How can the idea of meritocracy be practically realized?
One thing is absolutely certain: The days of the politicians are over.
They have done too well their job of being destructive, violent.
They have come to a point where humanity has to decide either to die remaining with the politicians, to commit a global suicide, or to throw out the politicians and save humanity, civilization, culture, life.
Nothing is favorable to the politician; and as each day passes his death comes closer. He himself is responsible. He improved the weapons which can bring death to the whole world to such a point that there is no way of going back. Either there will be an ultimate war – which means death to all and everything – or a total change in the whole structure of human society. I am calling that change, meritocracy.
One thing – we have to drop the idea that every man, just because he is twenty-one, is capable of choosing who is the right person to decide the fate of nations. Age cannot be the decisive factor. We have to change the decisive factor; that is changing the very foundation.
My suggestion is that only a person who is at least a matriculate should be able to vote. His age does not matter. And as I explain to you the whole thing, it will become easier. For the local government, matriculation will be the qualification for the voters. And graduation from a university, at least a bachelor’s degree, should be a necessary qualification for anybody running for election, for the candidates. A master’s degree should be a minimum qualification for the one who is running for mayor.
For the state elections, graduation with a bachelor’s degree should be the minimum qualification for the voters. A master’s degree in science, the arts, commerce, should be the necessary degree for the candidates. For the ministers an MA first class should be the minimum necessary qualification; more will be, of course, more appreciated. And anybody trying to become a minister will have to know something about the subject. His qualification should correspond to the subject matter that he is going to deal with in his ministership.
For example, I have known, in India, in the central government, a health minister who knows nothing about health, who has not even the qualifications of a pharmacist, what to say about a doctor. He does not know even what first aid is. And he is the health minister! Now what is he going to do?
I have seen education ministers who have never been to university. Before they became education ministers they had never even seen a university campus. Yes, after becoming education minister they start giving convocation addresses to the universities. Universities start giving them degrees, honorary degrees, because actually they are not even matriculates. A few of them can only sign their signature, and a few of them even cannot do that; they have to make their signature by the mark of their thumb on the paper.
It happened; one man has recently became education minister in Madhya Pradesh; he is utterly uneducated, but rich, clever, cunning. And he was inaugurating the state yearly game competitions…. It goes on for at least one month; the whole state, all the colleges, schools, universities participate. It is a small, miniature Olympics. In his first address after becoming the minister, he said, “There are three kinds of games: football, volleyball and the Olympics.” He had no idea even that the Olympics is not a game. And I don’t think he had any idea what football is and what a volleyball is.
So if somebody is going to be an education minister, then his qualifications should make him capable of being an education minister. He should have at least a master’s degree in education, first class; with less than first class nobody should be a minister on the state level. Yes, if he has better degrees – doctor of education, PhD in education – that is good, that will make him more qualified.
The attorney general should have at least the degree doctorate in law, an LLD; not less than that, because he is going to defend the law of the state, the rights of the citizens. He should have the best degree possible so he knows everything about it.
The governor should have the best of all the degrees possible for him: MA first class, PhD – his subject for PhD should be on political science – and at least one honorary degree, a DLitt or LLD.
For the federal government, a master’s degree will be the voter’s minimum qualification. A first class master’s degree and PhD should be the minimum for the candidates running for election. And the ministers should all have the highest degrees in the subjects for which they are going to be ministers. If it is education then the highest degrees available in the country; if it is going to be health, then the highest degrees available in the country.
The president should have at least two PhDs and one honorary DLitt or LLD; and the same for the vice-president because he can become president any day.
In this way mobocracy is destroyed. Then just because you are twenty-one it does not mean you are capable of choosing the government. Choosing the government should be a very skillful, intelligent job. Just by being twenty-one you may be able to reproduce children – it needs no skill, even animals are doing perfectly well. It needs no education, biology sends you well prepared. But to choose the government, to choose people who are going to have all the powers over you and everybody and who are going to decide the destiny of the country and the world…the way we have been choosing them is simply idiotic.
Just the other day I got this information – and I congratulate Oxford University for it; perhaps this will be the only congratulations they will receive. In England, as in every country, there are conventions. Every prime minister in England conventionally gets an honorary doctorate from Oxford. This time – this is unprecedented in the whole history of England – Oxford university has decided not to give the degree to Margaret Thatcher. I congratulate them, because this is how every university in the whole world should act.
Of course the reason why they have stopped is not very great, but that is irrelevant. At least they have shown enough courage. And Margaret Thatcher will also be an historical person because no prime minister of England has gone without an honorary doctorate from Oxford. The reason they decided this was that she had cut the budget for Oxford university, particularly for research in literature. The reason is not very great, but still it is significant. A woman who thinks that literature does not deserve any research certainly does not deserve any doctorate from the university.
I would like all the universities of the world to think again; just don’t go on conventionally honoring stupid, idiotic politicians with doctorates. In this way you are simply insulting yourself. In this way you are degrading the status of education.
On the contrary, I would like all the universities – first of just one state – to call a convention of all the vice-chancellors and the eminent professors; of the eminent intelligentsia who may not be part of the university: painters, artists, poets, dancers, actors, musicians. It would include all kinds of people who have attained a certain eminence and have shown their caliber – excluding politicians completely.
All the Nobel prize-winners should be invited – excluding the politicians again, because within these past few years a few politicians have managed to get Nobel prizes, and this has degraded the value of the Nobel prize.
It has not added any value to the politician; he still remains in the gutter, and he will remain in the gutter because that’s where he belongs. He cannot live out of the gutter – he would die. And if you give him a Nobel prize he will drag the Nobel prize also into the gutter: of course wherever he lives he is going to take the Nobel prize, doctorates, and all kinds of degrees with him.
Every state should call a convention of all the intelligentsia who are part of the universities or not part of the universities – writers, novelists, all dimensions of talents – and they should choose a delegation for the national convention. So from all the states a national convention meets and goes into details of how the meritocracy can work.
From the national candidates there can be an international convention of all the universities of the world and the intelligentsia. This would be the first of its kind because never has the whole intelligentsia of the world come together to decide the fate of humanity.
They should write the first constitution of the world. It will not be American, it will not be Indian, it will not be Chinese – it is going to be simply the constitution of the whole of humanity. There is no need for different kinds of laws. There is no need all human beings need the same kind of laws.
And a world constitution will be a declaration that nations are no longer significant. They can exist as functional units but they are no longer independent powers. And if the whole intelligentsia of the world is behind this convention it will not be very difficult to convince the generals of the world to move away from the politicians.
And what power do politicians have? All the power that they have we have given to them. We can take it back. It is not their power, it is our power. We just have to find a way to take it back – because giving is very easy, taking is a little difficult. They will not be so simple and innocent when you take the power back as they were when they were asking it from you. It is our power, but they will go on having it if the mob remains there to give it to them; the mob can be convinced about anything.
It is the function of the intelligentsia…. I would like to say that now if anything happens to humanity, the whole condemnation will go to the intelligentsia: “What were you doing? If those idiots were ready to kill humanity, what were you doing? You could not even manage those idiots? You simply went on grumbling, being grumpy, but you did nothing else.”
And the time is running short. Once we decide that the voting power is not the birthright of every human being but is a right which you have to earn…. You have to see the distinction. It is not a birthright, it is a right that you have to earn by your intelligence. Everybody is given the opportunity to earn it, there is equal opportunity for all to earn it, but it is nothing birth – given; you have to prove it.
Once we move the power from the mob into the hands of the few intelligent people and the people who know what they are doing…. If a man who has devoted his whole life to thinking about education and its problems – has done all that was possible to do to find out every detail, every fundamental of education, all the possible philosophies of education – if he becomes an education minister, there is a possibility that he will do something. And at the same time, I want to shift completely from the mob to the chosen few.
I am not against the people. In fact, in the hands of these politicians, the people are against themselves. I am all for the people, and what I am saying can be said to be exactly what has been said about democracy: for the people, by the people, of the people – just “by the people” I will have to change. This intelligentsia will be for the people, of the people. It will be serving the masses.
It is so simple a thing. You don’t elect a doctor, that just anybody can stand, it is a birthright, and people can vote. Two persons fighting to be the doctor or to be the surgeon? What is wrong in it? The people choose for themselves: for the people, by the people, of the people. They choose one person, a surgeon, because he speaks better, he looks good on the television and he makes great promises.
But he is not even a butcher! – and he is going to become a surgeon. He is not even a butcher. Even a butcher would have been better; at least he would have known how to cut, and finish you. This man…but you don’t choose a surgeon by election.
How can you choose a president by election? How can you choose a governor by election? You are giving so much power to power – hungry people; with your own hands you are telling them to hang you! This is not democracy. In the name of democracy these people have been exploiting the masses.
Just to make a distinction I am calling my system meritocracy. But merit for what? The merit is to serve and share. And once you have decided to shift the power from the politicians to the intelligentsia, everything is possible – everything becomes simple.
Then I want every university to have two compulsory institutions, because that is the way I would like the people who are going to be powerful to be prepared.
Right now, up to now, for thousands of years you have never prepared anybody. If somebody is going to be a boxer you don’t just push him into the ring and say, “Start!” He has to learn. If somebody is going to be a swordsman, it will take him years. Otherwise he won’t even know how to hold the sword – using it and fighting with it will be impossible. First he will have to find out how to take it out from its sheath, how to hold it. It needs training. You don’t just give a guitar to somebody who has never seen the instrument before and expect him to be a Yehudi Menuhin or a Ravi Shankar.
Now this is your fault: these people who are in power, have you trained them? Has anybody ever thought that the people who will be holding so much power need some certain qualities so that they don’t misuse power? It is not their fault.
So I propose two institutes in every university. One institute is for deprogramming. Anybody who gets a graduation certificate will first have to get a clearance certificate from the deprogramming institute – which means it has deprogrammed you as a Christian, as a Hindu, as a Mohammedan, as a Jew…because this has been our trouble.
And four years is enough time. Deprogramming does not take that much time; just a few hours a month for four years and you will be deprogrammed. And you will not get any certificate from the educational institute unless you are cleared by the deprogramming institute that “this man is now simply a human being. He is no longer a Christian, no longer a Hindu, no longer a Mohammedan, no longer a Jew.”
The second institute will be an institute for meditation, because just deprogramming is not enough. Deprogramming takes rubbish from you, but you are left empty – and it is difficult to be empty; you will start gathering rubbish again. You cannot manage by yourself to learn how to live joyfully with your emptiness. That’s the whole art of meditation.
So on the one hand the deprogramming institute cleanses you, empties you, makes you a vacuum; and the meditation institute goes on helping you to enjoy your nothingness, your emptiness, your inner vacuum its cleanliness, its freshness. And as you start enjoying it you start feeling that it is not empty at all, it is full of joy. It looked empty at first because you were accustomed to having so much rubbish in it, and that rubbish has been removed so you say it looks empty.
It is just like a room full of furniture: you have always seen it full of furniture; then one day you come and all the furniture is removed and you say, “The room looks empty.” The room is not empty, the room is simply clean. The room is roomy for the first time. It was cluttered before, burdened, full of rubbish; now it is pure space.
You have to learn meditation to enjoy your emptiness.
And that is one of the greatest days in life – when a person starts enjoying emptiness, aloneness, nothingness.
Then nobody can reprogram you, nobody in the world.
Even if Jesus comes and says to you, “You are blessed. Just come, follow me, and I will take you to God,” you will say, “You go to hell with your God. Where I am, here is paradise. Wherever I am, here is paradise. You go, you follow yourself – and carry your cross also. And if nobody crucifies you, you crucify yourself because without crucifixion you will not be the real messiah.”
This is what Buddha actually said to his disciples: “If I come in the way, immediately cut off my head. I should not clutter your inner cleanliness. I should not be there, nobody should be there – no god. You alone are enough, more than enough. It is so overflowing.”
So a second institute is needed in every university which will be giving you a simple meditation. There is no need for any complexity. Universities, intelligentsia tend to be complex, tend to make things complex. A simple method of just watching your breath is enough. But every day for one hour you have to go to the institute. Unless the meditation institute gives you its degree, the university is not going to give you its degree.
The university’s degree will come only when a clearance certificate from the deprogramming institute and a graduation certificate from the meditation university have been granted. It will depend on you – you can graduate in one year, you can graduate in two years, you can graduate in three years, four years. But four years is too much. Any imbecile, if he just sits for one hour every day doing nothing for four years is bound to find what Buddha or Lao Tzu have found, what I have found.
It is not a question of intelligence, talent, genius. It is only a question of patience.
So from the university meditation institute you get a degree, a bachelor of meditation; then you get a bachelor of arts or commerce or science, not before it. And in the same way it continues. You get a master’s degree in meditation, MM., and again you will be required to continue with the deprogramming institute for two years, because you can’t be left so easily alone. People are, in some strange way, collectors of all kinds of things. A few people collect antiques, a few people collect stamps – postal stamps!
I was staying in a home in Madras, and the old man – he must have been sixty-five – my host, said, “Would you like to see my stamp collection?”
I said, “Your stamp collection?”
He said, “Yes, from my very childhood. But you will be surprised, I have such rare stamps.”
He had a room full of all kinds of stamps. I said, “That’s all you have been doing your whole life?”
He said, “You say, ‘That’s all?’ This is the best collection in the whole country!”
I said, “It may be the best collection, but you wasted your life collecting all this rubbish, these used stamps?”
He had devoted his whole life – and he had great certificates of appreciation from governors, from chief ministers, from prime ministers, from the president. They all had come to see: Anyone of any importance who came to Madras was bound to go to see his collection; it was the best in India.
I said, “The collection is okay, but leave the collection alone; I am worried about you.”
He said, “What is wrong with me? I am perfectly okay.”
I said, “You are not okay! If you were an eight-year-old child it would be okay, this collection. But you are sixty-five, and you are still collecting.”
He said, “I am still collecting. I am going to collect as much as I can.”
I said, “You go on collecting, but death will be coming soon: this collection will remain here and you will be gone without ever having lived because your whole time was wasted in collecting stamps.”
People are collectors. I think there is some psychological necessity. Because they feel meaningless, because they feel that they are not of any worth, they try to fill this gap by collecting something. By collecting knowledge, by collecting any kind of thing, they want somehow to feel that they are not empty and they have something valuable; they are worthy, they have not wasted their life.
So if you are going to continue on to do your master’s degree, then for two years you will continue with the institute of deprogramming – because there is no end to cleaning you. Every day the dust collects. It is not a question of your collecting it, it is just like a mirror: every morning you have to clean it and dust goes on collecting on it.
The mind is almost like a mirror, a reflector. Memories collect, experiences collect – this is the dust that is happening twenty-four hours a day. So unless you go on cleaning it continuously, soon you will be covered with dust again. So it is good experience: for two years again you are being deprogrammed; and for two years again you are meditating.
These processes go on simultaneously deprogramming and meditation. One goes on cleaning you, emptying you; the other goes on filling you not with something but some quality: blissfulness, lovingness, compassion, a tremendous feeling of worth for no reason at all. Just that you are living, breathing, is enough proof that existence thinks you worthy of living, that existence thinks you worthy of being here.
You are indispensable to existence.
This indispensability is discovered only through meditation; there is no other way. And unless you discover this indispensability to existence, you are going to do something stupid to feel worthy.
But when existence overwhelms you, showers all its blessings on you, then the urge to collect garbage simply disappears.
Then you live each moment and you die each moment. That is the time when meditation has come to its perfection:
Living each moment, dying each moment.
Dying to the memory that you have lived.
Dying to the moment that is just passing.
It can leave its trace, its lining, its signature, its memories…. No, die to all that so you are again fresh, ready to mirror existence with a clear reflection.
So if a person continues to study in the university, then he continues to go to the meditation institute for one hour every day; and before he gets his MA, he gets his MM – that is, master of meditation. He can get it in one year, he can get it in two years; or he may take a longer time if he is not meditating, because there is not going to be any verbal examination – it is going to depend on the master.
If the master feels, watching you coming every day, sitting, going – for two years he watches you, inquires about you, how you are feeling, how things are going – and never sees any tension in you, never feels that you are in a hurry, anguished, worried; and that you are always relaxed, at ease, at home; that you don’t feel nervous about anything; that you are not concerned about the past and not concerned about the future….
Just all these things he goes on watching, and if he feels – and there is no question of misjudging. If he is a meditator, he is not going to misjudge anybody; that is impossible. He will know for sure that you have the taste of it, and he will give you the certificate.
These are clearance certificates for your MA degree. And I want this to continue: if you are going to do your PhD then you do three years deprogramming and three years meditation. Those are compulsory to the very end, so when you come out of the university you are not only an intelligent person, well-informed, you are also a meditator – relaxed, silent, peaceful, observant, watchful, intuitive. And you are no longer a Christian, no longer a Hindu, no longer an American, no longer a Russian. All that bullshit has been completely burned, nothing is left of it.
This is the only way, to replace the politicians by the intelligentsia. But as the intelligentsia is now, it won’t be of much help, because they are all as much into power politics as the politicians. That’s why I make these two conditions necessary. If you get a PhD, simultaneously you will be getting a D.PhilM, a doctor’s degree in meditation. And if the meditation institute feels that somebody has come to a point where he should be honored, then they can give him a DLittM.
So while you are being educated you are, in a very silent and subtle way, being prepared to be in power, in such a way that power cannot corrupt you, that you cannot misuse it.
So meritocracy is a whole program of transforming the structure of society, the structure of government, the structure of education.
It looks utopian. Who is going to do it? How is it going to happen? Hence the question – how are we going to make it a reality?
It is utopian, but the situation is such that within twenty years politicians will bring you to the brink of death. Then you will have to choose; and at that time, when you have to choose between death and meditation, I think you will choose meditation – you are not going to choose death.
If at that time you have to choose between death and deprogramming, you will choose deprogramming: “Let the Christian die, but I can live. Let the Jew die, I can live.” And who bothers when it is a question of you or the Jew? If you can choose only one, either you or the Jew, I don’t think you are going to choose the Jew; even Moses would not have done that. I trust him to have been at least that intelligent.
Politicians have brought this great challenge to the whole of humanity. In a way we should be thankful to these fools: they have dragged the whole of humanity to the point where humanity has to decide, “Now either we can live or these politicians can remain in power – both are not possible.”
My professor, Doctor S.K. Saxena, used to have a car, a very ancient model. It used to remain standing in his porch. I asked him, “I have seen this car standing there – either sell it and get rid of it…. Then at least we will have some space in the porch – in the morning we can have tea; we can sit there, play cards or do something, but this stupid car…”
He said, “Never speak against my car. I have been keeping it for almost twelve years in the hope that one day I will be able to afford both the car and a driver. The problem is….” He was a spendthrift, he was not a miser. He was getting a good salary, he could afford both a driver and a car, but he was always in debt, and asking for money from his students. After the fifteenth day of each month he was finished.
So he said, “The problem is either I can have the car or I can have a driver. So finally I said to myself, ‘Just having a driver will look more foolish – the driver will be sitting in the porch the whole day, and people will ask, “Why are you keeping this driver if you don’t have a car?”‘ So finally I thought having a car is a better idea.
“You are the only person who goes on poking at me about the car, otherwise nobody bothers. They say, ‘Professor, you have a car?’ I say, ‘Yes, I have a car.’ Nobody bothers that the car never moves; nobody is interested in its movement – only I am interested,” he said. “And I manage – all the neighbors have cars so anybody can pick me up going to the university. And they all know that I don’t have a driver. I don’t know even whether having a driver now is going to help, because for twelve years this car has been just standing there. I have no idea in what condition it is.
“So in this life at least,” he said, “I have lost hope. Next life I will manage both from the very beginning, so I will not get into trouble. Having just one is troublesome.” Every day at least he had to clean it himself because it used to collect dust – and just sitting in the porch, a dirty thing…so he used to clean it.
I said, “You do it, I am not going to help” – because I used to stay with him many times. “I am not going to help at all, because according to your Hindu philosophy, everybody has to suffer for their karma. I have no involvement with the car and you should not look with expectant eyes at me, as if to say, ‘It is mannerly for a student that when the old professor is cleaning his car, you should help.’ You should not look like that. Each according to his karma!”
The politicians are bringing you to that point; they have brought you there already. So I say that now the universities have to become more bold, courageous, united, and they have to gather all the intelligentsia round them – which is not difficult, because all over the world I have seen that every kind of intelligent person is against these political fools. But he cannot do anything alone – what can he do? And he does not see that there is any alternative.
I wonder why you can’t see any: you have so many universities of great prestige. For example, if Oxford can gather courage to refuse, to say that the university is not going to give Thatcher an honorary doctorate, why shouldn’t a university like Oxford – which is prestigious, old enough, respected around the world – start calling these conventions? Why shouldn’t Oxford become the center of a new power, the power of the intelligentsia?
And it is not so difficult as it looks. One thing I forgot. I said, “Exclude the politicians”; I wanted to include one thing more: exclude the priests, the pope, because the religious establishment has always been supportive of the political establishment. They are in deep conspiracy together, they support each other. And they support in such absurd conditions also that one cannot make any sense out of it.
Adolf Hitler was blessed for victory by the Christian high priest in Germany; he prayed for Adolf Hitler to be victorious. And he was very happy because Adolf Hitler was finishing the Jews; perhaps he has done greater service to the Christians than anybody else – millions of Jews he finished. So the Christian priest might have been feeling he was doing the right thing by blessing him: revenge against the Jews had to be taken. But he forgot completely that Churchill was being blessed for victory by the Christian archbishop in England; that in America, the American president was being blessed…strange! And they were all praying to one God!
Now God must have been in a difficulty: who to listen to? But he, being an old Jew it seems, heard Churchill, who was not a religious man at all. He neither looked religious, nor did he look intelligent. If Churchill was to be sent to the right place, he should have been in a circus or in a carnival somewhere, selling hot watch – dogs; that man does not look like an intelligent person.
So all these bishops and popes have to be excluded; they have nothing to do with it. And we have to exclude them because we are going to deprogram, and the deprogramming is one of the most significant things to be done; otherwise, the world cannot be saved.
These people – priests, popes, shankaracharyas, imams – have been doing the ugliest things in the world, but because of the facade of religion you let them go free. If anybody else were doing them he would be caught immediately.
The previous pope, Pope Paul the Sixth – before this Polack came upon the stage…. This Pope Paul the Sixth was a cardinal in Milan before he became pope. And the whole world knew that he was homosexual. It was such a known fact, particularly in Italy and more particularly in Milan, that there was no question about it.
He had a boyfriend, a male ballet dancer; and when he became the pope, in Italy just as a joke, the ballet dancer also became famous. They changed the pope’s name in Italy: they made him a feminine pope. They gave him the name Papessa Pauletta. This was the first woman pope, Papessa Pauletta. The Italian language seems to be groovy; I would have learned it, but Italians look greasy, so I don’t want anything to do with it.
But not a single newspaper around the world published the facts. Strange – the whole country knows, all cardinals, all bishops, everybody knows, still it is not published anywhere? It is because the pope is a political power too: your paper could be crushed, you could be destroyed.
They go on writing things against me which are absolutely absurd, lies, because one thing they are certain of: no politician can be in support of me, no power is going to support me. I am against all those who are powerful. Naturally, anybody can write anything against me. The courts, the political powers, the governments – they are all already against me; they are prejudiced beforehand. But you cannot write against the pope that he is having…that this guy is a gay guy. And even after becoming pope he was moving with that boyfriend, Papessa Pauletta was always….
The rumor is all over the capital that one of the most prominent politicians is a homosexual. That is old news, but just two days ago it has been discovered that this man is not only a homosexual – he has AIDS. And now he is going to run for president in the next election; he is trying for it. Right now he is a senator and one of the most powerful senators, and he is preparing to run for the presidency. But all the newspapers are silent.
What kind of news media exists? It seems it is only against people whom you can harm but who cannot harm you. For example, I cannot harm anybody so they can write anything against me; right or wrong is not the question. You know perfectly well that before seven thousand people, a knife was thrown at me. Twenty policemen and four police officers were present – eyewitnesses. The man was caught red-handed – and yet he was released. Seven thousand witnesses didn’t prove anything; even police officers could not prove anything – because the government wanted him freed.
The magistrate knew that if he did not listen then his promotion would be stopped. And he was not concerned with me or my life, he was concerned with his promotion. So to get the promotion he simply released the person with no punishment.
But a person who has AIDS may become the president of America – and everybody will keep silent about it. Nobody is going to open his mouth, because anybody who opens his mouth will be in danger from those in power. But I don’t have anything to lose so whatsoever I want to say, I say. And I know that that man cannot challenge me because if he challenges me then he has to come to the hospital and prove that he does not have AIDS.
Pope Paul the Sixth of course is dead so he cannot do anything against me; I don’t believe in ghosts. But just think: if Pope Paul the Sixth – who was thought to be a very wise man, perhaps one of the wisest popes in the whole of history – could do such stupid things, what about the Polack Pope? You can just imagine what he can do. He cannot be defeated by Pope Paul the Sixth; he will do something to defeat that fellow and he must be doing it. But these things you come to know when the person is dead. Now Pope Paul the Sixth’s story is known to everybody – because dead people cannot influence anybody, cannot take revenge, cannot harm you.
So the politicians and the priests have to be avoided. The politicians are going to say that what I am saying is anti-democratic. It is not, because nowhere does democracy exist.
I love the statement by H.G. Wells. Somebody asked him, “What do you think about democracy?”
He said, “It is a good idea.”
The man said, “A good idea?”
He said, “Yes, it has yet to happen.”
It has not happened yet. In the name of democracy something else is going on.
While I was in India I used to think that perhaps in America something of democracy is happening. But coming to America has been a tremendous disappointment. There is no democracy anywhere – neither in America, nor in the Soviet Union, nor anywhere else. It is only a word that politicians have been exploiting.
So first it does not exist, so there is no problem that I am against democracy, anti-democratic. There is no democracy, so how can I be anti-democracy? What I am proposing is the right way to change the whole structure, so that one day meritocracy can merge into democracy – because sooner or later everybody can be educated. I am not preventing anybody; I am simply saying that right now give the power of governing only to those who are entitled to it and prepared for it. Meanwhile, go on preparing other people.
We may not be here, that does not matter. But within three or four generations, everybody can pass through the process of deprogramming, meditation and education. Then all people are entitled – because by twenty-one, most have already matriculated: they can participate in the local election. A few of them are graduates: they can participate in the state election. And by twenty-four, most of you are post-graduate: you can participate in all the elections. And before thirty you can be able to stand for the presidency of the country.
I am not asking much, just a ten-year preparation. And if the whole government is meditative, deprogrammed, unprejudiced – just visualize it – then bureaucracy disappears, hierarchy disappears; then things that take years can be finished within seconds.
I know of one case, one of my friends – he was a very old man, he just died two years ago. He was a very famous historian, Pandit Sunderlal. Sometime in 1920 he wrote a book of history in which he disagreed with British historians; and he was perfectly right, because what British historians were presenting was not factual. It was one-sided, naturally – they were the victors, the defeated ones had lost even their voice.
The victors can write anything. So if the defeated were going through a revolution, the victors would not call it revolution, they call it mutiny. If the revolutionaries become victorious then even if it was a mutiny, it becomes revolution. It depends on who is going to write the history.
The British historians wrote about the leaders of the Indian revolution as if they were criminals and of course in their eyes they were criminals. They were trying to overthrow the government, creating disorder, chaos. Naturally, these people were criminals. But to the Indians, those people were their heroes, not criminals. They were fighting for their freedom; they sacrificed their lives for the freedom struggle.
So Sunderlal wrote – he was the first historian to write from the side of the Indians. Of course his book was immediately banned and a case started against him, which continued up to ‘82: sixty-two years. The case continued for sixty-two years – can you imagine? If a case needs sixty-two years to decide, my God! Then who is going to be punished? All those people are gone!
It was tried by at least eight High Court judges; all died. At least one dozen advocates who fought both for and against all died. Of the publisher of the book, the printer of the book, the writer of the book, and the distributor of the book – the case was against all four – three of them died. Only the writer continued to live, and because of him the case continued because there was no way…. Even the government who had started the case died. The country became free, the ban from the book was removed – but the case continued.
I asked Sunderlal, “Panditji, this is a miracle. You have killed everybody: twelve advocates, eight magistrates, two governments – and when is this case going to be finished?”
He said, “Until I die this case is not going to be finished because there are legal problems. They cannot just finish it, they cannot just close the file. They have to come to a certain conclusion. Now it has become, it is becoming every day, more and more complicated.” All the magistrates that were trying the case before India became independent – they have their notes and their opinions; they were against Sunderlal, they all wanted him to be imprisoned for life.
After the government changed, India became free. Now the magistrates are all for Sunderlal: “He has done a great service, he should be honored.” But what to do with the opinions of their predecessors? It does not matter to which government they belong; it is the same court and the same law. “And the complexities were such,” he said, “that those judges have said, ‘Unless you die we cannot close the file, the case will continue. We are not going to punish you – we cannot punish you. Even they could not punish you.”‘
They could not punish him because all their witnesses had died – three “major criminals” had died. Only that one man, Sunderlal, remained, and that man was a very intelligent man. He fought continually, saying that whatsoever he had written was right: “Unless you prove it wrong…and you cannot just prove it with your British writers because what do they know?
They were not present here, they don’t know the Indian situation; they remained in England and they were writing history in England about India! They never came to India, and their histories are being taught in the universities. And I have been here, I have seen with my own eyes what has happened. I am an eyewitness, and you are telling me that I am wrong. You call your historians: they have to prove on what grounds they got their ideas.”
Those historians were collecting simply from British newspapers. Naturally, all that they were collecting was favorable to the British government. Sunderlal was collecting raw material from the Indian masses about what had happened; he was far truer. And it was felt by all the judges that he had a point there – that he was an eyewitness here. But although they were feeling that he had a point there, they had to protect the government. They were servants of the government, they were there to serve the British empire.
In schools, before 1947, students had to pray for the queen: “God save the Queen” or “God save the King.” My principal was a certain Badri Prasad Gupta. The day I entered the school my father told me, “Don’t create trouble about this ‘God save the Queen.’ Let him save her; don’t create trouble on this point.”
I said, “I have no problem with that, don’t be worried.”
He said, “Promise that you won’t create any trouble about the queen.”
I said, “Promise.” And I never created any trouble about the queen. I asked the principal, “Where is God? I cannot pray…to whom? I have no problem about the queen – just show me God so I can pray.”
Badri Prasad Gupta said, “Up to now there have been some students creating problems because they come from revolutionary families. Their question was, ‘We cannot pray for the queen. Why should we pray for somebody who is imposing slavery on us?’ That I have heard, but this is a new problem.”
I said, “I have no problem with the queen; I will pray, but first show me God. If you cannot show me God, whom do you want me to pray to? – to you?…’Badri Prasad Gupta, Save the Queen’?”
He said, “No, don’t say that! I am a government servant and you are making me also involved in it. It may become a trouble.”
I said, “Then I cannot pray.”
When I came home, my father was waiting. He said, “No trouble?”
I said, “Trouble was bound to be there but I kept my promise to you.”
He said, “How did you manage?”
I said, “I changed the subject. Instead of bothering the queen, I said, ‘Why bother about the queen? Why not hit God himself so there is no question of prayer?’ And I told Badri Prasad Gupta, ‘I can pray to you, Badri Prasad Gupta,’ but he was so afraid that he said, ‘Don’t mention my name, because if some British officer comes to know that I am teaching students to pray, “Badri Prasad Gupta, Save the queen,” they will hang me! My job will be gone…and how am I going to answer those people? Just don’t mention this and don’t say it to anybody else, because these children are just a nuisance: they may start shouting in the streets, “Badri Prasad Gupta, Save the Queen.” But I will be killed; the queen will be saved, but I will be gone.’”
I said, “No, I will not create any trouble – you just have not to ask me again. I will remain silent. If God wants to save, let him save, if he does not want to save, that is his business and his problem. It is not of my concern. I am absolutely impartial about whether the queen is saved or not; I have no interest either way.”
But those British officers…Badri Prasad Gupta was an Indian, but being the principal of an English high school was enough to make him afraid. Every official was afraid, judges were afraid, Indian officers were afraid, because the power….
So politicians and priests both have to be dropped out of their long, long-standing establishment, and a totally new kind of management has to be developed.
It is a difficult job, arduous but not impossible – particularly in such a situation when death is the only alternative.

Osho,
What do you say about meditation according to the three states of consciousness?
Meditation I have explained to you so it won’t be difficult…just a little bit of new perspective.
Concentration is concerned with the instinctive layer, hence even animals are capable of concentration. When an animal is hunting game he is utterly concentrated. He is unmoving, not making even a little stir. And if you see his eyes, they are fixed, unblinking.
In fact, it is one of the findings of great hunters…. Once in a while it has happened that barehanded a hunter has come across a lion, and there was no way to escape – the lion was coming closer to him with his eyes fixed. Because the hunter was unable to escape, just unconsciously, without knowing what he was doing – of course he was frozen to death – the hunter’s eyes also became unblinking, and he was watching every move of the lion, so he was looking into his eyes.
And this is how it was discovered that if you look into the eyes of the lion just for a minute or two, the lion becomes hypnotized. He forgets to kill you. He forgets everything; he falls into a coma.
Gurdjieff remembers in his memoirs that while he was moving with the nomads near the Caucasus, he found they all hypnotized their animals. Nomads are moving people, a few days here, a few days there; they don’t stay in one place. They have a totally different culture. They don’t think much of you who live in cities and in houses. They think you are dead, finished; you have made your graves yourself.
What is life if you are not under the sun, under the sky, always moving into the unknown? – managing moment to moment, not being worried about tomorrow. They don’t believe in your law, they don’t believe in your state – they don’t believe in anything. They can steal, there is no problem; they can kill, there is no problem. They are a totally different people, and they are not ready – many governments have been trying to settle them, prohibiting them….
But you will be surprised, even in Europe the nomads are all Indians from Rajputana. In fact, all over the world the nomads are Indians from Rajputana – one particular state. They all speak Rajputani. The language has changed, taken on different forms, but still you can figure out that they are speaking Rajputani. In Europe you call them gypsies, because from Rajputana they first went to Egypt, and after remaining in Egypt they moved to Europe. Because of this movement coming from Egypt, they became gypsies.
Gurdjieff was with these people, and these people have a different kind of wisdom – not bookish but from actual experience. And they have been moving around the earth experiencing so many things…. A person who flies from New York to London cannot say that he has toured from New York to London, flying in an airplane is not an experience. But moving on the earth, making your way through different societies, different laws, different difficulties, different problems, every day is real experience.
Gurdjieff said that these people knew a certain art of hypnosis. It was not much of an art, it was a simple process you can practice on your dog, on your cat. But if they are your pets it becomes difficult because they start moving here and there; they will not keep their eyes fixed on you. On wild animals it is very simple.
These nomads had to pass through wild areas, and that was their practice…. Gurdjieff was very young nine or ten, and he watched them: even if a lion came all the nomads, the men, would stand in front staring at the lion without blinking their eyes. And something happened – the lion simply collapsed, fell, as if there were no life in him. And immediately those gypsies would jump and catch hold of the lion; and by the time he came back to his senses, he would be captured, without any weapon.
Concentration is instinctive.
Everybody can practice it; all that is needed is to pinpoint your consciousness.
Contemplation is of the intellect.
It is beyond animals, and beyond most human beings – not absolutely beyond; if they try they can rise up to it. Contemplation needs your interest to be wide enough so that you can create a space in the mind to move. You need much information about a single subject so that you can move around the single subject without changing it, and yet moving, keeping in the same area.
For example, you are thinking about truth or love or religion: you keep yourself in the same area, but you look at it from every possible angle. And you will be surprised – there are always angles which have never been looked at. Life is so mysterious, there are always aspects which you may be the first to discover.
That’s how science functions. The subjects are not new, these are the same subjects. From Archimedes to Albert Einstein there is not much difference; they are thinking about the same subject, but new aspects go on revealing themselves. And each aspect becomes almost an area in itself. You can watch the progress of science, then you will understand.
In Oxford University the board hanging by the department of physics says: “Department of Natural Philosophy.” That is strange, because it was one thousand years ago that physics was part of natural philosophy. The board is one thousand years old; although painted again and again, although different boards may have come, the writing has remained the same. Now philosophy has nothing to do with physics.
In Saugar University where I did my postgraduate work, by the department of philosophy the board read: “Department of Psychology and Philosophy.” That too is one hundred years old. The university is new, but the founder was an old man and when he was studying philosophy and psychology were one subject. Now psychology has a separate individuality.
I told my professors, “This is stupid – drop it.”
But they said, “It is a historical monument. Leave it there.”
I said, “Now psychology is no longer being taught here. Why psychology and philosophy?” It used to be that psychology was part of philosophy, then they separated; now psychology has separated into different parts. Philosophy was part of physics; now physics has separated into different departments.
You go on contemplating and you find a new area which is vast enough to be a subject unto itself. And as you go into details you find that there are still branches moving apart. So there is now biophysics. No philosopher has ever contemplated that biophysics is possible. Metaphysics is possible, but it is completely finished; there is no department of metaphysics anywhere.
Metaphysics used to be in Aristotle’s time – and for a very strange reason. Aristotle wrote the first history of philosophy; he wrote all the chapters. One of the chapters is physics, and after the physics chapter comes philosophy. Just because it comes after physics – metaphysics means after physics – because the chapter came after physics, slowly it became known as metaphysics: the chapter that comes after physics.
When philosophy came into its own, metaphysics, the very word, simply disappeared. It is not used anymore – although it seems it may have a revival, a resurrection, because now physics is coming very close to philosophy, becoming more mysterious, finding more areas which cannot be explained by logic, cannot be explained by science. Perhaps they will start calling it metaphysics. It is beyond physics, after physics. Higher physics they are calling it now.
Contemplation is just the process of thinking, refining your thoughts; and the more you practice this refinement, the finer they become. And it is a joy in itself. It is a joy far superior to anything like food, sex, clothes; it is a finer joy. When you come across a new phenomenon which for millions of years people have passed by and nobody has detected and which you are the first to detect, a tremendous joy arises in you.
Contemplation is of the intellect.
Meditation is of intuition.
Meditation has no subject matter.
It is pure subjectivity.
Meditation is not thinking about something.
It is not thinking at all.
But one thing has to be remembered: it does not mean falling asleep. That’s what happens; if you are not thinking then the mind says, “What are you doing? Go to sleep.” Mind is at ease with thinking or with sleep, and just between the two is meditation: no thinking, no sleep. Thinking has been dropped and sleep has not been taken up. You are fully awake. It is awareness without thoughts. The road of your mind is completely empty of the continuous traffic of thoughts.
In that state of no-mind is hidden the ultimate secret – the secret of your being and the secret of the whole universe…because at the point of your being all points meet together. Your point is also the center of the whole universe. The further you go into thought, the further you move away from your center and also from the universe. Hence, I was suggesting a very simple method for all universities.
Buddha used to call it Vipassana. The word is beautiful, simple, meaningful. It means just watching. Pashya means to see and passana means to see very carefully. Vipassana means to see carefully but without thinking. You are just there, sitting silently, doing nothing.
In the West the proverb is that the idle mind is the devil’s workshop. It is not true. The idle mind, absolutely idle, is where your real birth happens. The mind full of thoughts is the devil’s workshop because it is continuously giving you ideas: “Do this, do that.” The silent mind…how can the silent mind be the devil’s workshop?
The West never attained to the state of meditation; it remained only at the state of contemplation. Concentration happened, contemplation happened, but meditation remained something unexplored by the West. Perhaps the conditions were not ready for it, ripe for it. Perhaps the West was too much concerned with physical survival. Life was difficult, the climate was cold; hard work was needed to survive.
In the East the climate was warm and not much work was needed to survive. One person in a family used to work and the whole family used to enjoy themselves. There was no need for everybody to work. The land was fertile, the population was small – and the land was giving so much without much effort that naturally people started exploring just sitting silently, doing nothing. It was a natural phenomenon to happen.
So many people were without any work – that’s why so many people became monks. And there was no trouble, no problem. Otherwise to so many monks you have to give food, you have to give clothes, you have to give shelter, because they don’t work. But there was no problem: people had enough to eat and they could give enough. Millions of monks roamed around the country, and all that they were doing was one thing…. Never in the history of man were so many people trying to sit silently and just be absolutely quiet not even a stir, not even a little breeze. And they attained it.
And that’s why I suggest each university should have an institute for meditation. Arrange the right climate, the right atmosphere – beautiful gardens, Zen-type cottages, ponds, trees, and small, Zen-type meditation rooms so every student, before he comes out of university, brings the quality of meditation with him.
Once we can help people to be deprogrammed and leave them just clean slates and, secondly, can help them to enjoy this cleanliness so that they never clutter it up again, we have prepared the foundation for a new humanity, for a new world without boundaries, without nations, without cults, creeds, religions – just one vast commune surrounding the whole world.

============================================================

Osho,
You were more awake as an infant than I am now. How did this courage and awareness happen?
It is very simple, and yet not so easy to explain to you. The reason is that it relates to your past life. Now, as far as I am concerned it is a reality. As far as you are concerned it can only be a hypothesis. I am not saying to you to believe in it.
That is my most fundamental approach – never to tell anybody to believe in anything. I am simply explaining how it happened to me. You can find out ways to experiment with the hypothesis; perhaps it may happen to you too – and it is never too late.
The moment the child is born, you think, is the beginning of its life. That is not true. The moment an old man dies, you think, is the end of his life. It is not. Life is far bigger than birth and death. Birth and death are not two ends of life; many births and many deaths happen within life. Life itself has no beginning, no end: life and eternity are equivalent. But you cannot understand very easily how life can turn into death; even to concede that is impossible.
There are a few inconceivables in the world; and one of them is, you cannot conceive of life turning into death. At what point is it no longer life and it becomes death? Where will you demarcate the line? Neither can you demarcate the line about birth, when life begins: when the child is born or when the child is conceived? But even before conception the mother’s egg was alive the father’s sperm was alive – they were not dead, because the meeting of two dead things cannot create life. They were both alive, and they merged into one and created a life which, rightly understood, is neither just man’s nor just woman’s.
A man has a woman hidden in him, the woman has a man hidden in her. It is bound to be so, because they are the contribution of one man and one woman – the father and the mother; they both contributed fifty percent to your being. If you are a man that simply means that the male side is above and the female side is below. If you are a woman the female side is above, and the male side is below. And this you can watch in your own life.
There are moments when a man feels very feminine, very vulnerable, very loving, caring. In fact he can be more feminine than a woman, because the woman’s femininity is an everyday affair. She takes it for granted; she has used it her whole life, it is nothing special. But for a man when the moment of femininity happens – there are moments of tenderness, everybody knows – he is also surprised of such a tenderness…and in him? That tenderness is fresh. The woman’s tenderness is getting stale, routine.
The same happens to the woman. There are moments when she feels the man coming up from deeper sources of her unconscious. She can show so much strength, courage, daring, that even a man may feel inferior. The simple reason is that man’s manliness is there, and he has been using it every day – it is not fresh, it is not so alive. That is why when a woman becomes angry she is more ferocious than man.
In animals it has been watched. The female becomes ferocious only in certain moments when her children are attacked. They may be attacked even by the father himself…because the institution of father is a human institution, it does not exist in animals. The children will never know who is their father, the father will never know that he has produced children. But the mother is not a human invention. The mother is something in nature itself.
That’s why you cannot put the father higher than the mother, except perhaps in Germany. Those fools go on calling their motherland, fatherland. The whole world calls their country their motherland, but German fools have some speciality. It doesn’t look right either – fatherland?
The earth is feminine, the sky is masculine. Because the earth gives birth to everything – to animals, to insects, to birds, to trees, to man – the earth can be called mother. You will be surprised to find the similarity between these words. The English word matter and the English word mother are both derivations from a Sanskrit root, matra. Matri means mother, and matra means matter, quantity. From matra are derived both matter and mother.
The earth is the most tangible material phenomenon. You cannot call it father; it has no relationship with fatherhood. But you can’t argue with Germans either. When I hear their language, I cannot help thinking that if in hell any language is spoken, it must be German. The way it hits you! It has no roundness anywhere…everywhere knives coming out of the language from each word. I cannot conceive how people can love in the German language; it will look like a fight. Perhaps it is! There are languages in which even if you fight it will look like you are having a sweet conversation.
The man and the woman are not really two separate entities, but the personality of the man needs the supporting qualities of the woman. If those supporting qualities are not there, the man will fall apart. And the same will happen to the woman. She cannot exist only on female qualities, she needs male supporting qualities. So each human being is a composite whole of two polarities which appear opposed to each other but are not really opposed; they are basically, absolutely essential components of each other.
At what point is the child born? Science has not been able to decide. There is no way to decide, because the eggs that the mother is carrying in her womb she has been carrying from her birth….
By the way – don’t let me just drift!
It has been found – and this seems to be the only explanation that can save Jesus from being a bastard – it has been found that a girl was born with her twin inside her womb. In fact she was going to be two girls but somehow the other girl, who was going to be the twin, never grew up; she became part of the girl that was born. She can carry that twin in her womb. That twin is alive, and at the right time, without any sexual interaction with a man, the girl will give birth to a child.
Now this is scientifically proved a fact. In a few animals it has been found again and again. And just the other day Vivek has brought one news item of a similar case. I have for at least twenty years been thinking about it, because I came to know twenty years ago about a case, a similar case, where a girl gave birth to a dead child. And even doctors confirmed that the girl was absolutely innocent.
I had been there in the medical college, to see the whole thing. It is a difficult problem in India – it is not so difficult in the West: if it was proved that the girl had some sexual relationship with a man then there would be no possibility…her whole life would be ruined. She could never be married, and she would be condemned everywhere. It would be better for her to die than to live.
But all the doctors were absolutely certain that this dead child was not conceived by her. She had carried the small, miniature child in her body since her very birth, and when she became sexually mature the child started to grow – exactly then, because for the child it made no difference…. For the child it was the same whether it was conceived sexually by a new man – but in fact the child was really carrying the girl’s father’s genes, and the mother’s genes. The child that was born to the girl was not her child but her sister. It was good that she was born dead.
It would have been good if Jesus also had been born dead, but unfortunately he was born alive. This is the only scientific way to save the poor fellow from being a bastard; otherwise no Holy Ghost can help. All that is nonsense.
One thing has to be accepted, that half of your being is alive in your mother, even before you are conceived. And half of you is to be contributed by your father – that too has to be contributed alive. When the sperms leave your father’s body they are alive, but they don’t have a long life, they have only two hours’ life. Within two hours they have to meet the mother’s egg. If within two hours they don’t meet, if they start bumming around here and there….
It is absolutely certain that each sperm must have its own characteristic personality. A few are lazy fellows; when others are running toward the egg, they are just taking a morning walk. This way they are never going to reach, but what can they do? These characteristics are present from their birth: they cannot run, they would prefer to die; and they are not even aware what is going to happen.
But a few guys are just Olympic racers, they immediately start running fast. And there is great competition because it is not a question of a few hundred cells running toward the mother’s single egg…. The mother’s womb has a reservoir of eggs which is limited and which releases only one egg every month. That’s why she has the monthly period; every month one egg is released. So only one fellow out of this whole mob, which consists of millions of living cells…it is really a great philosophical problem!
It is nothing, just biology, because the problem is that out of so many millions of people, only one person can be born. And who were those other millions that could not get into the mother’s egg? This has been used as one of the arguments in India by Hindu scholars, pundits, shankaracharyas, against birth control.
India is clever about argumentation. The pope goes on talking against birth control but has not produced a single argument. At least the Indian counterpart has produced a few very valid – looking arguments. One of their arguments is: At what point to stop producing children? – two children, three children? They say that Rabindranath was the thirteenth child of his parents; if birth control had been practiced there would have been no Rabindranath Tagore.
The argument seems to be valid because birth control means stopping at two children, at the most three: don’t take any chance, one may die or something may happen. You can reproduce two children to replace you and your wife, so no population increase happens; but Rabindranath was the thirteenth child of his parents. If they had stopped even at one dozen then too Rabindranath would have missed the train. Now how many Rabindranaths are missing trains?
I was talking to one of the shankaracharyas. I said, “Perfectly right; for argument’s sake I accept that this is true: we would have missed one Rabindranath Tagore. But I am willing to miss him. If the whole country can live peacefully, can have enough food, can have enough clothes, can have all basic needs fulfilled, I think it is worth it. I am ready to lose one Rabindranath Tagore, it is nothing much.
“You have to see the balance: millions of people dying and starving just to produce one Rabindranath Tagore? So you mean every parent has to go up to thirteen? But what about the fourteenth? What about the fifteenth?” And forget about these small numbers; in each love-making a man releases millions of sperms – and every time a man makes love a child is not conceived.
You will be surprised to know that if from the age a man becomes sexually mature, that is fourteen, he continues, according to my calculations, up to the age of forty-two, which I feel is a new maturity…. Just as sex matures at fourteen, spirituality starts growing at forty-two. There is a seven-year cycle.
In the first seven years there is no question of sex. The child is innocent. He may be playing sexual games, but those are unconscious and he has no idea that those games are sexual. And he is not playing those games for sexuality. He is being prepared by biology because later on he has to play all these games – some rehearsal is needed.
I told you that there are two games children play all around the earth; one I completely forgot that day. One is hide-and-seek, and the second is doctor and patient. That is strange…and the patient is always the girl, and the doctor is always the boy! I have inquired, “Does it happen sometimes the opposite way, that the girl is the doctor and the boy is the patient?” No, the girl is not interested at all in such curiosities.
The woman is not so much attracted by man’s body; she is attracted more by man’s charisma, impressiveness, personality – the way he walks, the way he talks. She is not much interested in his physical beauty she is interested in something which is not tangible. But the woman has that instinct to find what is attractive in the man.
Many times a man will be surprised: “I don’t see anything attractive in this man,” and it happens that that man is almost a hero among women. Many women get attracted to that man. They see something, they feel something which no other man will ever be able to see in that man. But their attraction is not physical, it is something more subtle; more the vibes of the energy, more on the esoteric side.
For example, Chetana has a boyfriend, Milarepa – Milarepa the Great. Milarepa is just a lady-killer, continually killing ladies here, there, and everywhere. And I can’t even recognize him! Vivek goes on showing me, Chetana has been showing me: “This is Milarepa,” and the next time again I forget who Milarepa is. He is such a lady-killer that I want to see him and look better at him, to see what is the matter. But I simply go on forgetting his face.
Just yesterday, Vivek told me, “He was standing with the drum just in front of you.” With a drum! – in front of me! I saw the drum and missed Milarepa. The drum was good and the drumming was good – everything was good – but I simply did not look at the man who was drumming it. He is a great drummer. I again missed.
I go on asking Chetana about Milarepa, and she has described to me everything about Milarepa. In fact Milarepa is the only person about whom I know any kind of information. Every day I try to find out – one day I am going to figure out that this is Milarepa. But yesterday I lost hope.
He was standing in front of me drumming – what more can the poor fellow do? Just, I am blind. And he is certainly a personality like Lord Byron in that even though he goes with so many ladies, no lady feels offended. They all accept that he is such a person that you cannot possess him.
From the very beginning there are individuals. And millions of people in each love-making simply disappear. We will never know how many Nobel prize-winners were there, how many presidents, prime ministers…all kinds of people must have been there.
So this is my calculation: from the fourteenth year to the age of forty-two, if a man goes absolutely normally about his love-making, he will release almost the equal amount of sperms as is the whole population of the earth. A single man can populate the whole earth – overpopulate it! – it is already overpopulated. And this can be done even by a single Milarepa; nobody else is needed. And all these people will be unique individuals, not having anything in common except their humanness.
No, life does not start there either; life starts farther back. But to you that is only a hypothesis – to me it is an experience. Life begins at the point of your past life’s death. When you die, on the one side one chapter of life, which people think was your whole life, is closed. It was only a chapter in a book which has infinite chapters. One chapter closes, but the book is not closed. Just turn the page and another chapter begins.
The person dying starts visualizing his next life. This is a known fact, because it happens before the chapter closes. Once in a while a person comes back from the very last point. For example he is drowning, and he is somehow saved. He is almost in a coma; the water has to be taken out, artificial breathing has to be given, and somehow he is saved. He was just on the verge of closing the chapter. These people have reported interesting facts.
One is, that at the last moment when they felt that they were dying, that it was finished, their whole past life went fast before them, in a flash – from birth to that moment. Within a split second they saw everything that had happened to them, that they had remembered, and also that which they had never remembered; many things which they have not even taken note of, and that they were not aware were part of their memory. The whole film of memory goes so quickly, in a flash – and it has to be in a split second because the man is dying, there is no time, like three hours to see the whole movie.
And even if you see the whole movie you cannot relate the whole story of a man’s life, with small, insignificant details. But everything passes before him – that is a certain, very significant phenomenon. Before ending the chapter he recollects all his experiences, unfulfilled desires, expectations, disappointments, frustrations, sufferings, joys – everything.
Buddha has a word for it, he calls it tanha. Literally it means desire, but metaphorically it means the whole life of desire. All these things happened – frustrations, fulfillments, disappointments, successes, failures…but all this happened within a certain area you can call desire.
The dying man has to see the whole of it before he moves on further, just to recollect it, because the body is going: this mind is not going to be with him, this brain is not going to be with him. But the desire released from this mind will cling to his soul, and this desire will decide his future life. Whatever has remained unfulfilled, he will move toward that target.
Your life begins far back before your birth, before your mother’s impregnation, further back in your past life’s end. That end is the beginning of this life. One chapter closes, another chapter opens. Now, how this new life will be is ninety-nine percent determined by the last moment of your death. What you collected, what you have brought with you like a seed – that seed will become a tree, bring fruits, bring flowers, or whatever happens to it. You cannot read it in the seed, but the seed has the whole blueprint.
There is a possibility that one day science may be able to read in the seed the whole program – what kind of branches this tree is going to have, how long this tree is going to live, what is going to happen to this tree – because the blueprint is there, we just don’t know the language. Everything that is going to happen is already potentially present.
So what you do at the moment of your death determines how your birth is going to be. Most people die clinging. They don’t want to die, and one can understand why they don’t want to die. Only at the moment of death do they recognize the fact that they have not lived. Life has simply passed as if a dream, and death has come. Now there is no more time to live – death is knocking on the door. And when there was time to live, you were doing a thousand and one foolish things, wasting your time rather than living it.
I have asked people playing cards, playing chess, “What are you doing?”
They say, “Killing time.”
From my very childhood I have been against this expression, “killing time.” My grandfather was a great chess player, and I would ask him, “You are getting old and you are still killing time. Can’t you see that really time is killing you? and you go on saying that you are killing time. You don’t know even what time is, you don’t know where it is. Just catch hold of it and show me.”
All these expressions that time is fleeting, and passing, and going, are just a kind of consolation. It is really you who are passing – going down the drain every moment. And you go on thinking that it is time that is passing, as if you are going to stay and time is going to pass! Time is where it is; it is not passing. Watches and clocks are man’s creation to measure the passing time, which is not passing at all.
Only in one madman’s house did I see the right kind of clock. I was traveling and I just missed the train. To catch the same train, I rushed to pick up a taxi to go to the other station – which was possible because the train went on a longer route of one hundred and twenty miles, so the taxi could reach there first by the sixty miles the road went. So I rushed to the taxi stand and there I found one of my friends from my school days – we studied in the high school together. So he was very happy.
He said, “Don’t be worried will put you on that train, if not at the next station, then at the next, or the next; or I will take you the whole journey. Don’t be worried – but you have to come to my house.”
I said, “There is no time for me to waste. I have to catch the train.”
He said, “You have to come. I have been waiting for you for years, and I have been hearing about you, and reading about you in newspapers and everything. I was waiting, thinking that someday you would come here too – and today you have come, and you are in such a hurry, you can’t even come to my house just to see in what misery I have fallen.”
I said, “What has happened?”
He said, “You just come.”
There was no way out! And he was the only taxi owner there; there was no other taxi, it was a small town. I said, “There is no other way so I will come, but remember that I have to catch the train whatsoever happens, wherever you catch it – but I have to catch the train.” That he promised.
He took me to his home and there I could see even through the window – the window was open – that his wife was mad. She was standing there holding the steel rods which were fixed on the windows to prevent her coming out. And the way her hair was falling, and the way she looked….
He said, “This is my wife.”
I said, “Good, but what can I do? – I am in a hurry. And do you want me to treat your wife or something?”
“No,” he said, “no, I don’t want you to treat her. I just want you to see her and suggest to me what I can do.”
I said, “Okay.” I went in and there I saw a clock – in my whole life the only right clock I have seen, and that woman had made it. It had only the hour hand. You could not figure out what the time was. I asked the man, “What is the point of keeping this clock here with only an hour hand?”
He said, “This woman has her ideas. I have had that clock fixed dozens of times but she always removes the minute hand.”
I said, “How do you tell the time?”
He showed me another watch. In his pocket he had a pocket watch which had only a minute hand. He said, “I keep both watches in front of me and figure out what the time is.”
I said, “Your wife is mad, but you are also mad. This is something! Really, you are a creative, inventive scientist – and you are driving a taxi! I could not have imagined that two clocks would do the work.”
He said, “They do perfectly well. Because she is not going to listen, I had to manage something myself.”
That is the only clock that is right because you could not figure out the time.
In India, in Punjab, if you are traveling in Punjab – you can ask Neelam – never ask anybody, “What is the time?” because if it happens to be twelve you will be beaten. And if you can escape alive it will be just a miracle. It is just for a very philosophical reason – but when philosophy comes into the hands of fools, this is what happens.
Nanak, the founder of Sikhism, has said that the moment of samadhi is just like two hands of the clock meeting on twelve, where they are no longer two. He was just taking an example – that in the moment of samadhi the twoness of your being dissolves and you arrive at oneness. The same happens in death too. He explained later on that the same happens in death. Again the two hands which have been separately moving come together and stop, become one: you become one with existence.
So in Punjab, twelve o’clock has become the symbol of death. So if you ask any Sosan, “What is the time?” if it happens to be twelve, he will simply start beating you, because that means you are teasing him, and you are cursing him with death. About somebody with a long face, miserable, in anguish, in Punjab they will say, “On his face it is twelve o’clock.” I have seen Sardars changing their watch quickly: when it comes to twelve they will move it five minutes ahead quickly. They won’t keep it on twelve; it hurts that their own watch is playing tricks on them. Twelve reminds them only of misery, sadness, death; they have completely forgotten about samadhi which Nanak was really trying to explain to them.
When a person dies – when it is twelve o’clock for him – he clings to life. His whole life he has been thinking time is passing; now he feels he is going, he has passed. No clinging can help. He becomes so miserable, and the misery becomes so unbearable, that most people fall into a kind of unconscious state, a coma, before they die. So they miss recollecting their whole life.
If death is without any clinging, if there is no desire to remain alive, even for a single moment more, you will die consciously because there is no need for nature to make you unconscious or force you into a coma. You will die alert, and you will recollect the whole past. You will be able to see that whatever you have been doing was simply stupid.
Desires have been fulfilled – what have you gained? Desires have remained unfulfilled and you have suffered – but what have you gained when they are fulfilled?
It is a strange game in which you are always losing: Whether you win or lose makes no difference.
Your pleasures were nothing, just signatures made on water.
And your pain was engraved on granite.
And you suffered all that pain for these signatures on water. You suffered your whole life for small joys which don’t appear to be more than toys at this stage, from this height, from this point where you can see the whole valley of your life. Successes were also failures. Failures of course were failures, and pleasures were nothing but incentives to suffer pain.
All your euphoria was just the function of your dream faculty. You are going with empty hands. This whole life has been just a vicious circle: you went on moving in the same circle, around and around and around. And you have not arrived anywhere because by moving in a circle, how you can arrive anywhere? The center always remained at the same distance wherever you were on the circle.
Success came, failure came; pleasure came, pain came; there was misery and there was joy: everything went on happening on the circle but the center of your being always remained equidistant from every place. It was difficult to see while you were in the circle – you were too much involved in it, too much part of it. But now, suddenly all has dropped out of your hands – you are standing empty.
Kahlil Gibran, in his masterpiece, The Prophet, has one sentence…. Al-Mustafa, the prophet, comes running to the people who are working in the farms and says to them, “My ship has arrived, my time has come to go. I have come here just to glance back on all that has happened and on all that has not happened. Before I go aboard the ship I have a great longing just to see what my life here was.”
The sentence that I was going to remind you of is…he says, “I am just like a river which is going to fall into the ocean. She waits for a moment to look back at the whole terrain that she has passed – the jungles, the mountains, the people. It has been a rich life of thousands of miles, and now, in a single moment, all is going to dissolve. So just like a river on the brink of falling into the ocean looks back, I want to look back.”
But this looking back is possible only if you are not clinging to the past; otherwise you are so afraid to lose it that you don’t have time to observe, to see. And time is just a split second. If a man dies fully alert, seeing the whole terrain that he has passed and seeing the whole stupidity of it, he is born with a sharpness, with an intelligence, with a courage – automatically. It is not something he does.
You ask me, “You were sharp, courageous, intelligent, even as an infant; I am not that courageous even now….” The reason is that I died in my past life in a different way than you died. That makes the great difference, because the way you die, in the same way you are born. Your death is one side of the coin, your birth is another side of the same coin.
If on the other side there was confusion, misery anguish, clinging, desire, then on this side of the coin you can’t expect sharpness, intelligence, courage, clarity, awareness. That will be absolutely unwarranted; you cannot expect that.
From the very beginning I have not done anything in this life to be courageous or to be sharp and intelligent, and I have never thought about it as courage or sharpness or intelligence.
It was only later on that I slowly became aware of how stupid people are. It was only a later reflection: earlier I was not aware that I was courageous. I thought everybody must be the same. Only later on it became clear to me that everybody is not the same.
One of the joys in my childhood was to go to the highest hill by the side of the river and jump. Many neighborhood boys would come with me to try it. But they would just go to the very brink and come back. Seeing the height they would say, “Suddenly something happens.” I used to tell them again and again: “If I can jump – I don’t have a steel body – and if I go on managing, surviving, why can’t you?”
They said, “We try our hardest” – and they really did try. There was one brahmin boy living just next door who was very humiliated because he could not jump. So he must have asked his father what to do, “…because it is very humiliating. He goes on top of the hill and jumps from there, and we just watch. We can see that if he can jump, we can jump; there is no problem in it. If the height cannot kill him, why should it kill us? But when we gather courage, making all kinds of effort, and we rush, suddenly there comes the break. From where the break comes, we don’t know, but just something inside us says, ‘No, these rocks, and this river – if you fall on a rock, or… And the river is deep, and when you fall from a height, first you go to the very bottom of the river then you come up; you cannot do anything else.’”
His father said, “This is not good” – because his father was a very good wrestler, one of the champions of the district. He used to run a gymnasium and teach other people how to fight Indian free-style wrestling. That is more human, more skillful, and more artful than boxing. Boxing seems to be an absolutely animal type of behavior.
In Indian wrestling you don’t hurt the other person. A very good wrestler simply touches the other person, and the other person falls flat. It is an art, a craft; the body has been taught point by point. Howsoever strong the other person is, if you just hit him this much – just this much – at a perfect angle behind the knee, the man will fall. Howsoever strong he is does not matter; you just have to know the right point where to hit with your hand. Your hand may be just a delicate hand – there is no need for it to be a hammer – the man will fall.
They know all kinds of strategies, there are thousands; and it is an art, certainly an art. Nobody is hurt, there is no desire to hurt anybody. And the game is worth seeing; it almost takes your breath away because it happens so quickly when there is a master wrestler.
And this man was a master wrestler. He was not very giant-like, and that was one of the reasons he became famous. He was middle-size in height, not a heavyweight champion but very thin. And in fact whenever he was challenged or he challenged somebody, the other wrestlers used to laugh: “This man? He may get killed! His bones may get fractured! This man is going to fight? The other man is so strong he will just take him up in both his hands and throw him down.”
That was his whole art, because everybody was ready to fight with him thinking that they were going to be victorious. And what he did on the field… The Indian wrestling field is not like the boxing ring. Very fine powdered earth, six-inches thick, is spread on a big piece of ground, so if they fall nobody is hurt. It is far softer than velvet, it is ground so fine, and they find the best kind of soil for it.
What he used to do first… The other wrestler would stand there, of course perfectly certain that he was going to win. And this poor fellow, who looked poor but always proved to be the winner, would go around in the circle of people standing to see – inside the circle was the wrestling area. He would go around dancing backward, and that dance was worth seeing. He wouldn’t look backward; he would look ahead while dancing backward and would still go exactly in a circle.
After his dance was over – and the other man was taken aback with what he was doing, the dance was so beautiful, so graceful – after the dance he would immediately jump on the fellow, as a tiger or a lion jumps on game. He was so lightweight he could almost fly in the air, and the man was simply taken by surprise: “What is happening?” First, his dance was strange, no wrestler I have seen dances that way, and after the dance he would simply jump on the fellow. And he had such small strategies that within seconds… People were not able to figure out what he did, and how the other man was flat on the ground and how this man was sitting on his chest.
If the child had belonged to somebody else, his father would have told him not to go there at all, but this man was not that type. He said, “If he can jump and you cannot, that is a disgrace to me. I will come with you. I will stand there, and don’t be worried: when he jumps, you jump.”
I had no idea that his father was going to be there. When I went there I saw the father, the son and a few other boys who had gathered to see. I had a look and I figured out what was the matter. I said to the boy, “Today you need not bother – let your father jump. He is a great wrestler and there will be no problem for him.”
The father looked at me, because he had come just to encourage the boy so that he did not become a coward. He said, “So I have to jump?”
I said, “Yes, you can have your dance – you can do anything that you want. Get ready!”
He looked down, and he said, “I am a wrestler. These rocks and this river – and you have found some spot! You must have been rehearsing here. Anybody else trying to jump is going to break his neck or leg or anything.”
I said, “You brought your son.”
He said, “I brought him not knowing what was the situation. I thought if you can jump, he can jump; he is of the same age. But here, seeing the situation, I was worried and thinking that if you didn’t turn up today it would be a great thing, because my boy is not going to survive. But you are clever: you simply dropped my boy and caught hold of me. I will try.”
And the same thing happened. Even that wrestler who was so courageous in every way, who had been fighting his whole life… But coming to the brink, the sudden break – because the slope was such, at least fifty feet down, and the river was thirty feet deep, and the rocks were such that it was beyond your control where you would land, what would hit you. And standing on the top of the hill the wind was so strong that you could be simply killed.
He just stopped there and he said, “Forgive me.” And he told his son, “Son, come home. This is not our business. Let him do it – perhaps he knows something.”
That day I felt strangely about myself: why doesn’t that break come to me? I had tried on very strange places…
The railway bridge was the highest point on the river, naturally, because in the rains the river swells up so big and the bridge always has to remain above it, so it was made at the highest point. And there were always two guards at the bridge, for two reasons: firstly, so that nobody committed suicide, because that was the place for people to commit suicide. Just falling from there into the river was enough. You never reached the river alive, you lost your breath somewhere in the middle. It was so high that just to look downward was enough to give you a nauseous feeling.
And secondly, there was a fear of revolutionaries who were planting bombs, blowing up bridges, burning trains. To destroy a bridge was very significant for the revolutionaries because those bridges were joining two parts of the province. If the bridge was broken then the army could not pass, and the revolutionaries could do something in the other part where there was no army headquarters. So these guards were there twenty-four hours a day. But they accepted me.
I explained to them, “I neither want to commit suicide, nor have I come to blow up your bridge. In fact I want the bridge to be guarded carefully because this is my place. If this bridge is gone then my highest point of jumping is gone.”
They said, “This is your practice?”
I said, “This is my practice. You can watch, and once you have seen you will be convinced that I have no other desire.”
They said, “Okay, we will watch.”
I jumped. They could not believe it. When I came back I asked them, “Would you like to try?”
They said, “No, but for you it is always free; you can come at any time. We have seen you going so easily, but we cannot jump – we know people have died from here.”
That bridge was known as Death Bridge and that was the easiest, cheapest way to commit suicide. Even if you purchased poison, some money was wasted, but from that bridge it was simply easy. The river there was the deepest and it took you away. Nobody would even find your body because just after a few miles it met a bigger river, a huge river – and you were gone forever.
Seeing the fear on those two guards’ faces, seeing the fear in this wrestler, I simply started wondering, “Perhaps I miss the breaks; perhaps they should be there because they are protective.” But as I started growing up… And I have been growing up, I have not been growing older. From my very birth I have been growing up, growing up, growing up. Never think that I am growing older. Only idiots grow older, everybody else grows up.
As I started growing up I started becoming aware of my past life, and death, and I remembered how easily I had died – not only easily but enthusiastically. My interest was more in knowing the unknown that was ahead than in the known that I had seen. I have never looked back. And it has been my whole life’s way not to look back. There is no point. You can’t go back, so why waste time? I am always looking ahead. Even at the point of death I was looking ahead – and that’s what made me clear why I was missing the breaks.
Those breaks are provided by your fear of the unknown. You are clinging to the past and you are afraid to move into the unknown. You are clinging to the known, the acquainted. It may be painful, it may be ugly, but at least you know it. You have grown a certain kind of friendship with it.
You will be surprised, but this is my experience of thousands of people: that they cling to their misery for the simple reason that they have grown a certain kind of friendship with misery. They have lived with it so long that now to leave it will be almost like a divorce.
The same is the situation with marriage and divorce. The man thinks at least twelve times in a day about divorce; the woman thinks also – but somehow both go on managing, living together, for the simple reason that both are afraid of the unknown. This man is bad, okay, but who knows about the other man? He may prove worse. And at least you have become accustomed to this man’s badness, unlovingness. And you can tolerate it, you have tolerated it; you have also become thick-skinned. With the new man, you never know; you will have to start from the very scratch again. So people go on clinging to the known.
Just watch people at the moment of death. Their suffering is not death. Death has no pain in it, it is absolutely painless. It is really pleasant; it is just like a deep sleep. Do you think deep sleep is something painful?
But they are not concerned about death, and deep sleep, and pleasure; they are worried about the known that is slipping out of their hands. Fear means only one thing: losing the known and entering into the unknown.
Courage is just the opposite of fear.
Always be ready to drop the known – more than willing to drop it – not even waiting for it to be ripe. Just jump on something that is new…its very newness, its very freshness, is so alluring. Then there is courage. Courage is not something that you have to exercise for and practice, do yoga asanas and go to a gymnasium for. No, I have seen those courageous people. They are not courageous at all.
I had a friend when I was in my matriculation year, who was very much interested in wrestling. He was a good wrestler, and of course he was thought to be very brave and courageous; he had won the state championship for wrestling.
In those days in our town there was the high school, but examinations for matriculation were not held there. For matriculation we had to go to the district place where the examinations were held. So we all went to the district place. It was not far away, just thirty miles, but we had to stay there for fifteen or twenty days – as long as the examination continued. By chance it happened that he had no place to stay, so I said, “You can stay with me.”
One of my father’s friends, who was a kerosene oil dealer, had a beautiful house. In front of the guest house there was a big house which he used for empty kerosene tin cans – just to collect them there – and on the side was his shop. What I had experienced many times before – many times I had been there and had stayed in their guest house – was that in the hot summer in India, when it is so hot in the day, the tin cans expand, and in the night they again come back to their size. So they make much noise, and if there are thousands of tin cans in the house, then you can think what kind of noise they will create.
So this wrestler…we were talking about things and for some reason we started talking about ghosts. He said, “I don’t believe in ghosts.”
I said, “It is not a question of belief. Do you want to see one?”
He said, “No, but there is no question of seeing. I don’t believe in ghosts.”
I said, “If you don’t believe, then don’t be afraid. I can manage a meeting this very night.”
Now he was in a corner. He said, “Okay. I don’t believe that there are ghosts.” But I could see on his face all his wrestling – because you can’t wrestle with a ghost. And I said, “A simple thing has to be done. You see the house in front?”
He said, “Yes.”
I said, “On the second floor, there is a beautiful room. Go there. Sleep there tonight and you will meet them because the ground floor of this house is occupied by ghosts.”
He said, “I don’t believe it – this is all nonsense.”
I said, “No problem. If by chance you are right, there is no problem; if by chance you prove wrong, I am always here. You can just give me a call from the balcony.”
He said, “There will be no need of calling anybody.”
He went into the house. The staircase went by the ground floor where all those tin cans were gathered. He looked at all those tin cans, but he had no idea what those tin cans could do. He went up and he said, “There is nothing – no problem.” I left him upstairs and I told him, “I am going out. Please lock it from within so nobody comes in.” So he came back, locked the door and went up.
Nearabout one o’clock in the night, it started. Of course I was fast asleep by that time thinking that nothing was going to happen. I had waited for one and a half hours, and then I said, “Perhaps today the climate is not good, or something else is the matter.” So I went to sleep. But by one or one-thirty, there was such a crowd that I woke up thinking, “What is the matter?” I had completely forgotten that I had put that boy there – and that was the matter.
A whole crowd was gathered there, and he was standing on the balcony, screaming; he could not make any words come out. He became almost like a person who cannot speak, and as he saw me – because all those people were strangers to him – as he saw me, he just raised his hand, and I said, “What is the matter – ghosts?”
He said yes with his head – he could not say it with his mouth; with his head he said it. So I said, “Why don’t you come and open the door?…”
We had to put a ladder up to the balcony, but he was so shaky that two persons had to put him on the ladder, and somehow we brought him down. I had to pour cold water on his head; then he started speaking. He said, “My God! If you had said that there were so many ghosts I would not have believed you. I thought that maybe there would be one or two I could manage them. But there were so many, and they were going from one tin can into another, from another into another. They were passing by and running all around, and making sounds – and you told me to come down by the staircase which passes just by the side of those cans!”
I said, “Now do you think that ghosts exist?”
He said, “Not only do I know, I will never forget; this experience is enough for my whole life. I will never say anything against any ghost. Although they did no harm to me, I have never been shaken so much. I feel as if all my energy is gone and I have become hollow within.”
I said, “Don’t be worried, by the morning you will be solid again; just have a good sleep.”
But he could not sleep the whole night, tossing and turning, and he said, “Can you hear the noises even from here?”
I said, “I can hear them, but I know those ghosts are very friendly people and I have been here many times. You are unnecessarily getting worried.”
He said, “Friendly? Ghosts – and friendly! Only you can sleep here – I am going. I will sleep in the railway station, and in the morning I will find some other house, because even in this house I can hear that sound. I can neither study, nor can I take the examination if these sounds continue.”
And actually that’s what happened. He went in the middle of the night to the railway station. I don’t know what he did, where he slept in the railway station, but in the morning he was not in the examination hall. I made inquiries; I phoned his family, and they said, “Yes, he has come back by the night train. He says, ‘There are so many ghosts – this year is gone. This year I cannot sit for the examination in that city. Next time I will choose another center, another district place, not that town.’ And he is so afraid…. What really happened?”
I said, “Nothing has happened, and when I come I will explain the whole thing. But the year is gone and he is responsible, because he insisted, ‘I don’t believe in ghosts.’ I said ‘I know their place,’ so I showed him the place.”
His family is still angry with me because then he never passed matriculation; he is still a non-matriculate. He tried eleven times, but the fear went so deep in him that at examination time he would start feeling nervous. The whole experience of that night would become alive again; he would start reliving it.
After eleven years even the family said, “Don’t unnecessarily harass yourself – forget about it. It is your doing: Why did you insist to that person that there are no ghosts? You know that he is clever enough to arrange something, and he must have managed it. We can’t see how he managed, but he must have done something.”
I explained to them that there was nothing managed; that it was just tins, empty tins, which shrink in the night when it gets cold, and they make a noise. And because they are piled on top of each other it seems as if something is going from one to another, passing by, roaming around. But no explanation could help. That shock really went deep into his heart.
The fear of death is certainly the greatest fear, and the most destructive of your courage.
So I can suggest only one thing. Now you cannot go back to your past death, but you can start doing one thing: Always be ready to move from the known to the unknown, in anything, any experience.
It is better, even if the unknown proves worse than the known – that is not the point.
Just your change from the known to the unknown, your readiness to move from the known to the unknown, is what matters. It is immensely valuable. And in all kinds of experiences, go on doing that. That will prepare you for death, because when death comes you cannot suddenly decide, “I choose death and leave life.” These decisions are not made suddenly.
You have to go inch by inch, preparing, living moment to moment. And as you grow more familiar with the beauty of the unknown you start creating a new quality in you. It is there, it has just never been used. Before death comes, go on moving from the known to the unknown. Always remember that the new is better than the old.
They say all that is old is not gold. I say, even if all that is old is gold, forget about it. Choose the new – gold or no gold, it doesn’t matter.
What matters is your choice: your choice to learn, your choice to experience, your choice to go into the dark. Slowly slowly your courage will start functioning. And sharpness of intelligence is not something separate from courage, it is almost one organic whole.
With fear there is cowardliness and there is bound to be retardedness of the mind, mediocrity. They are one part. They are all together, they support each other. With courage comes sharpness, intelligence, openness, an unprejudiced mind, the capacity to learn – they all come together.
Start by a simple exercise, and that is: always remember, whenever there is a choice choose the unknown, the risky, the dangerous, the insecure, and you will not be at a loss.
And only then…this time death can become a tremendously revealing experience and can give you the insight into your new birth – not only insight but even a certain choice. With awareness you can choose a certain mother, a certain father. Ordinarily it is all unconscious, just accidental, but a man dying with awareness is born with awareness.
You can ask my mother about something – because she happens to be here. For three days after my birth I didn’t take any milk, and they were all worried, concerned. The doctors were concerned: “How is this child going to survive if he simply refuses milk?” But they had no idea of my difficulty, of what difficulty they were creating for me. They were trying to force me in every possible way. And there was no way I could explain to them, or that they could find out by themselves.
In my past life, before I died, I was on a fast. I wanted to complete a twenty-one day fast, but I was murdered three days before my fast was complete. Those three days remained in my awareness even in this birth: I had to complete my fast. I am really stubborn; otherwise, people don’t carry things from one life to another life. Once a chapter is closed, it is closed.
For three days they could not manage to put anything in my mouth; I simply rejected it. But after three days I was perfectly okay and they were all surprised: “Why was he refusing for three days? There was no sickness, no problem, and now, after three days, he is perfectly normal.” It remained a mystery to them. But I don’t want to talk about these things to you because they will all be hypothetical, and there is no way for me to prove them scientifically. And I don’t want to give you any beliefs, so I go on cutting away all that may create a belief system in your mind.
You love me, you trust me, so whatever I say you may trust it. But I insist again and again that anything that is not based on your experience, accept it only hypothetically. Don’t make it your belief. If sometimes I give an example, that is sheer necessity. The questioner has asked, “How did you manage to be so courageous and sharp in your childhood?”
I did not do anything, I simply continued what I was doing in my past life. And that’s why in my childhood I was thought to be crazy, eccentric – because I would not give any explanation of why I wanted to do something. I would simply say, “I want to do it. There are reasons for me why I am doing it, but I cannot give you those reasons because you cannot understand.”
My father would say, “I cannot understand and you can?”
I said, “Yes, it is something that belongs to my inner experience. It has nothing to do with your age, your being my father. You, of course, can understand much more than I can understand, but this is something which is inside me; only I can approach there, you cannot.”
And he would simply say, “You are impossible.”
I said, “If everybody accepted this it would be a great relief. Just accept me as impossible so I am no longer a problem for you and I don’t have to trouble explaining all kinds of things. I am going to do whatever I am going to do. There is no way to change it. For me it is absolute. It is not a question of your giving me permission or not.”
So this was my usual practice: whatever I wanted to do, I would do. For example, in my town, in those days before India was divided…. The creation of Pakistan has destroyed many things in India. All the snake charmers were Mohammedan; they all moved to Pakistan. India is almost empty of snake charmers; otherwise every day Indian roads were simply a joy. On one corner you would see a magician doing such tremendous tricks that you would completely forget that Jesus was a man of miracles. People on the streets were doing things just to collect perhaps one rupee at the most after the whole show – and that was a lot. And some other place somebody is making the snakes dance around him with his special kind of flute.
I was interested in snakes; I watched many snake charmers. I was looking for somebody who could have a little compassion on a child. I followed one old man. Snake charmers used to stay outside the town on the other shore of the river. The municipal committee did not allow them to stay on this side because of their snakes. They had to stay on the other side of the river so even if snakes wanted to come to this side they couldn’t.
I followed him. Many times he looked back, and when we were alone, he said, “My son, why are you coming behind me?”
I said, “I have been looking for you for years.”
“For me?” he said.
I said, “Yes, because I wanted to know: what is the art catching snakes?” But he said, “Why did you wait for me? There are so many snake charmers coming and going.”
I said, “I wanted somebody who can have compassion on me. I cannot give you money because I cannot tell my parents that I need money to learn snake-charming. That will be the end of it.”
He said, “That’s true. But have you got their permission?”
I said, “If I get their permission I get their permission only when I don’t want to do something. Whenever I want to do something I do it first, then whatsoever happens, happens. When I have done it, they ask, ‘Why didn’t you ask?’ And my answer is always, ‘Simply because I wanted to do it, and you were not going to permit me. Now you make it difficult for me. If you give me a blank permission there is no problem, or if you promise me that even if I ask you such a thing you are going to say yes, I will ask.’ But snake-charming? I think,” I told that old man, “they are not going to permit me. But there is no need, you just tell me the trick.” And I persuaded him.
He was a very loving man; he said, “Okay. One day I was also a child, and one day I also wanted to learn and had asked somebody, and so many people refused. No, I cannot refuse you.”
And he told me small tricks. He said, “First you start catching water snakes because water snakes don’t have poison; They look absolutely like other snakes but they are without poison. So,” he said, “practice with water snakes.”
“Water snakes?” I said. “I know many of them because all around the river I am familiar with their places. How do I catch them?”
He said, “The method is very simple. You have just to hold their mouth tight so they can’t bring their tongue out. So one thing: so that they don’t bring their tongue out, you hold their mouth very tight. And the second thing: with the other hand, hold their tail, because if you leave the other end, they will immediately wind themselves up around your hand, and they wind themselves so tight that your hand opens. And once their tongue is out then you cannot be saved. But with water snakes there is no problem, even if their tongue is out; that’s why, for practice, you start with water snakes.
“First, hold their mouth, keep it tightly closed catch hold of their tail and stretch them as much as you can, so that even if sometimes you forget or you lose your grip…. Stretch them as much as you can so that they cannot just circle around your arm and press it so much that your hand opens. And even if your hand opens and their tongue comes out, hold them with both your hands. Don’t let them turn upward.
“The snake has its glands of poison in the top of the mouth, and its method of biting is, first, it bites with its teeth; that is just to make a wound in your body. Then it turns itself upward, so from its gland the poison starts flowing on your wound. He does not bite you really, his teeth are not poisonous. His teeth are just to create a wound so blood is available to pour poison in; then the blood will take the poison around your body. So even if he opens his mouth, don’t be worried. Just don’t let him turn upward – hold him.”
I tried it with the river snakes. That was a great experience. They are really quick, it is not so easy. Once I had learned with water snakes, I told the man, and he said, “Now you try with my snakes because they are trained and their poison gland has been removed. But wild, these are really dangerous snakes. You should not start with them; first try with the trained ones. These are all for show business. Their glands have been removed so they cannot do anything; but they can make all the show of biting. And that’s how snake-charmers used to sell medicine.”
A small seed of some tree, which is rare and is found only in the Himalayas – it has value because you cannot find it anywhere else – they used to sell that. Their simple method was: they would let their snake bite them in front of you and blood would appear. The snake would turn upward – nothing but saliva was pouring on their blood – and then they would just put that seed, which was a porous seed, on their wound. It sticks onto the wound and sucks the blood and the saliva that the snake has left there; when they take it off, their hand is almost clean, there is nothing. They were selling those seeds – and they were useless, there was nothing in it. With the real snake nothing is going to work, but those snakes were just show business.
So he told me, “This is our business. We have nothing to do with real snakes. Don’t bother with real snakes, you can play with my snakes. But once you learn, then if a chance arises you can catch hold of any snake.”
And when my parents came to know…they had to come to know because that was the whole thing that I was learning. I brought a long water snake into the class. That was the class the principal himself used to take. He was always talking of courage, and this and that. And when I came in with the snake hanging over my back and holding his mouth and went just close to his desk, he stood on his chair. He said, “Keep away! Keep away! Don’t come close.”
I said, “This is nothing, this is just a poisonous snake. You are not a cowardly man, come down.”
He said, “Get out of the room! I want nothing to do with you. And I promise I will not punish you – just get out. I will never raise the question that you brought the snake into the class. Just get out!”
But I remained there, and I said, “What about my father? You have to promise before thirty students that I never came into this class with a snake. Say it loudly.”
And the snake was so big that he had to say loudly, “I promise that you never came into this class with any snake.”
I said, “That’s okay. I am going.”
But he became so freaked out…”This is now too much. If this boy starts doing this kind of thing, he can bring a lion or something. How did he manage?” He rushed to my father, and he told him. He said, “Don’t say that I have told you because he has taken my promise before thirty boys who are always in his favor because if they are not he will create trouble for them. So the whole class as a solid unity is always behind him. Whatsoever he does doesn’t matter – they are in his favor. So they will say he never came with any snake.”
I came home. My father said, “Anything happen today?”
I said, “Every day something or other happens. Life is such a joy.”
He said, “It may be for you but for others you are a nuisance. I am thinking of sending you to a boarding school.” I said, “That’s a great idea. Boarding school, you mean?”
He said, “You have some ideas about boarding school?”
I said, “It would be perfectly good because you will not be there, the family will not be there. Nobody to bother me – and all that freedom…. And I will continue to do the same things that I do. I know what is troubling you. Badri Prasad Gupta was here?” I smelled around and said, “I can smell him – he stinks!”
My father said, “Just get lost! I don’t want to talk with you because from the very beginning you are prepared.”
I said, “Yes, and if you want to see the snake it is in the bag.” He escaped from me, ahead of me – he was out of the room!
But there was no training as such; I was just enjoying everything. It was such a joy to learn to catch snakes. I followed the magicians to learn their small tricks, anything that I came across. And I learned much more outside the school walls, colleges and university than in the university, colleges and schools themselves.
So I feel really sad and sorry for all those people who think all learning is confined to those walls. The real learning is outside. What is inside the walls of schools, colleges, universities is all borrowed, bogus, with none of the authenticity of your own experience, or exploration.
Courage will come to you.
Just start with a simple formula:
Never miss the unknown.
Always choose the unknown and go headlong. Even if you suffer, it is worth it – it always pays. You always come out of it more grown up, more mature, more intelligent.

============================================================

Osho,
What is the difference between accepting myself and loving myself?
There is great difference between the two. Accepting yourself is a much lower state of consciousness – better, of course, than rejecting yourself. It is a medicine; the disease is rejection. And anything medicinal has no permanent or ultimate value; its value is only in curing the disease. Once the disease is cured the medicine has to be thrown away.
The idea of accepting yourself arose because of all the religions for centuries teaching you not to accept yourself. They have created a certain conditioning in the mind which condemns you. It is the priest, the state, which have managed, by continuous repetition, to convince you that a few things are ugly in you: you have to hide them, repress them. And they also give you the idea what is good – which is not in you, which you have to learn and practice.
This point has to be noted: the bad is in you, born in you, part of your nature – obviously it has to be repressed, condemned, controlled, kept in order. The best thing is to destroy it completely. If it is not possible for you to destroy it, then at least don’t leave it uncontrolled; keep it in control. And the society respects the man most who has destroyed that bad part completely, burned it out.
Such people are called saints, sages, mahatmas.
Lower than them are those people who have not been able to destroy it completely, but have been successful in controlling the bad part. It is within boundaries. They have created a cage for it – it can go on roaming inside it, roaring inside it. It is troublesome to them but it brings tremendous respectability outside in the world.
These are the respectable citizens.
The most condemned are those who allow freedom to their natural parts which religions think are bad they go with them. These people are condemned as criminals by the law. And if they are not caught by the law then religions have provided a God who is all-observing for twenty-four hours a day.
He never sleeps for a single moment, never takes his eyes off you as if you are the only person in this whole infinite universe – and goes on noting in detail what you are doing; not only that, but what you are thinking, dreaming, fantasizing. And all this has to be accounted for one day; on the day of judgment, you will have to answer for it.
So those who are caught by the law, the law will punish, and those who are somehow not caught by law – and of course the law cannot catch you if you are thinking a bad thought, fantasizing something. Even if you are fantasizing a murder, it is not illegal, it is not a crime; the law cannot punish you. The law can punish you only when your thought becomes an action.
But religions were not satisfied only with that, they want to punish your thoughts too; so, God will punish you…. And they have created their hell for those who allow their unacceptable parts to go according to nature.
In short, the natural being in you is not acceptable in its totality to these religions. Many fragments of it are absolutely condemned. A few fragments of it can be used, but in moderation, with control. And the real good has to be learned. You don’t bring it from nature: it has to be earned, deserved.
Now, if for millions of years this kind of conditioning goes on and on, naturally you start having a certain conscience – which is not consciousness.
Conscience is a social by-product.
Consciousness is your ultimate nature.
For consciousness there is nothing wrong in you. Everything that nature has provided you can be used for the growth of consciousness. It is raw material.
Have you seen when a building is being constructed and all the raw material is there? You cannot conceive that a beautiful building will come out of it, that a Taj Mahal will be created out of this mess. Your immediate idea will be, “What is this mess all about? Clean ground is far better.” But you don’t know that all that is cluttering the ground can become part of an immensely beautiful building. It just needs the right architect, the right builders.
There is a Sufi school whose name is simply “The Builders.” They have chosen the name “The Builders” because of this fact that man comes from nature as raw material. Nature gives you everything that you need to become a god; but it gives you freedom. It does not impose it on you, because if you are made a god, manufactured a god, your godliness will be worthless. Then you are assembled in a factory.
No, so much freedom is given to you that from the same raw material you can create a devil, you can create a god; you can create a hell for yourself, you can create a heaven. You can fall to the lowest and you can rise to the highest. But nothing is unnatural, neither the highest nor the lowest. Both are your possibilities, and you are free to choose.
But religions have been telling an absolute lie.
They have been saying that you are born in sin, that your nature is basically leading you toward more and more sin. You have to fight with nature, so everything natural becomes in some way evil, and everything that you can do against nature becomes good. That is their definition.
Just look at all the religions and their definitions of good and bad. They may differ about certain things – whether they are good or not – but as far as their fundamentals are concerned, there is no difference.
This is the basic fundamental: that all that has a natural pull on you is sick. You have to get out of the grip of nature – nature is evil and you have to become something supernatural. Then this question of rejection naturally arises. Much has to be rejected in you; almost everything that is natural has to be rejected in you.
It means, in other words, life has to be denied, love has to be destroyed, laughter has to be crippled. You have to be made almost a robot, functioning according to principles given by your pseudo-religious prophets, messiahs.
For example, Jesus says, “Love your enemy.” He himself cannot love, neither can his God do that. It is such a simple thing: if God loves his enemies then the sinners should be sent to paradise, not to hell. And the whole bogus theology falls with a single hit, nothing much is needed. If God loves his enemies, then what about the devil? The devil is God’s archenemy – he should make him a boyfriend, a girlfriend, anything, but he should love him.
And what are people doing in hell if God loves his enemies? If Jesus loves his enemies then, on the day of judgment, first he should choose his enemies to enter paradise. Christians should be the last because they are not his enemies; his love first should go to those who are against Christians. But that is not the case.
He promises his disciples that, “At the last judgment day, I will be there to sort out my people, my sheep.” And it is significant that he calls them sheep. Whether he was a shepherd or not is questionable, but those people were certainly sheep – and they still are. In fact, except sheep, who needs the shepherd? – not man.
Jesus reduced people to sheep by forcing them to believe, to have faith – not to argue, not to doubt, not to question. You are destroying man’s humanity, and by and by he becomes a vegetable. Of course vegetables are great believers. They never argue, they never doubt; even if you cut them they don’t distrust you. You go on butchering them, they go on believing in you – and that’s what Jesus wants from people.
Jesus cannot love his enemies. And he knows perfectly well that his father who is in heaven is also of the same mind, because when he was crucified…. His last prayer has never been looked at from this angle. It has been thought beautiful; from one angle it looks beautiful, but before you judge anything you should move around it and see it from all angles.
Jesus says, “Forgive these people for they know not what they are doing.” He is asking his father to forgive these people who are crucifying him “because they know not what they are doing.” Now, two things are certain: Firstly, he is not certain whether his father is going to forgive them or not; otherwise, what is the point of the prayer?
If he loves his enemies, he will simply give embraces and kisses to these people who crucified his son. There is no question of forgiving them; otherwise you are depriving them of the kisses of God and the embraces of God and the love of God. If he forgives them, they are no longer enemies; they have not done anything wrong so the question of loving them does not arise. And Jesus praying certainly shows that he is not certain that God is going to forgive them. He is suspicious; otherwise prayer is irrelevant, absurd.
Secondly, even though praying for them, that they should be forgiven, he goes on being arrogant – for which he is being crucified. And he is not leaving that point at all. In the end he adds his insistence, “Forgive them….” Why? “…because they know not what they are doing.” They are ignorant and he knows. This idea, that they are all ignorant, is simply egoistic.
And you don’t have any proof of what you have been telling them. They are simply asking for the proof, and this is one of the ways of finding out whether you are the messiah or not: the messiah should be crucified and there will be a resurrection. So these poor fellows are simply following religious scriptures. They know exactly what they are doing. They are not ignorant, they are really much too knowledgeable. Ignorant people are innocent; ignorant people don’t crucify anybody.
These are knowledgeable rabbis, the high priests of the Jewish temple. These are very knowledgeable people, far more knowledgeable than Jesus is. And this is the whole conflict, that they think this man is simply a crackpot – with no arguments, with no logic, with no rationality, with no support of the scriptures – who goes on proclaiming that he is the only begotten son of God. Now, anybody can say that. There is no way to disprove it.
I have heard a story…. A man, very ugly, dirty, poor, uneducated, fell in love with a very beautiful girl of the city – rich, cultured. And he was in difficulty, how to get this girl? Even to meet her was difficult. The story belongs to India, it can happen only in India. One Gandhian, a follower of Mahatma Gandhi, suggested a simple method: do what Gandhi did.
The man said, “What am I supposed to do?”
The Gandhian said, “You simply go with your bed, spread the bed before the palace of that rich man and go on a fast. Say that unless you are married to the girl you are not going to break your fast – a fast unto death. And I will collect people; don’t be worried.”
The idea was appealing, and soon the man was lying there with signboards all around and flags and decked, “With our love….” “Fast unto death for love.” Nobody had ever heard of such a great lover before – and so religious too; not threatening anybody, simply killing himself. Now, you cannot take action against any person…and particularly in India. All the Gandhians were in support because of course it is a non-violent method. The police cannot interfere, the government cannot interfere.
The father was in trouble, thinking, “This is something strange. If he dies I am condemned for my whole life. People will say, ‘You killed that man.’ The murder is on my head. And I cannot let this man get married to my daughter. He has no merit, no qualification he is a beggar, a criminal.”
Two or three days passed and it was in all the newspapers with big photos of the man saying that he was dying for love, and condemning the rich man.
Finally, the old man went to an old Gandhian to ask, “You suggest something, because I have inquired of all my friends and they say, ‘Nothing can be done against it; even the British government had to leave because of Gandhian fasts. And who are you? – you will have to give in, otherwise that man will die on your floor and you are condemned forever. And nobody is going to marry your daughter either, remember, because a murder is on you, on your daughter: you killed a poor man.”‘
So finally he thought it was better to ask some Gandhian, an old Gandhian. The Gandhian said, “It is very simple – just use a Gandhian technique against a Gandhian technique. I know a prostitute uglier than that man, very old, just on the verge of death, suffering from leprosy. Just for a little money she will be ready….”
The rich man could not understand; he asked, “What do you mean? What will that prostitute do?”
He said, “She will do everything. We have to give some money to her and tonight she will also come with her bed, lie down by the side of the man and say, ‘I will die if you don’t marry me.’ And by the morning the man will be gone – don’t be worried. Just seeing that woman will be enough! He will never come back to your house.”
And that’s what happened. The man did not even wait for the morning; the moment he saw the woman coming he asked, “What is the matter? What are you doing here?”
She said, “I am going to marry you, otherwise I am going to do a fast unto death, here, just by your side. Either marry me or I will die.”
The man looked here and there, but it was silent and in the middle of the night there is nobody. He rolled up his bed and not only escaped from that place, he escaped from the town for a few days, because who knows, that woman might find him and catch hold of him…. He himself had started the Gandhian game; now he was caught in it.
It is a very cunning device invented by all the religions…. They had to invent it because without it there was no way to catch hold of humanity. And certainly, they have been successful. For millions of years they have been sitting on your head. They have reduced all humanity to slavery, in every possible way.
What they have done is this: what is natural to you they have condemned some part of it. Different religions have chosen different parts – that doesn’t matter. All that matters is, it has to be natural.
Natural means whatever you do you cannot destroy it. Whatever you do there is no way to get rid of it; at the most you can repress it, hide it so deep within yourself that nobody may be able to detect. But you will know always…. The priest, of course, knows; and the priest has ways of finding out.
First, it is absolutely there; there is no question about it, because it is against nature to drop it. The priest knows it is there, you know it is there. You may even forget it is there but the priest will not allow you to forget that. He will go on reminding you in every sermon, every scripture, every day in every possible way, that your animal – they call your natural being the animal, the devil – is within you, it is there. And the more sophisticated religions even make you confess it – for example, Catholicism.
You have to go to confess to the priest what sin you have committed, what sin you have been thinking to commit, what your fantasies are, what your dreams are. The pope has called it also a sin to confess directly to God. The world seems to be absolutely idiotic, dumb: this Polack goes on saying things and nobody even raises a question. Confessing to God directly is a sin? Why? Is not God your father also? No, the reason is, if you start confessing to God directly, what about the priest?
The whole key to the Catholic enslavement of its followers is in the hands of the priest. He knows all the dark corners of everybody in the congregation. You cannot leave the congregation – he may expose you. He is dangerous in a way because you have confessed your secret to him, and you have confessed those things which you have been hiding from everybody else. Your whole respectability he can throw within a second; you will be nowhere. Right now you are at the height of respectability, but before the priest…he knows where you are, exactly.
Now, that is a great invention of Catholics – making you confess. But it makes no difference: all other religions, even without confession, know you…because what they have been asking of you is impossible. They have been telling you that two plus two is five, and they know it cannot be. Two plus two is always four.
And you have agreed with them that two plus two is five; now you are caught. If you say two plus two is four you are falling into your animal-hood; two plus two has to be five. And you know that that is wrong, but the wrong is respected. The right is not right; the natural is not acceptable.
It is because of this that psychoanalysis became such a tremendously successful phenomenon. It took over the whole world. Never has a single man’s idea been so significant that in his own lifetime it became a worldwide revolution. What was his secret? There was no secret. Simply seeing what Christians, Jews and other religions have been doing to people…. They have all repressed your sexuality; on that point they all agree, because sex is the most significant force in you.
Sex is your life-force.
It is from this energy that you come.
It is this energy that keeps you running, alive.
Call it elan vital, call it life-force – because the word sex has become so condemned by the priests that even to use it is to feel as if you are doing something wrong. Use “life-force” and you can see the difference. With the word life-force you don’t feel at all guilty. With sex immediately something inside you starts pinching – that is your conscience. The priest has managed to create a small mechanism in you; it starts pinching you, telling you that something is wrong.
Sigmund Freud is a by-product of the religions. If there had been none of these religions, there would have been no possibility of any psychoanalysis, because what would there be to analyze? First one needs a repressive system, then a Sigmund Freud is needed, an Adler is needed, a Jung is needed and they will go on coming.
While religions go on suppressing, more and more sophisticated methods of psychoanalysis and treatment will be coming. It is a growing profession. But they should remember this, and I think they have understood the point; within this half century psychoanalysts have understood the point. Now they are functioning in cooperation with religions as deprogrammers…very strange.
A Christian father may take his son to the deprogrammer because the son is moving away from Christianity to some new movement, to some new idea, some new ideology; and the psychoanalyst helps the father. Of course he charges – that is his business – and he deprograms the son. And things can be vice versa too.
Just a few days ago an old man was here, perhaps he is sixty-five. Now his children are thinking to take him to the deprogrammer because he has been coming here for one year continually, and joining in therapies and meditations, and now he is thinking of taking sannyas. Now a crucial moment has come – the family is afraid. He is the head of the family – not only the head of the family, he is the chairman of the corporation, the family’s business, which is tremendously large; one thousand million dollars per year he earns.
Of course millions of dollars he gives to charity, to Christians, so that religion is involved. They are afraid if he becomes a sannyasin, those millions will not go to Christianity. The children are afraid because it is all their inheritance but it is in his power. The psychiatrist is there, ready to help bring him back to the Christian fold.
Psychiatrists have understood this perfectly well, that the whole of their religion and their profession are together, they cannot be separated. If psychoanalysis succeeds, it will commit suicide; hence, psychoanalysis goes on and on, it never succeeds. It is not meant to succeed, because if a man is successfully psychoanalyzed he will be deprogrammed completely; then there is nothing to be done with him. He is completely free.
He will do things…. Now he need not have anybody else to guide him, to show him the way, to lead him to God. In his utter freedom he will know that he is part of this eternal existence and there is nobody to lead him. His nature is enough. His intuition is enough. Now he is clean enough to have his intuition function. No, psychoanalysis will not ever be complete.
And in the beginning of psychoanalysis the approach appeared as if it was against religion. It is not. They are conspirators in the same game. First the priest and the politician were two shareholders in the conspiracy. Now, a third shareholder has entered – the psychotherapist, the psychoanalyst, the psychologist; and they have all kinds of varieties. They have all joined in the conspiracy.
Just the other day I heard the news that four priests in South America – in one small country which has gone into the hands of the leftist revolutionaries, four priests have been told that they are no longer priests because they have accepted government posts. One is an education minister, three others are in higher posts. Now the pope cannot tolerate this – in a leftist government?
America has been trying to sabotage that government. You can see how conspirators, without even meeting each other, go on functioning in synchronicity. America is trying to sabotage that country; the pope is trying to sabotage it from his side. Those four priests – what wrong have they committed? I don’t think there is any problem.
If the priest becomes an education minister the pope should be happy that now the priest will have enough power over education: he may be able to educate people in religion. He should be happy, he should welcome it. But no, the priest is expelled from the priesthood. The reason given is that no priest is allowed to have a governmental post.
I was surprised. Then what about the pope himself? – because he is the head of the government in the Vatican. The Vatican is a country, an independent country – not very big, just eight square miles, but it is an independent country; and the pope is the head of the state and of the church, both.
This man should be expelled immediately. But who will expel him? – that is the question. Only I can expel him, but it will not be followed. I declare him expelled, he is no longer a pope at all – because if just by becoming an education minister in a small country somebody loses his priesthood, then your becoming the head of the whole government….
And the Vatican may be small but it has immense political power around the world, because six hundred million Catholics…. So the land may be small – that does not matter – but six hundred million Catholics around the world, that is his real state. It is all over the world, spread all over the world. But I wonder whether he himself thought about it, what he is doing. It can backfire. But it won’t backfire because nobody who has power is going to say anything against it; they will all be happy.
By the way these priests were thrown out, the pope has shown his attitude – that he is against the leftist government, that Catholics should get out of this movement, that they should be against the government, not for the government. He has shown, “I am for America,” without saying anything.
In the Vatican they have created an academy of sciences. The purpose is not science; they will exploit it. Already twenty-six Nobel prize-winners are members of the academy. It has already become respectable. Who is going to be welcomed in the academy? Sixty other scientists around the world have joined the academy. Four times it will be meeting in the year, discussing scientific progress and the problems that scientific progress creates.
But the real reason is that they will supply to that pope all the necessary information, the latest in all fields of science, so that he can decide what is right and what is wrong; so he can decide whether science should move in this direction and should not move in that direction. Particularly his interest is in genetic engineering.
Now, that is going to happen sooner or later, and it has to be done. We are capable now of engineering the human child in thousands of ways. We can give him a lifelong healthy body, from the very beginning prepared to resist all kinds of sicknesses. We can arrange how long we would like him to live, how long we would like him to be young; he can be young to the very last breath.
There is no need for old age. Old age simply can be wiped out, just as sickness can be wiped out. Man can grow up to youth, and then he can remain young for a hundred years, two hundred years; three hundred years is very easily possible. Right now it can be done, but it is not being done, because nobody is interested in life. All governments are interested in death.
All governments are putting seventy-five percent of their budget into arms. Even the poor countries are in the same competition: seventy-five percent of the budget of their country. People are dying, they don’t have enough to eat – and they are creating nuclear bombs and atomic bombs.
Nobody is interested in life; otherwise all facts and research are available to show that man can at least live three hundred years. In fact scientists say, “We don’t see any reason why man should have to die, because if he can manage for seventy years on an automatic renewal system, all that is needed is that his genes be reprogrammed.” That is genetic engineering.
If your father lived to seventy, and your grandfather lived up to seventy, you can be quite certain that you cannot live more than that. Maybe you will live a year or two more because you have better medical facilities, but not much more because they have given you genes which have a program. Those are the same genes that your father had, your grandfather had, your mother had, your grandmother had. At the most you can take the average of the combination of all those people’s genes, and that will be nearabout your life span.
But the genes can be reprogrammed; it is only a question of putting the right idea in their minds. Those genes have a certain small mind, and that mind carries the idea of seventy years of age. If you can just put one zero more it becomes seven hundred, and those poor genes will not in any way object to adding one zero more. It is no problem for them, not a burden. And genetic engineering is now capable of this; in animals it has succeeded, so there is no reason…because the process is the same whether in animals or man.
Now the pope is worried about that. And that is one of the reasons for creating the academy, so that genetic engineering be prohibited, or the pope decides whether it is moral or immoral. And certainly I can say that he will decide it is immoral, because God gives you seventy years – it is a God-given thing – and you try to improve upon God and make man seven hundred years old?
Certainly it will have implications, tremendous implications, because a man who is going to live seven hundred years will remain young at least up to five hundred years. That will be the equivalent of fifty – up to five hundred years he will remain interested in women!
You will have to change that phrase “dirty old man”; there will be no dirty old men. Up to five hundred years a man will be interested in women the women will be interested in men, and they will be capable of making love.
Of course the pope is worried. That’s what he has been trying to cut down as much as possible – and these fools, genetic engineers, they are trying to prolong it. Just seventy years is enough for eternal hell. Five hundred years of youth – they will have to create new hells for you. The old hell will not hold that much population; such great old sinners will come in that the former old ones will look childish and be told “Just get out of here!”
It is strange that the academy that the pope has created is not interested in any real problem of life, but is interested only in how to cut man’s life – not to solve any problems. But this is the logical end of their whole history. Your nature has to be destroyed, crippled repressed. That creates the greatest religious thing. guilt. And any man who is guilty cannot get out of the prison of the religions.
He may change from one prison to another; he may become a Christian from a Hindu, or a Buddhist from a Christian. That doesn’t matter; it is simply choosing your prison. That much you are allowed, because these prisons are without walls; you can simply move from one prison into another prison. But you will remain imprisoned because every religion depends on guilt.
That’s why I say my religion is the first authentic religion; it has no idea of guilt at all.
I don’t want you to feel guilty about anything, because nature has given to you out of its bounty. It is a gift to be received with joy, whatever it is. And a gift has not to be thrown out, repressed. Enjoy it.
So the first thing is accepting yourself – which is not very great; but seeing the situation in which humanity is, still it is a great revolution: accepting yourself.
But I don’t like the word accept, because that means somehow “What to do? This is the way I am; I accept it.” No, with my religion just accepting yourself is not enough.
Loving yourself, that is totally different.
Then you are feeling blessed.
Whatever nature has given – and we are nature, extensions, parts of it – we have to live it with a song, with a dance, with no question of guilt. That idea of accepting yourself has arisen because of guilt. Guilt says, “Don’t accept yourself; reject, go on rejecting. The more you reject yourself, the greater a saint you are.”
If you look into the history of religions you will find how many kinds of perversions have arisen out of this rejecting.
In Soviet Russia before the revolution there was a Christian cult, very prominent, which used to cut off their genitals. Every year at Christmas time – of course, that is the holiest time – these people would gather in great crowds around the churches and cut their genitals off and pile them up. Now women were at a loss, but not for long; soon they discovered they could cut off their breasts…and they started cutting off their breasts. It was such a bloody, idiotic affair, but these people were respected, worshipped almost like sages – they had done a great thing.
But even if you cut off your genitals that doesn’t mean that fantasies about sex will disappear or sex will disappear. It is in the very cells of your body, every fiber of your body. But educated people, even in the beginning of this century, were doing this. It was only because of the revolution that it became a crime. It was very difficult to stop them even after the revolution because it was their religious practice. It continued even after the revolution, here and there; in secret they would gather and do it.
More or less all the religions have been doing it in different ways. Jainism gives its monks so little food that there is no possibility that they might be able to generate any sexual energy. The food is just enough for them to breathe – only that much energy…Jaina monks are just skeletons. But the surprising thing is, sexual fantasy does not leave. The body has almost gone, there are only bones: the food is not enough for the most essential things in the body, so of actual sex there is no question.
First your life has to be saved. Sex is the life of your children, of your future generations; but first your life has to be saved; so when food goes into you it has priorities. First, it has to save your brain; otherwise, even if you are alive you will not be of any use, you will be worse than dead.
So the first priority is for the brain. But you will see in the Jaina monks, their brains start disappearing. You can see from their face no sign of any intelligence. They have not done a single creative act in five thousand years. So many people doing nothing – what happened to their brains? Those very delicate tissues died because the food was not available. Right proteins were not available, right vitamins were not available – those tissues slowly slowly died.
Then the heart has to be looked after. Then there are other functions in the body. Only when your whole body is looked after well do you accumulate sexual energy, because sexual energy is not in any way concerned with your life, it is concerned with lives to come. It is concerned with future generations, it can wait. But if you die there is no question of waiting; first you have to be preserved.
So Jainism has cut the food of the Jaina monk in such a way that he has simply destroyed his whole life energy, the whole system. He lives – that means he breathes – and he dies. He never experiences any joy, he cannot even smile. There is nothing left in his life to smile or laugh about.
All the religions in subtle ways – for example, Catholics have monasteries where only monks live, no woman can enter. There are nunneries where only nuns live, no man can enter. And when they say no man can enter or no woman can enter…. I have inquired, “There must be some age limit – for example, a six-year-old boy, he is a man, can he enter where the nuns live? Or a six-year-old girl, can she enter where only monks live?”
They said, “What are you saying? Scriptures say even a six-month-old girl “a six-month-old girl! “cannot enter the monastery.” And for one thousand years, in one monastery, Athos, no woman, not even a six-month-old girl, has entered. Now, they have cut out sex in a different way – but they have created a thousand and one perversions.
Homosexuality is one of the by-products of religions.
Now when I say it, all the religions will feel offended; let them be! Homosexuality is a by-product of religions – I cannot deny the truth – because you forced monks to live separately, nuns to live separately, you encouraged it.
Wherever only men are living, sooner or later homosexuality is going to happen. In army camps, in religious monasteries, in boys’ hostels, in girls’ hostels, in nunneries – wherever a single sex is living, an intelligent human mind will find some way to express its sexual energy; it is bound to find a way into homosexuality.
All religions condemn homosexuality.
And they are the producers of it.
They are playing really a very criminal game with humanity. On the one hand they are the causes of all perversions; on the other hand they condemn you because you are perverted.
My whole effort here is to make you aware that the people who cause perversions are not the people who are going to help you out of them. They are living respectable lives – rabbis, sages, popes, bishops, cardinals – on your guilt.
Let the guilt disappear from humanity and you will see all the religions disappearing so quickly…. It is just as when the early morning sun rises, and you can see that in the cool night, drops of water have accumulated on the petals of roses, on the leaves of trees. They are there, but as the sun rises they start evaporating; just within a few minutes they are gone.
Once guilt is dropped religions will simply evaporate; they cannot remain on the earth even a single moment more. It is guilt that keeps giving them food, sustenance; hence, the idea of accepting yourself arose. It is a humanitarian idea. It has come from those people who have been thinking, “How has man become unnecessarily miserable? He has made himself miserable just by fighting against himself.” They created the idea of accepting yourself. It was good for its time, but it is not enough.
It is the minimum that you can do. But when you can do the maximum, why stop at the minimum? When you can dance to abandon, then why go on just moving your body a little, as if under compulsion, ashamed: “What am I doing?” Accepting yourself is just like that: smiling, and yet still feeling, “What am I doing?…”
Something is negative in “accepting” yourself. The very word, acceptance, means there has been rejection before, a denial, and now you are trying to cover that denial, that rejection, with acceptance. No, I don’t want this kind of idea to be implanted in you.
My whole vision is of a human being, totally alive, intensely alive, enjoying everything that life makes available, and enjoying it with grace, with gratitude toward existence.
And that’s what loving yourself means.
It means that you have thrown all the garbage of religious rejection, repression. You have dropped all the ideals that they have given to you; you are now standing on your own as if you are Adam and Eve. No priest has been there before, no religion has been there before; you are uncorrupted, unspoiled, clean.
Start like Adam and Eve – just think of the idea!
Why bother about the past? Forget about it. You are the first man.
Start living as if you don’t know how to live. Nobody is there to teach you, no guidelines exist. No books exist which say how to do this, how to do that. You are just left alone on an island. Everything is available: Intelligence is within you, instinct is within you, intellect is within you, intuition is within you. Now start moving.
Yes, perhaps you may commit a few mistakes – there is no wrong in it, that’s how one learns. Perhaps a few times you may fall – nothing to be worried about. You can get up again; and next time you will be walking more carefully, more alert, so you have gained something out of that fall. Out of each mistake, each error, you are constantly gaining something.
Errors are valuable. Mistakes are immensely necessary. If you are somehow protected from committing mistakes and errors, you will never grow, you will never learn a thing, you will never mature.
So behave as if you are the first here. The whole world is available to you to explore. And in exploring it you will be surprised that simultaneously your inner world is being explored too, because as you explore the outer world your insight becomes deeper, your intelligence becomes sharper, your awareness becomes keener. And a perfectly fulfilled man is one who explores both the outer and the inner, and who, at the moment of death, can have a smile on his face: he lived totally, he is happy that he lived totally, he burned his life’s candle from both ends together.
When you can burn your candle from both ends together, why be miserly and burn just one end? When you can enjoy double the light and two flames together, enjoy it – because enjoyment is not simply enjoyment. Every joy is growth and brings you closer to blissfulness, to ecstasy.
And unless you have attained to a state of ecstasy where you can say, “I have arrived, I am fulfilled…. The purpose of existence in me is completed. If now death comes, it is welcome. Now that is the only thing that I don’t know.” A man who can say, “Death is now the only thing that I don’t know – life I have known,” will be enthusiastic about death, will be eager to meet it, would like to have a plunge into it.
And this is the paradox of life:
One who is ready to die, never dies.
One who is himself ready to jump into death, for him death disappears.
Death is only for cowards.
Death is only for those who have not lived, who have really remained dead their whole lives.
Death is not for the living.
The more alive you are, the farther away is death.
If you are totally living, there is no death:
Death exists not.
Then there is only life, life eternal.