---
title: From Unconciousness to Conscious 01
series: From Unconsciousness to Conscious 01-30
talk_number: 1
url: https://oshoworld.com/from-unconciousness-to-conscious-01
language: English
duration: 01:35:41
author: TALKS IN AMERICA
scraped_at: 2026-01-03T09:14:56.848230+00:00
---
Osho,
Why do you call your religion the first and the last religion?
It is a little difficult for me to speak again. It has been difficult always, because I have been trying to speak the unspeakable. Now it is even more so.
After one thousand, three hundred and fifteen days of silence, it feels as if I am coming to you from a totally different world. In fact it is so. The world of words, language, concepts, and the world of silence are so diametrically opposite to each other, they don’t meet anywhere. They can’t meet by their very nature. Silence means a state of wordlessness; and to speak now, it is as if to learn language again from abc. But this is not a new experience for me; it has happened before too.
For thirty years I have been speaking continuously. It was such a tension because my whole being was pulled toward silence, and I was pulling myself toward words, language, concepts, philosophies. There was no other way to convey, and I had a tremendously important message to convey; there was no way to shirk the responsibility. I had tried it. The day I realized my own being, it was such a fulfillment that I became silent. There was nothing left to be asked.

One of my professors at university, who was a world renowned man, Dr. S.K.Saxena – he had been a professor of philosophy in America for many years – again and again used to ask me to ask him some question. And those were the days when I was so fulfilled and so content, there was no question, no quest left.
So I used to say to him, “I have answers; I don’t have any questions.”
He used to laugh and say that I am crazy: “How can you have answers without questions?”
I insisted to him, “While you have questions you will never have answers. Unless your questioning drops away you will not find the answer. And it does not come in the form of an answer, but it answers all; not answering any particular question but simply answering all questions – possible, impossible, probable, improbable.”

After my enlightenment, for exactly one thousand, three hundred and fifteen days I tried to remain silent – as much as it was possible in those conditions. For a few things I had to speak, but my speaking was telegraphic. My father was very angry with me. He loved me so much that he had every right to be angry. The day he sent me to the university he had taken a promise from me that I would write at least one letter every week. When I became silent I wrote him the last letter and told him, “I am happy, immensely happy, ultimately happy, and I know from my very depth of being that I will remain so now forever, whether in the body or not in the body. This bliss is something of the eternal. So now, every week, if you insist, I can write the same again and again. That will not look okay, but I have promised, so I will drop a card every week with the word ditto Please forgive me, and when you receive my letter with the word ditto you read this letter.”
He thought I had gone completely mad. He immediately rushed from the village, came to the university and asked me, “What has happened to you? Seeing your letter and your idea of this ditto, I thought you were mad. But looking at you, it seems I am mad; the whole world is mad. I take back the promise and the word that you gave to me. There is no need now to write every week. I will continue to read your last letter.” And he kept it to the very last day he died; it was under his pillow.

The man who forced me to speak – for one thousand, three hundred and fifteen days I had remained silent – was also a very strange man. He himself had remained silent his whole life. Nobody had heard about him; nobody knew about him. And he was the most precious man I have come across in this, or any of my lives in the past. His name was Magga Baba. It is not much of a name; magga simply means a jug. He used to carry a jug – that was his only possession, a plastic jug. From the same jug he would drink, he would ask for food with it. People would drop anything in the jug: money, food, water. And that was all he had. Anybody who wanted to take from his jug was also allowed to; so people would take out money, or food – children, particularly…beggars. He neither prevented anybody from dropping, nor did he prevent anybody from taking. And he was absolutely silent, so nobody had any idea even of his name, because he had never said what his name was. They simply started calling him Magga Baba because of the jug.
But deep in the night, once in a while when there was nobody, I used to visit him. It was very difficult to find a time when nobody was there, because he attracted strange types of people. He was not speaking, so of course intellectuals were not going to him – just simple people. And what could you do with him? In India, to go to a man who has realized is called seva. Literally it means service, but it would not be justified because that word seva has a sacredness about it which service has not. When you go to a realized man what else can you do than serve him? So people would come and massage his feet and somebody would massage his head, and he would not say anything to anybody. He would neither say yes, nor would he say no. Sometimes they wouldn’t allow him even to sleep, because four or five people were massaging him; they were doing seva. Many times I had to throw people out. He was just living on a porch of a bungalow, open from all sides. Once in a while, particularly on cold winter nights, I used to find him alone; then he would say something to me.
He forced me to speak. He said, “Look, I have remained silent my whole life, but they do not hear, they do not listen. They cannot understand it; it is beyond them. I have failed. I have not been able to convey what I have been carrying within me, and now there is not much time left for me. You are so young, you have a long life before you: please don’t stop speaking. Start!”
It is a difficult, almost impossible job to convey things in words, because they are experienced in a wordless state of consciousness. How to convert that silence into sound? There seems to be no way. And there is none.
But I understood Magga Baba’s point. He was very old, and he was saying to me, “You will be in the same position. If you don’t start soon, the inner silence, the vacuum, the innermost zero, will go on pulling you inward. And then there comes a time when you cannot come out. You are drowned in it. You are utterly blissful, but the whole world is full of misery. You could have shown the way. Perhaps somebody may have heard, perhaps somebody may have walked on the path. At least you would not feel that you have not done what was expected of you by existence itself. Yes, it is a responsibility.”
I promised him, “I will do my best.” And for thirty years continuously I went on and on talking on every subject under the stars. But I came to a point which Magga Baba had not come to. He saved me from his disappointment; but I came to a new realization, a new point. I had thrown my net far and wide to catch as many people as have the potential to blossom. But then I felt that words are not enough.

Now I have found my people and I have to arrange a silent communion, which will help in two ways: those who cannot understand silence will drop out. That will be good. That will be a good weeding; otherwise they will go on clinging around me because of the words, because their intellect feels satisfied. And I am not here to satisfy their intellect. My purpose is far, far deeper, of a different dimension.
So these days of silence have helped those who were just intellectually curious, rationally interested in me, to turn their back on me. And secondly, it has helped me to find my real, authentic people who are not in need of words to be with me. They can be with me without words. That’s the difference between communication and communion.
Communication is through words, and communion is through silence.
So these days of silence have been immensely fruitful. Now only those are left for whom my presence is enough, my being is enough, for whom just the gesture of my hand is enough, for whom my eyes are enough – for whom language is no more a need.
But today I have suddenly decided to speak again – again after one thousand, three hundred and fifteen days – for the simple reason that the picture that I have been painting all my life needs a few touches here and there to complete it, because that day when I became silent, everything was left incomplete. Before I depart from you as far as my physical body is concerned, I would like to complete it.
I have been speaking to Hindus, to Christians, to Jews, to Mohammedans, to Jainas, to Buddhists, to Sikhs, to people belonging to almost all the so-called religions. This is for the first time that I am speaking to my own people: not to Hindus, not to Mohammedans, not to Christians, not to Jews. It makes a lot of difference, and only because of that difference can I give the finishing touch to the picture that I have been painting. What difference does it make? To you I can speak directly, immediately. To the Hindus I had to speak through Krishna, and I was not happy about it. But there was no other way, it was a necessary evil. To Christians I could speak only through Jesus. I was not at ease about it, but there was no other way. So one has to choose the least evil. Let me explain to you….
I do not agree with Jesus on all points. In fact, there are many questions which I have left unanswered, because even to touch them would have been destructive to those Christians who had come to me. Now they are clean. People say that I am brainwashing people. No, I am not brainwashing people. I am certainly washing their brains – and I believe in dry cleaning! So I can say to you now exactly what I feel; otherwise, it was a burden on me.
To speak on Mahavira was necessary because without that it was impossible to get any Jainas to hear me. And with Mahavira I do not agree on all points. In fact, my disagreement is on more points than my agreement. So I had to do a strange job: I had to choose those points on which I could agree, and not talk at all about those points which I was absolutely against. And even on the points on which I have a certain agreement, I had to manage another thing: that was to give new meanings to their words, to give my meaning to their words. It was not their meaning. If Mahavira comes he will be angry; if Jesus comes he will be angry. If this whole crowd of Jesus, Mahavira, Buddha, Lao Tzu, Chuang Tzu meets me somewhere, they will all be mad at me because I have made them say things they would never have dreamed of. They could not. Sometimes I have even put meanings into their words which go basically against them. But there was no other way.
The whole world is divided. You can’t find a single man who is clean. Either he is a Christian – he is carrying one kind of dirt; or he is a Hindu – he is carrying another kind of dirt. Now it is possible for me to say exactly and directly things which may even sound bitter.

You have asked why I call my religion the first and perhaps the last religion.
Yes, I call it the first religion, because religion is the highest flowering of consciousness. Up to now, man was not capable of conceiving of it. Even now, only one percent of humanity is barely able to conceive of it. The masses are still living in the past, burdened with the past, conditioned by the past. Barely one percent of mankind is in a state now to conceive of religion. All the old religions are based on fear. Now, a real religion destroys fear. It is not based on fear.
The concept of God in all the old religions is nothing but out of fear, a consolation; otherwise there is no validity, no evidence, no proof for the existence of God. The people who believe in God are really people who cannot trust in themselves. They need a father figure, a big daddy. They are still childish. Their mental age is nearabout twelve years, not more than that. They need somebody to give them courage, to guide them, to protect them. They are simply afraid to be left alone. They are afraid of death, which is coming closer every day. They need somebody to protect them from death. It is a projection of your fear. The moment your fear disappears you will find there is no God. The moment you are able to trust in yourself, to be yourself, there will be no God. You will laugh at the whole concept of God.
Now, Jesus is praying to God, continually raising his hands toward the sky, as if God is there above, in the heavens. And not only is he praying, he is receiving answers too – he is hearing voices! Now, these are symptoms of neurosis. To tell you the truth, Jesus is a mental case. He is a nice fellow, he is a good person, but the way he behaves proves many things. He is a fanatic. He carries the same kind of mind as Adolf Hitler. He is a fascist. He thinks that only those who follow him will be saved; anybody who does not follow him is going to fall into eternal hell. Now, only a simpleton can say such a thing. Who is he to save anybody? But he says he is “the only begotten son of God.” And he truly believes it. It is not only that he says it, he truly believes it!
Until the crucifixion, he truly believes it. It is only the crucifixion which brings a little sense to this insane man. Only at the crucifixion, he cries, “Why have you forsaken me?” He was certainly waiting for a miracle to happen. He is the only son of God, and God doesn’t come. And if he doesn’t come at the crucifixion, then when? And if even Jesus is not being saved, what is the guarantee that those who are going to follow Jesus will be saved? And the fools still believe that they will be saved if they follow Jesus. Even Jesus is not saved. And he knew it. He waited for a time for the miracle to happen – but it didn’t happen.
Miracles don’t happen at all. They have never happened. They are only wish fulfillments of people who are dreaming and hallucinating. They are not realities. If you believe in them, they may appear to you almost real, perhaps more than real. It is your belief that creates the hallucination; otherwise there is nothing – no miracle. But Jesus believed that he himself was doing miracles; and he was waiting for the miracle. These are all very childish qualities.
He is a little bit schizophrenic, too. He goes on saying, “Blessed are the meek, for theirs is the kingdom of God.” But he is not a meek person. He is very arrogant. If you are burdened with Christian conditioning you may not be able to see that he is very arrogant. But once you are clean you can see it clearly. He enters the temple, the great temple of the Jews, and throws out the money changers, turns over their tables, hits them, beats them – and he is talking of meekness, humbleness!
He and his followers are hungry and they have been refused food in a village. He is very angry. They come to a fig tree; it is not the season for figs, so of course there are no figs on the tree. And he becomes so mad at the fig tree and curses it: “You are also against us; you will not provide figs for us.” Now, a person cursing an out of season fig tree – what do you call such a person? And it is not only me. His own master…Jesus was a disciple of John the Baptist. John the Baptist was imprisoned, and when he heard these things about Jesus, even he became doubtful about whether he was worthy to be accepted as a disciple or not. He sent a message from the jail to Jesus: “Do you think you are really the messiah for whom the Jews have been waiting?” Because he became suspicious – the things that Jesus was saying and doing were contradictory, and the way he was behaving was not the way of a religious man. He was behaving very irreligiously.
A religious man cannot take the standpoint that, “I am special, the only begotten son of God.” A religious man comes to know that he is as ordinary as every ordinary thing. He is just like the blades of grass or the stars or the mountains. He is not special in any way. The idea of specialness, of being extraordinary, superior, is nothing but the game of the ego, which creates all kinds of arrogance.
The same was the situation with other religions. I have spoken on Mahavira, but I cannot agree with the man’s behavior, nor can I agree with the ideology and the guidelines that he gives to his disciples. They are absolutely against nature.
Mahavira lived naked. Now, it is not accidental that man has invented clothes. It is absolutely a natural need – because other animals grow hair all over the body and they are protected from winter and cold. Man has not that capacity. Even if he grows hair, it is not as thick as on an animal who lives in the snows. He will not survive, he will die. He has to protect his body. He is not cold-blooded, like cold-blooded fishes which live in the Arctic. Their blood is cold, ice cold, and it has a certain chemical that keeps it from freezing. The outside, to us, is freezing cold; for those fishes it is not. Man is a hot-blooded animal. He needs protection. Now, to make him go naked is absolutely idiotic. And Mahavira prescribes that you should not use any kinds of instruments – even simple instruments like a razor blade, which is not a big machine or big technology. If you want to cut your hair you have to pull your hair out. So Jaina monks pull out their hair every year. This is so stupid, so ugly, so unnatural – and for what?
The whole reasoning is that if you do these things you earn virtue and you will be in heaven. On the one hand he says, “Don’t be greedy, greed is sin,” and on the other hand, he is teaching nothing but greed, greed in the other world. That seems to be far more greedy even than the ordinary greed of this world: having money or a good house seems to be nothing compared to eternal pleasures in heaven. And Jainas have seven heavens, so the more you torture yourself the higher you reach. So it seems there is certainly an element of masochism in Mahavira. But I could not say this to the Jainas.
So I have been carrying a heavy weight on me, on my heart. My health has been destroyed for many reasons; the most important is this, that I have been speaking on people with whom I do not agree at all. I disagree – not only disagree, but I find them basically psychotic, neurotic, schizophrenic, anti-life. All these religions in the past are anti-life. Nobody is for life, nobody is for living, nobody is for laughter. No religion has accepted a sense of humor as a quality of religiousness.
Hence, I say my religion is the first religion which takes man in his totality, in his naturalness, accepts man’s whole, as he is. And that’s what holy means to me – not something sacred, but something accepted in its wholeness. Perhaps things are a little bit upside down and you have to put them in place; just like a jigsaw puzzle, you have to put them in place. And then out of that wholeness arises religious consciousness.
I have spoken more on Buddha than on anybody else. But he is as much anti-life as anyone else: “This life has to be used just to reach the real life which is after death.” Now, nobody has returned after death. Not a single proof exists of anybody returning after death and telling you that there is life there. And all these religions are based on this assumption, that there is a life after death; sacrifice this for that. And I am saying, “Sacrifice that for this!” – because this is all that you have got: herenow. And if there is any life after death, you will be there and then it will be “here and now.” Once you know how to live here and now, you will be able to live there too. So I teach you how to live here and now.
This is the first religion which does not reject anything from your life. It accepts you totally, as you are, and finds methods and ways of how to make a more harmonious whole. You have all the ingredients; everything that is needed is within you – perhaps not in the right places. It has to be put in its right place. And once everything is put in its right place – that I call virtue. Then the man of character, the man whom I can call a moral man, a religious man, arises out of you.
All the old religions are based on certain belief systems. Those beliefs are not to be questioned because they are all fictions – beautiful fictions, but fictions all the same.
You cannot ask, “How do you know God created the world?” There was not a single eyewitness – there cannot be by the very nature of it – because if there was an eyewitness already there, then this was not the beginning of the world. You will have to go back, before that eyewitness. The world was already there; the eyewitness was there. That eyewitness is enough to prove that the world had already been in existence. So there cannot be any eyewitness for God creating the world. But all the religions accept it, and you are not allowed to ask or question because to doubt is to be on the blacklist.
Then there are seven hells waiting for you, with all the tortures that any Adolf Hitler or Josef Stalin or Mao Zedong can conceive. These religious people have conceived them a long time before – all kinds of tortures. And not for a few days – Christianity throws you in hell for eternity. Such an absurd assumption!
Christianity accepts only one life. In one life how many sins can you commit? If you continuously commit sins day and night for seventy years, from the first day to the last you go on like a chain-sinner, then too eternal punishment cannot be justified. Eternal punishment…forever? There will be no end to it! And I don’t think you commit sins continuously every moment. A man may commit a few sins…may go to a jail for four years, five years; it may be justified. But eternal hell? So they are exploiting your fear: fear of hell and greed for pleasure in heaven. That has been their total pattern of working on the human mind. I want to say to you that they are only so-called religions. They are not religions at all.
This is the first religion. I don’t promise you any heaven, and I don’t make you afraid of any hell; there is none. I don’t say, “You have to follow me, then only can you be saved.” That is absolutely egoistic. Jesus says, “Come, follow me.” Even my book on Jesus is titled Come, Follow Me – that is not my statement, it is Jesus’ statement. If you ask me I will say, “Never! Don’t follow me, because I myself am lost. Unless you choose to be lost forever like me…then it is okay.” To me, anybody claiming any kind of superiority that you have to follow him – it is a fascist attitude.
My sannyasins are not my followers but my fellow-travelers, my friends, my lovers.
They have seen something in me the way you see something in a mirror. You are not a follower of your mirror – but in the mirror you can see your face. The master is a mirror. You are not to follow him. You have to see your face in his mirror – and that’s all. And remember one thing: the mirror does not do anything at all. When you are facing the mirror, you are doing something; you are facing the mirror. The mirror is not bothered whether you are facing it or not. And the mirror does not do a single thing while you are facing the mirror; it simply mirrors you. That is its nature, that is why we call it a mirror. It simply mirrors, reflects. It is not a doing, it is its being.
The master does not do anything at all. It is his being, it is his presence that becomes a source of reflection. Slowly, slowly, you start seeing yourself in a new light, in a new way, from a new aspect, in a new dimension.
The old religions are based on belief systems. My religion is absolutely scientific. It is not a belief, it is not a faith – it is pure science. The word science means knowing. Of course, it is a different science than the science that is being taught in the universities. That is objective science; this is subjective science.
Sometimes words are tremendously significant. Have you ever thought about the word object? It simply means that which obstructs you, objects to you, comes in your way, hinders you. Science is trying to observe the objects that surround you. They should not hinder you, they should not come in your way. On the contrary, they should become your way; they should become stepping stones, they should be used. They should not remain enemies surrounding you. So the whole effort of science is to transform the objects into friends, so they no longer object to you, but allow you, give a welcome sign.
And when I say religion, my religion, is a science, that means the way science observes objects, religion observes subjectivity. Subjectivity is just the opposite of objectivity: the very diametrically opposite. The object obstructs you; subjectivity is just an abysmal depth. There is nothing to object to you. Once you let go, you start falling into a fathomless abyss; you never come to the end. But you don’t want to come to the end either. Just that eternal falling is so tremendously ecstatic that to think that it will end is not possible; it is unending.
Objects begin and end; subjectivity begins but never ends. Science uses observation as its method; religion also uses observation as its method, but it calls it meditation. It is observation, pure observation, of your own subjectivity. Science calls its work experiment; religion calls its work experience. They both start from the same point but they move in opposite directions. Science goes outward; religion goes inward. Hence, I have not given you any belief; I have only given you methods. I have only explained to you my experience, and I have told you the way I experienced it.
Once I experienced it, I tried all the ways – whether they all reach to it or not. And I found there are one hundred and twelve ways which can reach to the same point. And once you reach by one method, the one hundred and eleven are very simple because you know the point, you have reached it already. Now you can reach from anywhere. So I have been teaching one hundred and twelve methods of meditation – but no belief system. Hence, I call it science.
And I have said perhaps it may be the last religion too, for the simple reason that I have not given you anything which can be argued against. I can argue against Jesus, I can argue against Mahavira, I can argue against Lao Tzu, I can argue against Buddha. Nobody can argue against me, because in the first place I have not given you any dogma which can be argued against. I have given you only methods. Methods you can try or you may not try, but you cannot argue against a method. If you try, I know it will succeed. I know by my own experience that will succeed – there is no question. If you don’t try, you have no right to say anything about it.
And because I have taken the whole personality of man into it, nothing has been left out. All the religions have been leaving things out, so there was the possibility of another religion taking something in. For example, Buddhism will not allow alcohol; Christianity allows it.
I have not given you anything that is not rooted in reason, in logic, in experiment, in experience, so a person can be against me only if he does not know me. If he knows me, there is no way to be against me. I don’t give you any point to be against me.
And I can say it is the last religion because I have not claimed infallibility like the foolish popes of the Vatican go on doing – only an idiot can say that he is infallible, and for two thousand years these popes have been claiming they are infallible….
And it is such a beautiful and strange story: that one pope has to correct another pope, who was also infallible! One infallible pope burned Joan of Arc alive because she was rebellious and she was a heretic, and she was not following orders from the pope. After three hundred years, as people became more and more aware of Joan of Arc, her life, her story, the pope who had butchered her became more and more condemned in people’s eyes. After three hundred years it became necessary for another pope to declare Joan of Arc a saint. Now she is Saint Joan of Arc! And her bones were dragged out from the grave and worshipped. Someday some other pope may find that it is not right: she was a witch – they will drag her bones out from the grave again and curse them, and spit on them, and drag them into the filth, and do whatsoever he can do. What kind of stupidity is this? These infallible people! And strange that even in this century….
That’s why I say only one percent at the most have barely touched the point at which an authentic religion can become possible. The ninety-nine percent are still under “infallible popes.” They may be Hindus, then the shankaracharya is infallible.
You may be surprised. I used to know one shankaracharya – I used to know many, but one I was very much interested in because he belonged to the same place to which I belonged, and I knew him and he knew me from childhood. And I was interested in the man because before the public he would not accept anything from me, but in private he was absolutely in agreement with me. And he said, “You can call me a hypocrite – I am. But I am holding such a position that in public I cannot say you are right. You are right; as far as I am concerned I follow you and I try your methods and I read your books.” This was an infallible shankaracharya. Before the public he has not even the guts to say that what he is doing is wrong. And what he is doing in private is totally different and against what he is doing in public.
The man died. He wrote two wills. Perhaps one he wrote at one time, for somebody he thought was very much capable of being a shankaracharya…and forgot about the will. And when he was dying he wrote another will, for another man. Now those two are fighting in the courts about who is the real shankaracharya. These are infallible people! Now the court has locked the temple and it will not be opened till the court decides who is the real shankaracharya. And it is very difficult to decide because both the wills are written by the same man, signed by the same man, so for almost twenty years the case has been pending. Many judges have changed, but nobody can decide. How to decide it? They are simply waiting for one of the two to die so that a decision will happen; otherwise, legally there is no possibility. Both have equally valid grounds.
These infallible shankaracharyas, infallible popes, imams, caliphs…they can be proved very easily wrong in a thousand and one ways. I am not infallible. So what I am giving to you is an open religion. They have given you a closed system. A closed system is always afraid of any new truth, because the new truth will disturb the whole system. You will have to arrange it again.

You know the story…. When Galileo found that it is not the sun that goes around the earth, but the earth that goes around the sun, the infallible pope immediately called him to his court and said, “You have to change it, because the Bible says that the sun goes around the earth, and the Bible cannot be wrong because it is written by God.” And if one statement is wrong, then all other statements become doubtful.
Galileo was a very intelligent man; I love that man. Very few people have praised that man – even a man like Bertrand Russell has condemned him as a coward. I don’t think Russell understood Galileo’s point, because Galileo went to the court and kneeled down before the pope – he was old, seventy-five, dying; from his death bed he had been forced and dragged to the court – and he asked, “What do you want from me?”
The pope said, “You simply state in your book that the sun goes around the earth, and the previous statement you cancel.”
He said, “Perfectly right: I will write in my book that the sun goes round the earth. But, dear sir, one thing you should remember: neither the sun nor the earth listen to me. Still the earth will continue to go around the sun. I cannot do anything about it. I will change it in my book – the book is mine and I have every right to change it – but the universe…I cannot do anything about it.”
I think he was a man of immense humor and not a coward at all. And he did the right thing – why unnecessarily quarrel with these idiots? He said, “Okay. But remember, don’t think that this is going to change the fact. The fact remains in its place.”

Now, the Bible is a closed system. What I have given to you is not a closed system, it is an open experiment. Any truth that may come later on can be absorbed by this system without any conflict, because I have told you again and again that there are no contradictions in life; all contradictions are complementaries. So even something contradicting any statement of mine can be absorbed in the religion without any fear, because this is my position: every contradiction is a complementary. Just as day and night are complementary, life and death are complementary, all contradictions are complementary, so you can absorb even the most contradictory truth that ever comes in the future and it will be part of my system.
Hence, I say this is the first and the last religion. There will be no need for any other religion.

============================================================

Osho,
Jesus says, “Come follow me.” You're against this statement. What would you like to say about it?
Jesus says, “Come follow me.” It is not only Jesus who says it: Krishna says it too, Buddha says it too. All the old religions of the world are based on that statement. But that statement is a psychological exploitation of man. I cannot say, “Come follow me.”
First, those who have said it have crippled humanity, have made humanity helpless. They certainly fulfilled a certain need. People don’t want to be on their own. They don’t have the guts to create their own path, to walk and create it. They want to be led. But they don’t know that if you are being led – slowly, slowly, even if you have eyes – you will lose them. You will be seeing through the eyes of Jesus, Krishna, Mohammed. Your eyes will not be needed; in fact your eyes will cause a disturbance.
The leader wants you to surrender your eyes and see through his eyes; surrender your legs and walk with his legs; do not believe in yourself but believe in him. To me it is a crime; it is crippling you, paralyzing you, destroying you. And you can see it all over the world. The whole of humanity is destroyed by such statements and such people.
I can say to you, “Come and share me,” but I cannot say, “Follow me.” Who am I that you have to follow?
And you have to understand also that each individual is so unique that if you start following somebody you will be automatically imitating. You will lose your identity. You will start becoming phony, a hypocrite. You will not be yourself, but somebody else. You will become split.
You will have a mask: Christian, Hindu, Mohammedan, Buddhist. That will be just the mask that you and the person you have been following have created – it is not your authentic face. You are going against yourself, and you will be in suffering…and the whole of humanity is in suffering.
It sounds very strange to say that such statements are criminal, because they come from nice people like Jesus, Buddha, Confucius. You can understand my difficulty too. I have to say it the way it is.
Every child is trying to imitate his parents, his neighbors, his school friends, his teachers…and they are all trying to enforce it.
I remember in my own childhood. It was just an accident that I was born in a Jaina family. That is a very ancient religion in India, perhaps the ancientmost religion in the world. But my father was certainly a human being. He used to take me to the temple, but he told me that I need not imitate him. He had followed the ways of his forefathers and he had not found anything. He said to me, “I cannot force you to follow my ways. I can make you acquainted – that this is the way I have followed, these are the gods I have been bowing down to, these are the prayers I have been doing, but nothing has happened to me. I will not insist that you do it; on the contrary, I will insist that unless you feel to do something, never do it.”
I have never followed anybody and it has paid me tremendously.
It has been the greatest benediction to me that can be possible for a human being: not following.
I have tried to remain just myself.
You will need courage. You will need intelligence. You will need a true search and seeking; then only can you risk. Otherwise there are people all around you – they are all salesmen.
Now, Jesus is just a salesman, saying, “Come follow me, because those who follow me will find God, will find heaven and all the pleasures therein. And those who do not follow me will fall into dark hell for eternity.” Now, this man is not going to help anybody. He is exploiting your need for guidelines, your need to find a path; basically, your need to have a certain meaning in your life. And he is promising that, “I am ready to give it to you. All that you have to do is to believe in me, unquestioningly, without any doubt. All that is needed on your part is absolute faith.”
To ask anybody to believe is to cripple his intelligence, is to make him mediocre, is to condemn him to remain an idiot forever.
A Christian cannot ask, “What is God? What is all this nonsense about the Holy Ghost?” And he does not seem to be very holy either. He is a rapist; he rapes the Virgin Mary. And this Trinity: God, Son and Holy Ghost – they have not allowed a single woman in it. Without a mother, the son is born…. In the Trinity there is no possibility for a woman. Nobody has asked, “And what are the proofs that you are the only begotten son?” But you are not supposed to ask, you are supposed to believe. It is a bargain. He will give you, after death, all the pleasures of life; all imaginable fantasies will be fulfilled. And you will be surprised what kind of fantasies these religious people have been offering to fulfill.
Mohammed says in his paradise – and remember, the English word paradise comes from the Arabic firdaus; it is basically Mohammedan – in his paradise, there are rivers of wine. “Drink as much as you want, drown yourself, swim in the wine.” And there are beautiful women available who remain always young, stuck at the age of sixteen. They are still sixteen. Whenever you go, they will be sixteen; they don’t grow. And not only that – because in Mohammedan countries homosexuality has been a very long tradition – Mohammed promises young, beautiful boys also, for the great saints.
It is a bargain. You remain crippled, unintelligent, mediocre, stupid – and after death you will achieve everything. And nobody knows what happens after death. Nobody has ever returned and told what happens after death. So they are doing such a fabulous business – they are selling such a commodity which is invisible, intangible, and what they are taking in return is your whole humanity, your whole integrity. They are destroying you completely.
I can say, “Come and share me.” That is a totally different standpoint.
I have known something.
I have seen something.
I have lived something.
And I can share it with you.
And remember, I am not obliging you when I share it with you; you are obliging me, because when a cloud is heavy with rainwater, the earth is obliging it by receiving the water. I say to you: I am heavy with some ecstasy, some blissfulness. And it is not a question of a bargain after death. I am not promising you something in the future, and I am not asking you anything in return, not even a thank you, because I am grateful to you that you shared with me.
My religion is a religion of sharing, not of following. It is a religion of love. The very idea of following makes me sick. It is sickening. You have to be yourself, and when you blossom, you are not going to be like me or like Jesus or like Buddha. You are going to be just like you – which has never happened before, and which is not going to happen again. It is only possible with you. You are unrepeatable. If you start following somebody you are missing a great opportunity that existence has provided for you, and you will never be happy. No Christian is happy, no Hindu is happy, no Buddhist is happy; they cannot be. How can you be happy?
Just think in this way: if the roseflower tries to become a lotus, the lotus tries to become a rose, both will be in tremendous suffering because neither can the rose become the lotus nor can the lotus become the rose. At the most they can pretend, and pretensions are not fulfilling. The roseflower can only be a roseflower. And the unfortunate thing is, when the roseflower starts trying to be a lotus, its energy goes into that effort of becoming a lotus. A lotus it can never become, it has no potential for it. It is not a lotus, and there is no need for it to be a lotus. If existence wanted a lotus there would have been a lotus. Existence needs a rose. Trying to be a lotus, the rose will be losing its energy in a fruitless, hopeless effort, and perhaps may not be able to become even a rose. From where will it find the energy to become a rose, the vitality to become a rose?
It is one of the most important psychological phenomena to understand: each individual is unique; there has never been that kind of individual before, and there will never be that kind of individual again.
If you follow somebody you are betraying existence because you are betraying your own innermost being. You are betraying your flowering. And why do people so easily become followers? Why is the whole world following somebody or other? And if sometimes one becomes fed up with Christianity, he becomes a Hindu; the Hindu becomes fed up with Hinduism, he becomes a Buddhist…but the following continues. The whole pattern remains the same. The book changes, the leader changes, but the following, the follower…and the whole process remains the same, the same destructive suicidal process.
I am against following because it is against the basic psychological principle of the uniqueness of the individual.
You should pay a little more attention to the word individual. It means indivisible – it cannot be divided. The moment you follow, you are dividing. You are something, you are trying to become something else; you are somewhere, you are trying to reach somewhere else. Now you are creating a tension in your being. Hence the anguish all over the world.
My religion is not the religion of following. I can only share with you whatever has happened to me. And I am not saying that the same will happen to you. I am simply saying that if I can see, you can also see. If I can feel, you can also feel. Certainly, you will feel in your own way and you will see in your own way. The poetry that will be born in you will be your poetry, it will not be mine.
So the people you see here around me are not my followers. I am nobody’s leader. That silly word leader is perfectly okay in politics, but not in religion. In politics, of course, you need idiots. The greater idiot leads the smaller idiots. But in religion, a flowering of intelligence is needed, not idiocy. So my work is basically of sharing. It is just….
I would like to tell you an old, beautiful parable:

A lioness gives birth to a cub in a crowd of sheep. The cub grows amongst the sheep and naturally believes that he is a sheep – what else can the lion do? One day an old lion, just passing by the crowd of sheep, looks at this miracle: a young, beautiful lion just walking in the middle of a crowd of sheep. Neither the sheep are afraid of him, nor is he in any way behaving differently.
The old lion becomes interested. He runs after the young lion. It is with great difficulty that he catches hold of him because the young lion escapes, just like every other sheep escapes. But finally he catches hold of him. The young lion starts crying and weeping, like a sheep. And the old lion says, “Stop all this nonsense!” He takes him to a nearby pond, drags him by his side to the pond, forces him to look into the water…and suddenly the young lion roars like a lion.

The old lion has not done anything. He has just shown him his face, his real face, and he has recognized that he is a lion – he is not a sheep. And just that recognition is enough. It is transforming. The old lion has not done anything at all. He has not told the young lion to “follow me,” to “imitate me,” and “These are the commandments for you, and this is the character you have to attain, and these are the principles, and these are the things you have not to do.” He has not done anything of that sort.
That is the function of the master: just to bring you so close to his own experience that something transpires in you.
A sudden lion’s roar…and the transformation, and you are yourself – neither a Hindu, nor a Mohammedan, nor a Christian. But the world wants a mob, a crowd. It is afraid of the individual because every authentic individual is bound to be a rebel, because he will insist on being himself.
Adolf Hitler would not like individuals, nor does Jesus like individuals. And the strange thing is that even Jesus cannot understand that he is not liked by the Jews. He was born a Jew, he lived as a Jew, he died as a Jew. Remember, he had never heard the word christian in his life. He was never a Christian, because the word christ does not exist in the Aramaic language that he spoke, which was his mother tongue. Nor does the word exist in Hebrew, which was the language of the learned rabbis.
It was three hundred years after Jesus, when the Bible was translated into Greek, that the word messiah, from Hebrew, was translated as christ. It was after three hundred years that the word christ became significant, and after Christ of course the followers became Christians.
But Jesus was not a Christian, and his only crime was that he was himself an individual, trying to live authentically his own way of life, not bothering much about the tradition. That’s why the Jews were so very angry. They would have loved him, they would have made him a great rabbi, but he tried his individual way, not the traditional way. He had to die on the cross just because he insisted on being an individual.
I am surprised that even such a man who suffered because of his individuality is again making the same mistake with other people: asking them to follow him. That’s what the rabbis were asking Jesus: “Follow us, don’t try to be on your own.” They were saying, “Follow Abraham, follow Moses, follow Ezekiel.” They were asking Jesus, “What is your authority?” And Jesus says, “I am my authority.”
This is how an individual should speak: “I am my authority – and I am before Abraham was.” Abraham was three thousand years before Christ, and he says, “I am before Abraham was.” He is simply proclaiming that he does not belong to the tradition, that he is a flowering on his own accord.
But even Jesus could not see that he is making the same mistake that the rabbis were making. And of course the popes have been repeating the same mistake. If Jesus could not see, then how can you hope that popes will be able to see? They are just blind followers. They are trying to convert the whole world into a Christian world; they are not satisfied that you already have so many Christians – and what have you attained? What has man gained through it?
More blood has been shed by Christians than by anybody else, more wars have been fought by Christians than by anybody else. People have been massacred, butchered, burned alive by Christians…and they are all following Jesus! They are really following those Jews who had crucified Jesus. They have been crucifying other individuals; whoever asserts his individuality, they have been crucifying him.
My way is not the way of following anybody.
It is just sick to be a follower. It is just sick to be a leader. The leader is somehow not certain about his authentic individuality. He wants followers because if he has followers then he becomes more certain he must be right. If so many people are following him, how can he be wrong? Alone he becomes suspicious. Alone doubts arise: Who knows whether he is right or wrong? He needs followers. It is his need that followers should be there. The greater the number of followers around him, the more satisfied and contented he is. He knows he is right; otherwise how can so many people be following him? That is the logic.
And why are the followers with him? They see his contented, authoritative statements, his determined effort, unwavering. Now, when Jesus says: “I am the only begotten son of God” with authority, naturally the poor people…. Who were the people who followed him? Have you ever thought about it? The twelve apostles – who were these people? All uneducated: fishermen, farmers, woodcutters, carpenters. Only Judas was a little educated; so he betrayed him. All the others were absolutely uneducated, poor people in search of somebody who could hold their hand and could give them a certain strength that they were lacking in themselves.
The followers feel it is a mutual conspiracy. Perhaps both are unaware: the leader is unaware that he needs followers to feel comfortable with his own idea, with his own fiction, and the follower is unaware of why he is following this man. He is following because the leader looks so authoritative, and he himself, the follower, feels so wavering, so doubtful, so untrusting. He thinks it is better to be with a man who knows. They are supporting each other.

I don’t need any followers because whatsoever I know, I know; and whatsoever I am, I am. Even if the whole world is against me it will not create a single doubt in me, not a single question in me. They have all disappeared.
I am absolutely at ease with myself and with existence. I don’t need any followers, and I insist that knowingly or unknowingly you should not fall in the trap of being a follower, because then you will never be able to be authentically yourself, an individual flowering.
Communism has created an idea in the world that every man is equal, which is absolutely absurd. Every man is so unique that he cannot be equal to anybody else. That does not mean that he is higher or lower; that simply means everybody is unique. And there is no question of comparison, the comparison does not arise. The rose is perfectly beautiful being a rose; the lotus is perfectly beautiful being a lotus. The grass leaf is perfectly beautiful being a grass leaf.
If you remove man from the earth, the grass leaf, the rose, the lotus will not have different values. They will be all equally unique. The winds will not behave differently with them, the sun will not shine differently on them, the clouds will not rain differently on them. It is man and his stupidity that brings the idea of comparison: of higher, of lower. And then the question that – no, everybody is equal….
Neither man is higher than anybody else, nor is he lower than anybody else, nor is he equal to anybody else.
Remember, my third point is of utmost importance: everybody is unique. And I respect this uniqueness.
How can I say to you, “Come and follow me”? Out of respect I can only say, “Come and share with me. Share my abundance.”
And the beauty is that the more you share the inner riches, the more you have them. The more you give, the more you have them. If you hoard them, you will lose them. So nobody who attains to inner blissfulness can hoard it. Hoarding kills it. He has to share it, it is an absolute necessity to share it. Only by sharing it remains alive and flowing. And more and more it goes on coming to you. One is simply amazed.
Ordinary economics do not work here. If you have money and you give to people, of course you will have less money. That is ordinary economics. But if you have silence, peace, love, joy, ecstasy – give it and see what happens. The more you give it, the more existence goes on pouring it in you.
So you are not obliged to me, I am obliged to you.

Osho,
Do you believe in God?
I do not believe in believing. That has to be understood first. Nobody asks me, “Do you believe in the sun? Do you believe in the moon?” Nobody asks me that question. Millions of people I have met, and for thirty years continuously I have answered thousands of questions. Nobody asks me, “Do you believe in the roseflower?” There is no need. You can see: the roseflower is there or it is not there. Only fictions, not facts, have to be believed.
God is the greatest fiction that man has created. Hence you have to believe in him. And why does man have to create this fiction of God? There must be some inner necessity. I don’t have that necessity so there is no question. But let me explain to you why people have believed in God.
One of the significant things to understand about man’s mind is that the mind is always seeking and searching some meaning in life. If there is no meaning, suddenly you feel then what are you doing here? Then why go on living? Then why go on breathing? Then why tomorrow morning you have to get up again and go through the same routine – the tea, the breakfast, the same wife, the same children, the same phony kiss to the wife, and the same office, and the same work…and comes the evening, and bored, utterly bored, you are back home – why go on doing all this? The mind has a question: Is there any meaning in all this, or are you just vegetating?
So man has been searching for meaning. He created God as a fiction to fulfill his need for meaning. Without God, the world becomes accidental. It is no more a creation of a wise God who creates it for your growth, for your development, or for something. Without God…remove God and the world is accidental, meaningless. And the mind has an intrinsic incapacity to live with meaninglessness, so it creates all kinds of fictions – God, nirvana, heaven, paradise, other life beyond death – and makes a whole system. But it is a fiction to fulfill a certain psychological need.
I cannot say, “There is God.” I cannot say, “There is not God.” To me the question is irrelevant. It is a fictitious phenomenon. My work is totally different.
My work is to make your mind so mature that you can live with a meaningless life, and yet beautifully.
What is the meaning of a rose, or a cloud floating in the sky? There is no meaning but there is such tremendous beauty. There is no meaning. The river goes on flowing but there is so much joy, meaning is not needed. And unless a man is able to live without asking for meaning, moment to moment, beautifully, blissfully, for no reason at all…just to breathe is enough. Why should you ask? For what? Why do you make life a business?
Is not love enough? Have you to ask what is the meaning of love? And if there is no meaning in love, then of course your life becomes loveless. You are asking wrong question. Love in itself is enough; it needs no other meaning to make it beautiful, a joy. The birds singing in the morning…what is the meaning? The whole existence, to me, is meaningless. And the more I became silent and became attuned with existence, the more it became clear that there is no need for meaning. It is enough as it is.
Don’t create fictions. Once you create a fiction then you have to create a thousand and one other fictions to support it, because it has no support in reality.
For example: there are religions which believe in God, and there are religions which do not believe in God. So God is not a necessity for religion. Buddhism does not believe in God, Jainism does not believe in God. So try to understand, because in the West it is a problem. You are aware only of three religions which are all rooted in Judaism: Christianity, Judaism and Mohammedanism. All three believe in God. So you are not aware of Buddha – he never believed in God.
I am reminded of H.G.Wells, his statement about Gautam Buddha. He said, “He is the most godless person, yet the most godly.” A godless person, and godly? Do you think there is any contradiction? There is no contradiction. Buddha never believed in God, there was no need. He was so utterly fulfilled that his whole fulfillment became a fragrance around him. Mahavira never believed in God, yet his life was as divine as life can be.
So when I say God is a fiction, please do not misunderstand me. God is a fiction but godliness is not a fiction; that is a quality. “God” is a person…as a person it is a fiction. There is no God sitting in heaven creating the world. And do you think a God would create such a mess that you call the world? Then what is left for the Devil? If anybody has created this world it must be the Devil, it cannot be God.
But fictions – and old fictions, repeated millions of times – start taking a reality of their own. It has been repeated so much that you don’t even ask what kind of world God has created, what kind of man God has created. This mad humanity…. In three thousand years man has fought five thousand wars. This is a creation of God? And still man is preparing for the total, suicidal, ultimate war. “God” is behind it.
And what kind of foolish fictions can become realities once you start believing in them! “God” created the world – Christians think it was exactly four thousand and four years before Jesus Christ. Of course it must have been a Monday morning, the first of January, I assume – because the Bible says so. Now there are proofs, a thousand and one proofs, that this Earth is millions of years old. We have found, hidden in the earth, animals millions of years old and even man’s fossilized bodies, thousands of years old. But what has the last pope said about it? He said, “The world was created exactly as it is said in the Bible.” Four thousand and four years before Jesus? – that means six thousand years ago.
All the evidence goes against it. In India we have found cities which are seven thousand years old. In India we have the Vedas which are at least ten thousand years old, according to the scientific approach. According to the Hindus they are ninety thousand years old, because in the Vedas there is a mention of a certain state of the stars which happened ninety thousand years ago. Now, how can that be described in the Vedas if they are not ninety thousand years old?
But what did the last pope say? He said, “God created the world with all these things. Everything is possible for him; he created the world four thousand and four years before Jesus with animal bodies looking millions of years old.” Everything is possible for “God.” One fiction, then you have to support it with another fiction, and you can go to the point of absurdity. And why? Again and again man has asked this question.
A simple, very simple argument is behind it. You see an earthen pot. You know it cannot have been created by itself; there must have been a potter. This has been the simple argument of all these religions: that if even a single earthen pot cannot have been created by itself and needs a potter to create it, this vast universe also needs a creator. And it has satisfied the simple human mind.
But it cannot satisfy a sophisticated, rational mind. If you say the universe needs a God to create it, then the question is bound to arise, “Who created God?” And then you fall into a regress absurdum. Then God one was created by God two, and God two was created by God three, and God three by God four, and then there can be no end. I don’t want to be absurd like that. It is better to stop the first fiction; otherwise you sow the seeds for other fictions.
I say existence itself is enough. It needs no creator – it is creativity itself.
So rather than asking me if I believe in a creator. You should ask me what is my substitute for God, the creator.
My substitute is the existential energy of creativity. And to me, to be creative is the most important religious quality.
If you create a song, if you create music, if you create a garden, you are being religious. Going to church is foolish, but creating a garden is tremendously religious. That’s why here in my commune, work is called worship. We don’t pray in any other way, we pray only through creating something. To me, creativity is God. But it would be better if you allow me to change the word god into godliness, because I don’t want to be misunderstood. There is no person like God, but there is tremendous energy – exploding, unending, expanding. This expanding, unending, exploding energy, this creativity, is divine.
I know it; I don’t believe in it.
I have tasted it; I don’t believe in it.
I have touched it, I have breathed it. I have known it in the deepest core of my being.
And it is as much in you as it is in me. Just a look inward, just a little one hundred and eighty degree turn, and you become aware of a truth. Then you don’t ask for beliefs. Only blind people believe in light. Those who have eyes…they don’t believe in light; they simply see it.
I don’t want you to believe in anything, I want you to have eyes; and when you can have eyes why be satisfied with a belief and remain blind? And you are not blind. Perhaps you are only keeping your eyes closed. Perhaps nobody has told you that you can open your eyes. Then you live in darkness, and in darkness you ask, “Does light exist?”

I am reminded of a small story in Buddha’s life. A man who was blind, but who was a very logical man, was brought to Gautam Buddha. He was so logical that his village and the pundits of the village became utterly fed up with his logic. They could not prove to him that light exists. The whole village knew; everybody saw it, only the blind logician was unable to see it. But he was a very logical man. He said, “Anything that exists can be touched. Bring light – I would like to touch it. Anything that exists, you can hit it with something, it will make sound. Let me hear the sound of your light being hit by something. If it has any smell bring it to my nose, I can smell it. If it has any taste, I can taste it. These are the four possibilities for me.”
Now you cannot taste light and you cannot create a sound out of it, and you cannot smell it, and you cannot touch it. And the blind logician would laugh and he would say, “You just want to prove me blind, hence you have created this fiction of light. There is no light. You are all blind just like me; you are befooling yourself.”
Buddha was passing by the side of the village, so the villagers thought, “It is a good opportunity; let us take this logician to Gautam Buddha, perhaps he may be able to help.”
Buddha listened to the whole story and he said, “The blind man is right, and you are all wrong, because what he needs is not argumentation; he needs medicine for his eyes to be cured. And you have brought him to the wrong person. Take him to a physician.”
Buddha had his own personal physician who was provided by a great king, Bimbisara, to take care of Buddha’s body. So Buddha said, “You need not go far to find a great physician, I have one with me. You can show the blind man to him.” And he left the physician in the village and he moved on. In three months the blind man’s eyes were opened. He was not really blind – just a small disease; a small, thin layer was covering his vision. It was removed. He came dancing. He fell at Buddha’s feet and he said, “If they had not brought me to you, my whole life I would have argued against light. And they would not have been able to prove it.”

Godliness is not something that argument can prove or disprove. It is something that you can experience.
You will be surprised to know that the word medicine and the word meditation come from the same root. Medicine cures the body, meditation cures your being; it is the inner medicine.
I have experienced godliness everywhere, because nothing else exists. But there is no God. And if you want to experience godliness – just a little bit of meditation, a little bit of becoming thoughtless and remaining aware. When your awareness is there and thoughts start dropping like leaves in the fall, and when there is only awareness and there is not a single thought there, you will have the taste, the very taste on your tongue, of what I am saying. And unless you have tasted it, don’t believe me; don’t believe anyone, because belief can become a barrier. You may become satisfied with the belief, and you may never try.
I just heard yesterday…. I was told that President Reagan wants one minute’s silence in every school, college and institution. The idea is great, but I don’t know whether Reagan understands what it means – one minute’s silence. He must be meaning simply one minute keeping quiet, not speaking. Not speaking is not silence. You may not be speaking, you may not be uttering anything, but inside a thousand and one thoughts are running. There is a continuous flow of thoughts, day in, day out.
I would like to tell President Reagan first to try one minute’s silence. That means for one minute no thought moves on the screen of awareness. It is not easy. It is one of the most difficult things in the world. But it can happen if you continue to try.
And if it happens for one minute, that’s enough. If for one minute you can be in a state where no thought moves…. This has been my whole life’s work, teaching people how to be silent.
People have tried keeping a watch at their side: not even twenty seconds – one minute is too big, not even twenty seconds can they remain without thought. One thought after another, running…. And even if they can remain for twenty seconds, the thought comes, “Aha! Twenty seconds!” Finished – the thought has come.
If you can be silent for one minute, you have learned the art. Then you can be silent for two minutes, because it is the same; the second minute is not different from the first. You can be silent for three minutes; all the minutes are the same.
Once you know the way…and the way is not something which can be told to you; you have to just sit with closed eyes and start watching your thoughts. In the beginning there will be a great rush hour, but slowly you will find the street is less and less crowded; less cars are passing, less thoughts are passing, less people are passing, gaps are becoming bigger. If one continues patiently, in three months’ time he will certainly be able to attain one minute’s silence.
I don’t know if President Reagan has ever tasted it, because any man who can taste silence would not try to be a president of a country, could not be in politics. It is not for meditators, it is for mediocres. It is for all kinds of fools and idiots.
I have heard: before Reagan became president he used to have a monkey…I have just heard, I don’t know whether it is true or not. The day Ronald Reagan was elected president one of my American sannyasins brought a picture to me of Ronald Reagan with his monkey, and he said, “Reagan is declared president today, what is your comment.”
I looked at the picture for a long time. The sannyasin appeared puzzled and asked, “What is the matter? What are you looking at in the picture?”
I said to him, “I cannot figure out who is Reagan and who is the monkey. Out of these two fellows, who has been elected the president?”
He laughed and showed me a picture of Reagan, and I still remember my comment, that “It would have been better is the monkey had been chosen as president.”
Surely the Kremlin would have followed immediately and would have chosen a monkey as their prime minister. They cannot tolerate America to be ahead of them. And one thing is absolutely certain: that with a monkey in the White House and a monkey in the Kremlin, the world would be saved from a third world war, which is going to destroy the whole humanity and the whole of life on earth.
Politicians are monkeys. In fact monkeys should forgive me – politicians are worse. But the idea is good; once in a while, even in a monkey’s mind, a good idea can come. But if he really means it, I can provide the people who can teach every university, every college and school, how to be silent. I can send my sannyasins all over America to teach silence.

============================================================

Osho,
If there is no God, why were you being called Bhagwan?
There is no God, but that does not mean that I’m an atheist. Certainly I am not a theist – I am saying there is no God – but that does not mean that you jump to the opposite, the atheist.
The atheist also says there is no God, but when I say there is no God…. The atheists like Charvaka, Karl Marx, Lenin, Epicurus, when these people say there is no God, there is a tremendous difference between my statement and their statement. The statements are absolutely dissimilar, because I say at the same moment that there is godliness.
Charvaka would not agree on that point; Epicurus, Marx, other atheists would not agree on that point. To them, denying God means denying consciousness. To them, denying God means the world is simply matter and nothing more, and whatever you see as consciousness is only a by-product of certain matter put together, just a by-product. Take those things apart and the by-product disappears.
It is just like a bullock cart: you take the wheels away, you take other parts away, and each time you can ask, “Is this the bullock cart?” When you take the wheels away, certainly the answer will be, “It is not.” No part is the whole. You can take, by and by, each part and remove the whole, and no single part is the bullock cart. And in the end you can be asked, “Now where is the bullock cart? – because we have not removed it; you have never said at any point that the bullock cart has been removed.”
“Bullock cart” was only a combination. It had no existence of its own, it was a by-product. That’s what Marx means when he says consciousness is an epiphenomenon: remove the body, remove the brain, remove all that constitutes a man’s being – you will not find anything like consciousness. And when you have removed everything, it is not that consciousness will be left behind; it was only a combination. You have taken the combination apart.
So when I say there is no God, I am not agreeing with Marx or Epicurus. I am certainly not agreeing with Jesus, Krishna, Moses, Mohammed, when they say there is God, because they use “God” as a person. Now, to think of God as a person is just your imagination. The God of the Chinese has a Chinese face, and the God of the Negroes has a Negro face, and certainly the God of the Jews must have a Jewish nose; it can’t be otherwise. And if horses think about God, their God will be a horse. So this is just projection; giving personality to God is your projection.
When I say there is no God, I am denying personality to God. I am saying God is not, but there is tremendous godliness. That is an impersonal energy, pure energy. To impose any form on it is ugly. You are imposing yourself on it.
Now, Jesus is calling God “father”; Jesus must have a certain idea of what “father” means. He is imposing on God the same idea. Now, there are religions in India which believe not in a father god but in a mother goddess. The statue of their God is of a woman, the most beautiful woman that they can conceive, but it is a Hindu woman. Centuries have gone by, passed; religions have been born, died, disappeared – naturally, their gods have disappeared.
There is a place in India, Mohenjo Daro. It has been found to be the ancientmost city in the world. There are seven layers in Mohenjo Daro. It seems that civilization had to face some calamity seven times. When the first layer was found, it was thought that this is all: we have found Mohenjo Daro. That was determined to be seven thousand years old. But a little more digging and another city was found underneath the first city which must have been ten thousand years old. Then the work continued. The people who were working on the excavation went on digging, and city after city – seven cities have been found in Mohenjo Daro. The seventh seems to be at least twenty thousand years old. They have temples, they have statues of God. Those civilizations have disappeared; those people have disappeared, their religions have disappeared, their gods have disappeared.
The Christian god will disappear the moment Christianity disappears, the Hindu gods will disappear the moment Hinduism disappears. Do you see what I mean to say? It is your projection. If you go on projecting it, it is there. If you are not there to project it, if the projector is not there, the god disappears. I am not in favor of such gods, which have been projected by the tiny mind of man. And of course the tiny mind of man is bound to give qualities to God which are its qualities.
The Jewish god in the Talmud says, “I am an angry God. I am not nice; I am not your uncle.” Now, this is perfectly meaningful in a Jewish context, but to a Hindu, God saying that, “I am an angry God,” is a sheer impossibility. Anger and God? – they cannot meet. The Jewish god is perfectly angry; it is very Jewish, very human. And if you don’t worship him, if you go against him, he will destroy you. He destroyed two cities because the people of those two cities were behaving in a sexually perverted way, and he was very much against it. Sodom and Gomorrah – he completely destroyed these two cities.
This will not appeal to a Hindu, it is impossible. It will not appeal to the Mohammedan, because the Mohammedan prays every day, “God, the compassionate one.” Compassion is the very innermost quality projected by him toward God. Now, God can only be compassion, nothing else. The Mohammedan prays that just accepting your sin will be enough, because God is compassionate – you will be forgiven.
Omar Khayyam, one of the great poets of Persian literature, says, “Don’t prevent me from drinking wine, enjoying women, because God is compassionate. Don’t tell me that I am committing sin, let me commit as many sins as possible. His compassion is far greater than all my sins combined together. To stop a certain activity in fear that you will be punished by God is to disbelieve in his compassion.” Now, this is a different attitude, but these are all human attitudes.
So when I say there is no God, I am saying there is no person like God; all personality is human projection. I want you to take away the personality and let God be free, free from the bondage of personality that you have imposed upon him.

I am not an atheist. To me, the whole universe is full of the energy of God and nothing else.
You have to understand one thing which is very fundamental: the world consists of verbs, not of nouns. Nouns are a human invention – necessary, but after all, a human invention. But existence consists of verbs, only of verbs – not nouns and pronouns. Look at this. You are seeing a flower, a rose. To call it a flower is not right, because it has not stopped flowering, it is still flowering; it is a verb, it is a flow. Calling it a flower you have made it a noun. You see the river. You call it a river – you have made it a noun. It is rivering. It would be more accurate to the existential to say that it is rivering, flowing. And everything is changing, flowing. The child is becoming a young man, the young man is becoming old, life is turning into death, death is turning into life. Everything is in continuity, continuous change; it is a continuum. There never comes a stop, a full stop. It comes only in language.
In existence there is no full stop.
Do you remember when you stopped being a child? – when, at what point, the stop came and you became a young man? There is no place, no demarcation, no full stop. The child is still flowing in you. If you just close your eyes and look within, you will find everything that has been is still there, flowing. You have been absorbing more and more, but all that has been is still there. The river is becoming big, new rivulets are joining it, but the original is still there.
If you have seen the Ganges in India, one of the most beautiful rivers, you would understand it. The point where it arises is so tiny that the face of a cow – of course of stone, stone carved into the face of a cow – is enough. Through that cow’s face the Ganges falls, starts its journey – so small. And when you see it near the ocean, when it is reaches to meet the ocean, it looks almost like the ocean itself – so vast. But that small current falling in Gangotri, far away, thousands of miles away in the Himalayas, from the stone mouth of a cow – that current is still there. So many rivers have come and fallen into it and have made it oceanic. It is still alive. Even while it is falling in the ocean it remains alive, it goes on moving. Perhaps it will become a cloud; perhaps it will rain again. It will go on and on. Existence goes on and on and on; it never stops. There is no rest period. There is no place where you can demarcate that something has come to its end. Nothing comes to its end. You cannot find the beginning, you cannot find the end. It is an ever flowing process.
When you say God you are using a noun, something static, dead. When I say godliness I am using a verb for something alive, flowing, moving.
So these points have to be clear to you. I am not a theist like Jesus or Mohammed or Krishna, because I cannot agree with a dead god.

I am reminded of one of my professors. He is a very beautiful man: Professor S.S.Roy. Now he is retired as head of the department of philosophy from Allahabad University. The first day I joined his class, he was explaining the concept of “The Absolute.” He was an authority on Bradley and Shankara. Both believe in “The Absolute” – that is their name for God.
I asked him one thing which made me very intimate with him, and he opened his whole heart to me, in every possible way. I just asked, “Is your ‘Absolute’ perfect? Has it come to a full stop or is it still growing? If it is still growing, then it is not absolute, it is imperfect – only then can it grow. If something more is possible, some more branches, some more flowers – then it is alive. If it is complete, entirely complete – that’s the meaning of the word absolute: now there is no possibility for growth – then it is dead.” So I asked him, “Be clear, because ‘Absolute’ represents God to Bradley and Shankara; that is their philosophical name for God. Is your God alive or dead? You have to answer this question.”
He was really an honest man. He said, “Please give me time to think.” He had a doctorate on Bradley from Oxford, another doctorate on Shankara from Benares, and he was thought to be the greatest authority on these two philosophers because he had tried to prove that Bradley, from the West, and Shankara, from the East, have come to the same conclusion. He said, “Please give me time to think.”
I said, “Your whole life you have been writing about Bradley and Shankara and ‘The Absolute.’ I have read your books, I have read your unpublished thesis, and you have been teaching here your whole life – has nobody ever asked you such a simple question?”
He said, “Nobody ever asked me; not only that, even I have never thought about it – that, certainly, if something is perfect then it has to be dead. Anything alive has to be imperfect. This idea has never occurred to me. So please give me time.”
I said, “You can take as much time as you want. I will come every day and ask the same question.” And it continued for five, six days. Every day I would enter the class and he would come shaking, and I would stand up and say my question.
And he said, “Please forgive me, I cannot decide. With both ways there is difficulty. I cannot say God is imperfect; I cannot say God is dead. But you have conquered my heart.”
He removed my things from the hostel to his house. He said, “No more. You cannot live in the hostel. You have to come and live with my family, with me. I have much to learn from you, because such a simple question had not occurred to me. You have canceled all my degrees.”
I lived with him for almost six months before he moved to another university. He wanted me to move with him to another university, but my vice-chancellor was reluctant. He said, “Professor Roy, you can go. Professors will come and go, but we may not find such a student again. So I am not going to give him his certificates and I am not going to allow him to leave the university. And I will write to the university where you are going, that my student should not be taken in there either.”
But he remained loving to me. It was a rare phenomenon: he used to come almost every month to see me from his university, almost two hundred miles away from my university. But he would come at least once every month just to see me, just to sit with me. And he said, “Now I am getting a better salary and everything is more comfortable there, but I miss you. The class seems to be dead. Nobody asks questions like you, which cannot be answered.”
And I told him, “This is an agreement between me and you: I only call a question, a question-which-cannot-be-answered. If it can be answered, what kind of a question is it?”

God: perfect, absolute, omnipotent, omniscient, omnipresent – these are the words used for god by all the religions – is dead, cannot be alive, cannot breathe. No, I reject such a god, because with such a dead god, this whole universe would be dead.
Godliness is a totally different dimension.
Then the greenness in the tree, then the flowering of the rose, then the bird in flight – all are part of it. Then God is not separate from the universe. Then he is the very soul of the universe. Then the universe is vibrating, pulsating, breathing: godliness.
So I am not an atheist, but I am not a theist either. And there is a third term also, which is “agnostic.” Socrates, Bertrand Russell, people like these are agnostic. An agnostic means one who says, “I don’t know whether God is, or God is not.”
These agnostics are at least more honest than your so-called theists in the churches, in the synagogues, in the temples, in the mosques – all phony and hypocrites, not knowing what god is and still bowing down. Their hearts are empty, their prayers are phony, they don’t mean what they are saying and doing. They are just imitating their forefathers; they are just puppets in the hands of tradition. They are hypnotized by their society, culture, civilization; they are conditioned by the teachers, by the priests, by their parents. What they are saying is not their own; it is borrowed.

I am reminded of one of my friends. He was an average human being – I mean just an idiot. All the students were continuously talking of falling in love with girls, and this and that, and they were asking him. And he was very cowardly, nervous – you cannot conceive of the conditions in India, even in the university the girls and the boys sit separately, they cannot talk openly, they cannot meet openly – but his heart was beating; he was coming of age. One day he came to me because he thought I was the only person who had never laughed at him, who had never joked about his nervousness, that seeing a girl he would start trembling – actually trembling, you could see his pajamas shaking – and perspiring. Even if it was winter and cold, he would start perspiring.
He came to me, closed the door, and said, “Only you can help me. What can I do? I would like to love a girl but I cannot even say a single word to a girl. Suddenly I lose my voice and I start trembling and perspiring.” So I had to train him.
I knew a girl who was in my class, and I told her, “You have to be a little helpful to this poor man. So just be a little kind and compassionate, and when he perspires, don’t mention it. Rather you should say, ‘People say that you start perspiring seeing girls, but you are not perspiring, and I am a girl – have you forgotten? – and you are not shaking.’ And he will be shaking, but you have to say, ‘You are not shaking.’”
I had to write love letters for him, and he would send those letters. And the girl was prepared by me, and just because I had told her, she would answer him. She would answer the letters, and he would come running to show me the letter, and he was so happy just with the letters. And again I said, “Now you start on your own. How long am I to be writing letters for you? And do you know, I have also written the other letter, because the girl says, ‘I don’t love him, how can I write? So you please do this one too!’ And she shows your letter to me and you show her letter to me, and I am the one who is writing both letters!” And this phony business, this love affair….

But this is what is happening in all the synagogues, temples, churches. Your prayers are written by somebody else, perhaps thousands of years ago. They are not part of your being; they have not arisen from you. They don’t carry any love from you, they don’t have your heartbeat. You don’t know whom you are addressing, whether anybody exists on the other side or not. That too is written in the same book from which you have taken the prayer: He exists. It is a very circular thing. The same book says God exists, the same book gives you the prayer, the same book says that if you do this prayer you will receive this answer. And if you are really hypnotized – and millions, almost all, are hypnotized – they start receiving the answer, the same answer.
No Hindu receives the answer which a Christian receives. Strange, even once in a while no mistake, no error happens? The Christian receives the Christian answer. The question is borrowed, the answer is borrowed; the prayer is somebody else’s, the answer is somebody else’s – and you are carrying on a phony love affair. How can it satisfy you? What fulfillment is possible out of it?
The agnostic is at least far more honest than your so-called theist – and also more honest than your so-called atheist, because these atheists have also not taken any trouble to search and seek, and then say, “There is no God.” They have read it in Epicurus, they have read it in Karl Marx. Nor has Karl Marx taken any trouble to find out whether God really exists or not, whether there is something in it or it is all fiction. No, he has borrowed from other atheists, from Epicurus, from Diderot.
Now the whole communist world, which is now almost half of the world – Soviet Russia, Yugoslavia, Czechoslovakia, half of Germany, Poland, China, Vietnam, Korea – almost half of the world is now atheist. Do you think these people have searched for God? They were all theists just as other people are theists. Russia was one of the strongholds of the Christians, the most orthodox Christians of the world. The Russian church was far more orthodox than the Vatican. What happened to all those Christians? They simply disappeared. They disappeared just like dewdrops in the early morning sun, not even leaving a trace behind. They were phony. And what they have now accepted is again phony. First it was the church and the czar, the government, the powerful people who were imposing, and they were believed. Now it is the communist party, the communist presidium, which is imposing the idea that there is no God. Each small child is being taught that there is no God.
One of my friends, Rahul Sankrityayana, went to Russia to teach Sanskrit. He fell in love there and married a Russian woman. But when his term was over they did not allow his wife and his two children to come back with him to India. He was very broken when he came back. He said, “They have spoiled my whole life.”
I said, “Why have they not allowed it?”
He said, “For a simple reason. My child learns in the school that there is no God, that religion is the opium of the people – and I am a religious man.” He was a Buddhist monk, and his wife was an atheist. And his wife and the children and the whole society, and other professors of the university, they were all trying to turn him into an atheist. And the government refused to let his wife and children come with him, “Because in India they will be spoiled; their minds will be filled again with the opium: that there is God. We cannot allow it.”
And he told me a very strange thing, which was confirmed by other friends later on who came from Russia: that they have many kinds of societies for small children, kindergarten schoolchildren. They have a youth communist league which spies on their parents and informs the communist party what they are doing, because they are suspicious of these people coming from the outside – they must be theists, they must be praying. So these small children functioned as detectives. They informed the communist party office, “Our father is praying. He has a Buddha statue hidden behind his bookshelf.” And the communist party people came and they found the Buddhist monk’s only treasure, a small statue that his master had presented to him, exactly where the children had informed them; otherwise there was no way for them to know it was hidden behind the books.
The wives are spying on the husbands, the wives have their own communist league. The husbands are spying on the wives – everybody is a detective, spying on everybody else. Now, within a few years the whole of Russia, China, Korea, all became atheist – they had to. Theism became a laughingstock.
Rahul Sankrityayana told me that he asked a schoolboy, when he first reached Russia, “Do you believe in God?”
The boy laughed. He said, “What are you saying? It is a primitive idea. When people were absolutely primitive, even fire was not discovered, there was so much fear that out of fear they started believing in God. We don’t see any need for it. Do you believe in God?”
And Rahul said to me, “I could not look eye to eye with that small child.”
I said, “The reason is that your religion is also borrowed, just as his religion is borrowed. Your parents have forced it upon you; his government has forced it upon him. Neither of you has looked into it on your own, throwing out all that others have given to you – cleaning your mind completely of all rubbish and crap. You have not gone directly, without anybody interfering with you, whoever he is – Jesus or Marx, Krishna or Confucius, Mohammed or Mahavira, whoever he is…not bothering about him, but just going directly into reality. Watching it, seeing it, and finding it.”
If you don’t find God you say, “There is no God.” If you are still searching, you can say, “I am still searching, seeking, hence I cannot answer the question with yes or no.” Then you are an agnostic. But I don’t think Bertrand Russell is right, or an honest agnostic. He has just argued against all the proofs of God – and it is very simple to argue. And he has argued against all the arguments against God – that too is very simple. Seeing that both the arguments are invalid, the theist and the atheist are both talking nonsense, he declares himself to be an agnostic: “I will not take any position.”
But I am not an agnostic. I am very strange in a way because you cannot categorize me. These are three categories – there is no fourth category – and I belong to the fourth, the unnamed category. I have looked, searched. I have not found God, true, but I have found something far more significant: godliness.
I am not an atheist, I am not a theist, I am not an agnostic. My position is absolutely clear.

You ask me: If there is no God, why was I being called Bhagwan by my people?
This question is a little complex. You will have to go into the linguistics of the word bhagwan. It is a very strange word. In Hindu scriptures, bhagwan is almost synonymous with God. I say almost, because in English there is only one word: God. In Sanskrit, in Hinduism, there are three words: bhagwan is one, iswar is the second, paramatma is the third. Hindus use these three words for three different reasons.
Paramatma means the supreme soul; param means the supreme, atma means the soul; paramatma means the supreme soul. So those who really understand use the word paramatma for God. The second word is iswar. It is a beautiful word. Iswar means “the richest”; literally one who has everything, who is everything. It’s certainly true. The moment you experience godliness, you have everything, everything that is of worth. You may not have anything at all, that doesn’t matter, but you have everything that is of any significance to life.
And the third is bhagwan. Bhagwan is very difficult to understand or to be explained in any other language. In Hindu scriptures…remember that, because bhagwan is used by two kinds of people in India: Hindus, one; Jainas and Buddhists, two. Jainas and Buddhists don’t believe in a God, still they use the word bhagwan. For Buddha, Buddhists use bhagwan – Bhagwan Gautam Buddha. And Jainas also don’t believe in a God, but for Mahavira they use Bhagwan Vardhaman Mahavira. So their meaning is totally different.
Hindus are very down to earth. You will be surprised, even shocked, but the original root in Hinduism of bhagwan is bhag – bhag means vagina. You could not have thought it. And bhagwan means one who used the vagina of the universe to create – the creator. Hindus worship the female vagina and the male phallic symbol, the shivalinga. If you have seen shivalinga, the marble standing out is just a symbol of the male sexual organ, and it is standing in the vagina. Underneath it, if you have looked, there is a marble vagina out of which it is standing. Hindus have worshipped it symbolically. And it seems meaningful in their reference, that any creation is bound to be the meeting of the male and the female, yin and yang. So for “the creator” they use the word bhagwan. But the origin of the word is very strange.
Buddhists and Jainas don’t believe in God, don’t believe that anybody created the world, but they use bhagwan. They have a different origination for their word. In Jaina and Buddhist reference, bhag means fortune, and bhagwan means the fortunate one, the blessed one; one who has attained to his destiny, who has matured.
So when I started talking thirty-four years ago, people started using it; because in India, if you respect a man you don’t use his name; that is thought to be disrespectful. That’s why a wife will not use her husband’s name. In India when there is a census, it is such a trouble because the husband is not at home, he has gone to the office and the officers come and the wife cannot say the name of her husband – just out of respect, nor does the husband use the wife’s name; he can use it, he is allowed by tradition to use it, but he does not use it. He will simply call, if he has a boy and the boy’s name is abc – any name – then he will call, “Where is a’s mother, or b’s mother?” But he will not directly use her name. That is simple traditional respect.
So when I started speaking and when people started feeling something for me, on their own they began to call me Acharya. Acharya means “the master,” but not just the master; it is something more. Actually it means the person who says only that which he lives, one whose actions and thoughts are absolutely in harmony. So for almost twenty years people called me Acharya. This was before I started initiating people. They were asking me all over India to initiate them. But I was waiting for the right moment, and I have never allowed anybody to dictate anything to me. I simply live out of my own spontaneity. For years people had been telling me that they would like to be initiated into sannyas by me, and I said to them, “Wait. Let the moment come when I feel to.”
The day came. I was taking a meditation camp deep in the Himalayas, in Kulu-Manali – it is one of the most beautiful places in the world. It is called the Valley of the Gods, it is so beautiful, so otherworldly. Once you enter Kulu-Manali you start feeling you are entering another world. On the last day of the camp it came to me, “Now the moment has come,” and I declared, “Whosoever wants to be initiated, I am ready.” Twenty-one persons immediately stood up. They entered sannyas. Now for them it became a question what to call me. Everybody else used to call me Acharya; now it was not enough for them. For them I had become far more important, far more significant, far more intimate. They had come very close to my being, and they decided that they would call me Bhagwan.
They asked me. I said, “That’s perfectly good, because that’s a very meaningful word for me: the Blessed One.” It does not mean God to me, it does not mean the creator, it simply means the blessed one – one who is at home, has arrived; one who has found, one who has encountered himself. Then there is nothing else but blessings, and blessings go on raining over him. Day in, day out, the blessing goes on showering.
So remember, Bhagwan has nothing to do with God. It has certainly something to do with godliness, because that is what arriving is: coming home. That is what makes you the Blessed One.

============================================================

Osho,
Are you a messiah?
No, absolutely no. The whole idea is fundamentally wrong. It is not only that I am not a messiah, there has never been anyone who was and there will never be anybody who will be. You will have to go deep into the concept of it. The idea of a messiah is a secondary idea. First you have to believe in God as a person, only then you can start thinking of God sending special messengers, messiahs.
To me there is no personal God at all who could send a messiah.

I am reminded of a very beautiful incident about one of the most famous Mohammedans, Caliph Omar. The caliph in Mohammedanism is parallel to the pope in Christianity; he is both the religious head and the temporal head. Omar was a very nice and good man. One day his soldiers brought a man to his court who was claiming to be God’s latest messenger – the Mohammedan word for it is paigambara.
Mohammedans believe Mohammed was the last paigambara, the last word God has sent – now there is no need of any other paigambara. This is a vicious logic, a very strange thing millions of people go on believing without even raising a simple question. The book, the Koran, which Mohammed says is God’s message to him, descended upon him; he is not its writer, just a receiver. And the Koran says that Mohammed is the last paigambara and there will be no more need for any other paigambara. So Mohammedans are very much against anybody saying that he’s a paigambara.
Omar told his soldiers to put the man in jail: “Give him seven days to think and after seven days I will come to the jail. If he still insists on being the paigambara then he will be beheaded immediately. If he takes his words back he will be released.”
After seven days of immense torturing – the man was bound to a pole and beaten continually day and night; very few moments were given to sleep and very little food was given to eat – in just seven days Omar could not recognize that he was the same man, they had tortured him and beaten him so much. And he was chained to a pillar, naked, with blood all over his body because he had been whipped so hard.
Omar asked, “I hope you have come back to your senses.”
The man laughed and said, “What are you talking about? This has proved that I am the latest paigambara, the latest messenger – because when I was leaving God, he said to me, ‘You will be tortured, beaten,’ and it has come true.”
Omar could not believe it. And just then another man who was tied to another pole and had been tortured for one month continually, shouted, “Omar! Don’t believe in this man, he’s absolutely lying. I did not send him as my last messenger,” because one month before this man had been caught declaring himself God!

These people are megalomaniacs. It is a certain mind disease. You want to be superior, higher than everybody else. You would like to be a president of a country, a prime minister of a country, a king, a queen, but it is difficult – there is so much competition. And in the whole country only one man can become a president, and the whole country is burning: deep down, everybody desires to be higher, above everybody else’s head, to be somebody special, unique. Now these kinds of people can find very easy ways: to declare oneself a messiah. There is no election for it, you don’t need anybody’s sanction for it. You can write a book in which you can declare that you are the messiah. This is a circular argument: the book is true because it is written by a messiah, and you are the messiah because it is written in a true book.
What other evidence has Jesus for being a messiah, except his own statements? What do Christians have to prove that Jesus is a messiah? – because it is written in the New Testament, and the New Testament is nothing but this man’s statements. Do you see the circular argument? They are true because they are from the messiah, and he is a messiah because it is written in the true book.
Jesus was not such a bad man that he should have been crucified – his only crime was that he declared himself to be a messiah. That too is nothing to be bothered about. If somebody thinks he is a messiah, he’s doing no harm to anybody; let him enjoy. But the Jews could not tolerate it. So I will have to go deep into the whole concept and its history.

Moses is responsible for Jesus’ crucifixion. Nobody has said it before because the distance between Moses and Jesus is three thousand years. But I say to you, Moses is responsible for Jesus’ crucifixion – for two reasons. First, he declares that a messiah is going to come and he will solve all your problems, all your difficulties. This is pure politics.
Jews were slaves in Egypt. Moses was a great charismatic leader, certainly one of the greatest leaders the world has known. He convinced these slaves that they could be free – not only that, but that they were the chosen people of God. These slaves were, in a way, perfectly satisfied the way they were there, although it was not a very comfortable situation. They were poor, their humanity was almost crushed. They were not treated like human beings, they were treated worse than animals. And continual labor, a futile kind of labor.
You see these pyramids…? All these pyramids were created by the Jews. Even scientists today are puzzled how such huge stones were carried from miles away, because there was no quarry around; the quarries were miles away. How were such huge stones carried? There were no cranes; there was no technology possible. They were just carried by human beings, Jews. And then to put those stones on top of each other and to make a huge, sky-high pyramid was almost an impossible task. It was made possible by continually whipping the slaves.
So Jews carried the stones – one stone may have been carried by forty, fifty people – and all around them were Egyptians on horses continually beating them so that they wouldn’t stop. People were dying and being replaced immediately by other slaves. How many people died in creating one pyramid is difficult to calculate now. Millions of people died in creating those stupid pyramids, which are utterly meaningless.
But the ego of man: each Egyptian king and queen wanted his grave – those are graves – to be the biggest, the highest, the most precious. And each king and queen, because they were not certain that after their deaths their successors would make so much effort – and a pyramid is not made in one day; Rome may be made in one day, but pyramids are not made in one day…so each king and queen would make one. The moment they were enthroned they started digging their grave, preparing, because it would take thirty years, forty years, fifty years for the pyramid to be made. Millions of people would die.
Moses must have been a tremendously powerful leader that he convinced these slaves, “You can drop out of this slavery, you are not made for this. On the contrary, you are a master race; you are the chosen few of God.” This was such a great quantum leap – from being a slave to becoming a master race. Moses did a miracle! But it is easy to convince people, to give them dreams, beautiful dreams, to give them hope, to give them utopias – but to fulfill them is not so easy, and Moses recognized it very soon. He took the slaves out of Egypt, giving them the hope that, “soon we will reach our cherished land, Israel. There you will all be blissful and happy and you will have all the comforts.”
Forty years they wandered in the Middle East desert. There was no Israel. In those forty years of wandering they suffered more than they had ever suffered in Egypt. You will be surprised to know that out of four people, three people died. By the time Moses decided to stop near Jerusalem he had lost almost all the people; only one fourth of the original people were left. Forty years is a long time. The people who were young became old and died. In fact, these were new children who were born on the way and were now young people. They had no idea about Egypt, they had only seen the suffering of wandering in the desert.
If you have wandered in a desert you will understand what it means to wander for forty years without food, without water, just begging whenever you can find some people somewhere, some caravan, some oasis. People died of hunger, people died of thirst. People simply died because they were dragging themselves in the sands year after year. Forty years is a long time.
And remember, it was not because Moses had found Israel that he stopped. He stopped because now he was also fed up; he had to stop somewhere. Now he understood that it is very easy to provoke people, to give them beautiful dreams, to encourage them, to fill them with hopes, but it is very difficult to materialize them. So he had to give them new hopes again. That is the only opium that keeps people somehow dragging and living. So he said, “Don’t be worried, our efforts are not wasted. We have reached the land.”
And what land had he reached? Jerusalem is nothing; it is a desert. And people were thinking of rivers of honey and rivers of milk. They were thinking of paradise – that’s the way Moses had painted it to them. And when they stopped at Jerusalem, almost dead – because they were refusing to move any more…enough is enough. Forty years you have been dragging them and pushing them and saying, “We are reaching, it is just close by, just a few days more.”
A few people became so frustrated that they left Moses’ group. That is what is called the lost tribe. It was not lost; they simply slipped away, seeing the futility of the whole thing. They slipped away, and by chance they reached a better place; they reached Kashmir, in India. Moses himself was tired, his people were tired. He gave them hope again – that’s all that leaders can do, and leaders have always been doing only that – the opium called hope, that tomorrow is going to be better: “Forget the yesterdays, they are finished, and don’t be too worried about today, it is fading away. Tomorrow, let tomorrow come and everything will be all right” But that tomorrow never comes.
Moses did the same. He said, “Don’t be worried, we have found the place.” He knew deep in his heart that he had failed, utterly failed; that knowingly or unknowingly he had cheated these poor people. They had been in poverty and they had been in suffering but not in such suffering and such poverty as they were now. But Moses could not confess it; to say it would have been really fatal. So what he did was, he said, “We have found the place. I am now old. The messiah will come soon. God has promised me he will be sending the messiah, who will redeem you, who will be your salvation.” And just to hide his face diplomatically, he said, “I have to go back and look for the lost tribe.”
It was a simple strategy to escape from the reality that was in front of them. No paradise had opened its doors and the people were becoming angry. Perhaps they would have killed Moses. There was a danger because this was the man who had created the whole trouble. Otherwise they were living somehow and they were satisfied, and they had accepted their fate.
I know poor people, utterly poor, who have nothing; it is so difficult for them to even manage one meal a day. Sometimes they have to just drink water and sleep – water to fill their empty belly so they can feel that something is there. But they are, in a certain way, satisfied. They have accepted it as their fate; they don’t think that things can be better than this. You can provoke them. You can put the fire in their minds very easily – just give them hope. But then sooner or later they are going to hold you by your neck: “Where are the hopes?”
And that was the situation when Moses left them after forty years. The excuse was, “I’m going to find the people who have got lost somewhere.” He never came back – he died in India. I have been to his grave. You will be surprised to know – it is such a great coincidence – that Moses and Jesus both died in India, and the graves of both are in one place in Kashmir.
The people who escaped from the pilgrimage, which was miles long, had found a better place. Perhaps if Moses had turned toward Kashmir he would have been able to tell his people that this was paradise. It is paradise. It is so beautiful, so utterly beautiful that the people who had escaped never bothered again about where the whole company had gone, where Moses was. They simply settled in Kashmir. Kashmir is Jewish. They were forced later on to become Mohammedans, and they became Mohammedans, but you can see their faces, their behavior, and it is so apparent that they don’t belong to India. They are not Aryans and they are not Mohammedans; they are Jews. Just a few days ago Indira Gandhi was assassinated. She was a descendant of those Jews – you can see by her nose.
Moses is solely responsible for giving the idea of a messiah who will come. And then many claim to be the messiah; Jesus was not the only one. There were many others, and they all suffered. Jesus was the most outrageous. And he claimed that he was the promised messiah, this was the crime. Why did Jews think it a crime? I feel perhaps they were right.
I cannot say they were right in crucifying Jesus – l cannot support any violence and this was just absolutely unwarranted. They could have tolerated him, let him. He was moving on his donkey declaring himself the messiah; you could have laughed and enjoyed – that would seem to be right. And what following had he? Just a few people – uneducated, uncultured – who got caught in his net, that he would redeem them, that he would show them the path and lead them to God. But very few, not even hundreds. He could have been tolerated, he was not in any way a danger to Judaism.
But I can understand why the Jews could not tolerate this man. Otherwise he was just a buffoon – they could have laughed at the whole thing: “Look at the messiah with his donkey and twelve stupid followers. He’s the messiah, the promised one!” But there is a psychological reason why they had to crucify this man: they didn’t want their hope to be disturbed. Remember, they will never accept anybody as a messiah. Since Jesus a few others have also tried, but Jews will never accept anybody as the messiah, because to accept somebody as the messiah means losing hope, and they have suffered so much that the hope is the only treasure they have.
Jesus is a nice fellow, but not psychologically balanced; otherwise he would have tried to help people become more integrated, more grounded, more centered, more meditative. If he had anything, he should have worked to share it. There was no need to declare himself a messiah and call down an unnecessary crucifixion.
There seems to be some kind of suicidal element in him. He was perfectly aware; the day he was crucified was not unexpected. He knew it before. At the last supper with his apostles he had said himself, “Tomorrow they are going to catch me. Tomorrow I am going to be crucified.” Then what was the need to go to Jerusalem? If you had already known the fact that they were waiting there to crucify you…. There was no reason for him to go to Jerusalem at all. But he was pulled, like a magnet pulling a piece of metal, he was pulled toward his crucifixion.
There seems to be a suicidal tendency in him, and I, at least, cannot forgive him for that. He was only thirty-three; after seventy it’s okay – one can enjoy the idea of dying – but at the age of thirty-three…it is the prime of life. And he had only been teaching for three years – what can you do in three years? How many people had he convinced? How many people were with him? In three years he was not even able to give a philosophical system, an entire ideology, a methodology for man’s transformation – nothing.
What he has given are very simple maxims which are more or less adopted from the wisdom of the ages. They are not new, there is nothing novel in it. Yes, he says again and again: “The old prophets have said to you, ‘Follow the law of tit for tat’” – or something like that – “but I say to you that if somebody hits you on one cheek, give him the other cheek. I say to you: love your enemy just as you love yourself.” They look profound but they are not very original.
He had traveled up to his thirtieth year in Egypt, in India, in Ladakh, into the Himalayas. I have been to Ladakh, and I have seen the ancient library of Ladakh lamasery which has the record, which has a record of all the visitors who have visited the lamasery – the lamasery was the Buddhist monastery in Ladakh. Jesus was one of the visitors. And his whole personality is described perfectly: his time, his age, how he looked, what essentially his teaching was, everything is described. And scientists have looked into these old pages – they are leaves of a certain tree – they are exactly two thousand years old, they are not new.
So he was gathering all this from outside sources, hence he looked very new to the Jews; but he cannot look new to me. Before him, Buddha had been talking about love, and Mahavira had been talking about love; five hundred years before Jesus, Lao Tzu in China was talking about love. And what Jesus was saying was almost the same.
It would have been new if he had added something through his experience. For example, I would like to say to you: Jesus says, “Love your enemy just as you love yourself.” Firstly, you don’t love yourself, remember – that is the last person in the world that you love. So to say to a person, “Love your enemy just as you love yourself,” is strange, because nobody loves himself.
Have you ever thought about it? Do you love yourself? Have you any respect for yourself? Forget about love, forget about respect; do you even accept yourself as you are? There is condemnation; you would like to be somebody else, you don’t want to be yourself – not at all.
Jesus has not thought at all about what he is saying. It is easier to love the enemy than to love yourself. It is not so difficult to love your enemy because it makes you feel so much higher, so superior, so special. But to love yourself…you don’t become superior. You don’t even look at yourself. You have not even looked within you at what you have been carrying from your very birth. What is it that you are? Have you ever tried to face it?
And secondly, anybody who is really original and thinking about love will have to know one thing: you can love only if you are capable of hate. You cannot love if you become incapable of hate. You can love somebody because you are capable of hating somebody else. You have a friend, that is why you can have an enemy. You cannot destroy hate completely and just save love; they are two sides of the same coin. When hate disappears, love also disappears. That is my experience.
Buddha also says love, and don’t hate. Jesus also says love, don’t hate; Mahavira also says love, don’t hate. But I say to you: if you don’t hate you cannot love. All these people are just talking intellectually. They have not looked into the energy of love and hate, that they are one energy. Love standing upside down becomes hate; it is just standing on its head, that’s all. It is not a different thing. So when hate disappears – I am saying it to you from my own experience – when hate disappears, love disappears too. And what is left is just compassion.
You cannot call it love – love is too passionate a word, too hot a word. What is left when love and hate are gone – for love and hate it would be better if I say love-hate and drop the “and” because they are not two things – when love-hate disappears, then the energy that is left is compassion. It has no attachment; it is neither love nor hate. It has no friends, and no enemies. Neither Buddha has understood it, nor Mahavira, nor Jesus.
So in three years what was he doing? In thirty years, whatsoever he had collected by roaming around the then known world, he was just saying parrot-like, without having any insight into it. But because he was saying so many beautiful words, he became hypnotized by his own words and started thinking that he was the messiah for whom the Jews had been waiting.
And Jews are never going to accept anybody. Even if Moses came again, they would not accept him as the messiah for a simple psychological reason: to accept somebody as a messiah means dropping the hope for the future. Then there is no tomorrow. Then there is no more utopia. They had to crucify Jesus just to save their hope. The hope was far more significant than crucifying a Jew who was going to die anyway. But he should not be allowed to disturb the hope of the whole race.
So it will not be very correct to be absolutely against the priests of the great temple of the Jews who decided for the crucifixion of Jesus, because this man was destroying their hope, their dreamland. They had nothing. In the time of Jesus they were under the rule of Rome, they were again slaves; they had escaped from Egypt for nothing. All that suffering, all those forty years of immense suffering and pain, and what had they gained? Israel was under the Roman Empire. They were again slaves, again paying taxes – to the Romans; again being beaten – by the Romans; again being treated like slaves, animals – by the Romans – subhuman….
They had only one thing: a hope that “the messiah will come and he will redeem us from all our miseries.” Now this man says, “I am the messiah.” And they know he cannot redeem them from their miseries; they know him, who he is. And when they crucified him they were asking him, “Now redeem yourself! Ask your God – ask the God you have been talking about continually, saying, ‘I am the only begotten son of God’ – ask him now, ‘Father, help me. This is the moment to do the miracle. When will such a moment come again, when your only begotten son is being crucified?’ But the sky is silent; no answer comes, there is nobody to answer you.”
“It was your hallucination that you are God’s only begotten son. It was your dream in which you started believing, because a few people, a few foolish people, started believing in your words, and you started believing in their belief in you.” On the cross it became clear that the sky was empty: “And there is no answer to your prayer.” The Jews said, “Look, this is the messiah who was going to redeem the whole of humanity – he cannot even redeem himself!”

I am not a messiah. I don’t give you any hope. And I would like you to remember emphatically that nobody else can redeem you – the whole idea is wrong. You have created your bondage; how can I make you free?
You throw your bondage and be free.
You love your chains and you want me to redeem you. You are asking an absurdity. You are the cause of your miseries, sufferings, and you want me to redeem you from your sufferings and miseries. And you will go on sowing the same seeds, continuing being the same old person, watering the same causes. Who can redeem you? And why should anybody redeem you? It is not my responsibility to redeem you. I have not made you what you are; you have made yourself what you are.
My function here is not that of a messiah who simply says, “Believe in me and you are redeemed” – a very simple strategy: “You have nothing to do with your personality change, transformation; you have nothing to do at all, you just believe in me. Don’t let any doubt arise.” Now, this is the whole strategy of belief.
You cannot avoid doubt; wherever belief exists, doubt is simply suppressed. If there is no doubt you don’t need any belief. It is because of the doubt that you need belief, to suppress it, to cover it. And the condition is that there should be no doubt; you should believe in me without any doubt and I will redeem you. Neither can you fulfill the condition, nor can you ask me, “Why am I not redeemed?” The condition is such that it cannot be fulfilled. And I am free to say that you have not fulfilled the basic condition; the contract has not been fulfilled from your side, what can I do? You agreed to believe in me indubitably, which is absolutely impossible. Nobody can do it, it is not in the nature of things.
Belief always exists hand in hand with doubt. It exists for doubt.
I have no belief at all in anything because I don’t have any doubt at all about anything. If there is no doubt, there is no need for belief. The disease is not there; medicine is not required.
You go on pouring belief, more belief; but you are simply repressing doubt deeper and deeper into your unconscious. And the deeper it goes, the more dangerous it is because you will become unaware of it. One day you will think that you believe, that you are a believer, that you have attained to faith, because your doubt has gone so deep in your dark unconscious that you cannot see it anymore. I would like you to see your doubt clearly. Rather than repressing it by any belief system, bring it out into the conscious mind, face it. And just by facing your doubt, it dissolves. No belief is needed, it simply evaporates.
Doubt is not to be substituted with a belief. If you substitute it with a belief, then you are in a very strange dilemma: just scratch your belief a little bit – and there is doubt flowing, fully alive. The belief is skin deep and underneath your blood is flowing.
So basically my standpoint is: you are responsible for whatsoever you are. If you are miserable, you are responsible. Don’t throw the responsibility on anybody else; otherwise you will never be free of it, because how can you be free if I am responsible for your misery? Then, unless I free you, you cannot be free; it is in my hands. And if it is in my hands, it can be in somebody else’s hands.
Those who are with me have to understand, howsoever hard and painful it is, that you and you alone are responsible for everything that is happening to you, has happened to you, will happen to you. Once you accept all your responsibility in its totality, you become mature. You stop throwing tantrums, and you stop seeking for messiahs. Then there is no need for any Jesus to save you. Nor can any Jesus save you – he was exploiting your situation.
Jews did not allow him to disturb their hope, their dream, their future. Jews have suffered the most in the world, hence they need hope more than anybody else. And they have been clinging to the idea: “The messiah will come, and these are only a few days of suffering, and nothing to be compared with when the messiah comes and redeems you. And you will be the chosen few of God and all others, who are enjoying now, and are not suffering now, will be thrown into hell.” A good consolation! Jesus was disturbing their consolation, their hope; naturally they became angry. Otherwise he was not a dangerous man at all. But he certainly has the mind of a megalomaniac.
I am just an ordinary man.
In the same reference I would like to tell you a few things which are related and have been asked of me again and again. Hindus have asked me, “Are you an avatara of God, an incarnation of God?” Just as Jews believe in the messiah, Hindus believe that their sufferings will end – their poverty, their misery – when God descends in the form of an avatara, as Krishna, as Rama.
They have been asking me, and I have been telling them, “No, not at all. Because you are so idiotic: Rama has been here, your sufferings have not changed; Krishna has been here, your sufferings have not changed. Are you still asking? – and I tell you neither was Krishna an avatara, nor was Rama an avatara. It is their megalomania and your hope mixed together that creates the whole thing.”
The Jainas have asked me, “Are you a tirthankara?” That is their hope, their word for messiah, and you will be surprised, and that’s what makes me very sick…. Mahavira is the twenty-fourth tirthankara of the Jainas. They have this fixed number of twenty-four. Now, there was so much competition in Mahavira’s time: there were eight people, contemporaries of Mahavira – Gautam Buddha was one of the eight – who were all insisting, “I am the twenty-fourth tirthankara.” And they were all criticizing the remaining seven.
Their criticisms are not rational, their criticisms are more abusive. For example, even Buddha…. That’s why I say it makes me feel sick, even Buddha – whom I respect in many ways, but in many ways I can’t help it, I can’t respect him – was claiming that, “I am the real tirthankara, not Mahavira.” Mahavira was old, Buddha was young; Mahavira was almost established, Buddha was preparing the ground. If he had criticized Mahavira rationally, scientifically, I would have loved it. But that is not what he does.
Buddha tries to make Mahavira a laughingstock, because Jainas say that the tirthankara is omniscient: he has all the qualities of God; omniscient: he can see all, past, present, future; omnipresent: he can be present anywhere, or can be present simultaneously everywhere; omnipotent: that he has absolute power over everything. Buddha could have criticized him: “To claim such qualities seems to be egoistic, and the ego is the first thing that has to be dropped on the path. Rather than dropping it, you are making it bigger and bigger and bigger – so big that it is going to burst.”
Buddha makes a laughingstock of Mahavira. He says, “What kind of omnipotence is it?” – because Mahavira’s stomach had failed in his old age. He was eighty-two, walking, on his feet for forty years continually, eating only once in a while. One day he would eat and then seven days he would not eat. It was bound to happen that he would disturb his whole system of digestion, and that’s what happened. At the age of eighty-two his whole digestive system simply collapsed. He died, perhaps of a stomach ulcer, cancer, something – nobody knows, but something to do with the stomach. The stomach simply failed to function. He was responsible; nobody else was responsible for it.
In the night, the Jaina monk cannot drink water – and in a hot country like India, and the hottest part, Bihar…. Even in the hot summer, the moment the sun goes down nothing can go down into your stomach: no food, no water, nothing. And you have to eat only one time, and that too standing, not sitting, because that is too luxurious and comfortable. If he looked at my chair he would go mad, he would simply freak out!
He used to eat standing, and he could not use anything, only his hands – no pot, no utensils, nothing, because that is possession, and he did not possess anything. So he had to use his hands as a cup, and the food was given into his hands and he ate it. It is uncomfortable, very uncomfortable, because both hands are full, now how do you eat? I have tried and not succeeded…not really, just before a mirror, not with any food in my hands. But when your hands are both engaged in holding the food, then you have to eat just like an animal, directly with the mouth. He could not eat much because he could only have his hands filled once. How much could he hold in his hands? He had to drink water that way. He was naked. These were the qualities prescribed by the ancient tradition of Jainas for a tirthankara, and he was fulfilling each quality whatsoever the cost.
A tirthankara could not get food every day because in the morning, doing his meditation, he would make a note in his mind that, “Today I will accept food at a certain house, only if certain conditions are fulfilled.” Still, he could manage things…and he had not to tell anybody: that two bananas should be hanging in the doorway; only then would he accept food, otherwise he would not accept it. Now, everybody would go bananas and nobody would be able to find any. So sometimes ten days would pass and he would go around the town and he would not find his condition fulfilled. By the Jainas that is thought to be a sign that existence does not want them to take food today.
Strange…then why did he feel hungry? Why did he go in the first place? If existence did not want him to take food today, there should not have been any hunger – why did he go in the first place? If I meet him somewhere I will ask him, “Why did you go? If existence itself does not want it, there will be no hunger and you will not have any urge to go around. You were hungry, it is absolutely certain. You went around the town but you had a strange condition, and that was in your mind. And people are not mind readers; now, don’t throw the responsibility on poor people.” Sometimes by coincidence it would happen then he would take food. Now, this is a sure way to disturb your whole system of digestion, intestines – and that’s what happened. But he was a very strong man, so he could manage for a long time. But how long can you go against nature? Finally his stomach collapsed.
Now, rather than arguing the point, Buddha simply makes Mahavira a laughingstock, saying that if he is omnipotent then why cannot he cure his stomach, then why does the physician need to be called? He is omnipotent! He is omniscient – he must have seen it before it happened because he knows the past, present and future. And Buddha laughs and says, “I have seen Mahavira begging in front of a house in which nobody lives. He knows the past, present and the future, and he does not know that the house is empty, that there is nobody inside! He has stepped – in the early morning when it was not light enough to see – on the tail of a dog; and only when the dog started jumping and barking at him did he come to know. And he is omniscient, he knows the past, present and future – and he does not know that the dog is just in front of him!”
These are not arguments, these are below Gautam Buddha. But the same is the situation with Mahavira. Mahavira never criticized Buddha for the simple reason that Buddha had no established name yet. He was young, and Mahavira did not bother about this man. But he was behaving in the same way, even worse about others, who were more established than Mahavira, before Mahavira, who were older than Mahavira. Makkhali Gosal was another competitor for the twenty-fourth tirthankara…because now the line was going to be closed – after the twenty-fourth, there was not going to be a twenty-fifth.
Once, I managed with one idiot, he is a Jaina monk – he was, because the Jainas threw him out. I convinced him that if there can be twenty-four tirthankaras, why not twenty-five? What is wrong in being the twenty-fifth? And day in and day out I continued to argue about the twenty-fifth. I said, “You declare you are the twenty-fifth.” And he declared. His name is Swami Satyabhakta. He declared himself and the moment he declared himself the Jainas threw him out saying, “You are not even a Jaina…twenty-fifth!”
He came running to me: “You convinced me that I am the twenty-fifth!”
I said, “I don’t take any responsibility. I simply argued. It was you who became convinced – that means you had been carrying the seed of it; you wanted it, but you were not courageous enough to say it. And I simply brought it up. It was your desire, otherwise you would have said, ‘I am satisfied. I don’t want to be the twenty-fifth.’ I have been trying it on other people also. They have not been caught so I am not responsible.”
Now he is very angry, because since then the Jainas have not allowed him back into the community. He has asked to be forgiven, but such a man to the Jainas…it is just like the Jews were against Jesus. Jainas at least have not crucified him; they simply threw him out, took away the symbols of the Jaina monk and said to him, “If you say it again we will drag you to court, because in our tradition nobody can be the twenty-fifth.”
But he is such an idiot. I said, “You do one thing. You say that Mahavira was not the real twenty-fourth, you are the twenty-fourth.”
He said, “Great! This idea never occurred to me.”
I said, “But remember, I will not take responsibility for it, because this time they will beat you. For being the twenty-fifth they have simply thrown you out because you are crazy. But if you say that Mahavira was not the real twenty-fourth, that it was just a misunderstanding that for twenty-five centuries Jainas have believed in…. And it was contested by eight people, so there is no problem, you can contest it. They were his contemporaries – of course there is no guarantee that he was the twenty-fourth. But now I will not take responsibility.” So he never did that, seeing the point that if he said he is the twenty-fourth they would really kill him.
But Mahavira himself had misbehaved with Makkhali Gosal, who was older than him and died before Mahavira died. And Mahavira told a story which is so ugly that I cannot conceive where his nonviolence, his love and everything went.
He told a story that Makkhali Gosal died in a prostitute’s home. Now, this is absolute fiction, created by him just to defame Makkhali Gosal – that he died in a prostitute’s home and that before death he told the prostitute, “I am not the real tirthankara, Mahavira is. But I was egoistic and jealous of him, hence I continued the whole of my life to fight for it. But now, at my dying moment, I want to declare the truth. And only you are here, so I am saying it to you; you declare it to others. And because I have been lying my whole life that I am the tirthankara when I was not – and I knew it – please make sure, because it is my last will to you, that my body should be dragged naked in the street. It should not be carried on the shoulders” – in India, dead bodies are carried, four persons carry the body on their shoulders to the burning place – “my body should be dragged on the road and everybody should spit on it, so that the whole city comes to know that I was a criminal.”
Now this is absolute fiction, because Buddha does not mention it when he mentions Makkhali Gosal’s life. He had died, so there was no competition with Buddha. He does not mention it at all, nothing of it. And there are other sources of contemporary times which don’t mention it. Makkhali Gosal died amongst his disciples – and he had thousands of disciples, and he received the same respect as Mahavira received when he died. But that is written in other books.
What Mahavira says in his statement is a fiction, absolute fiction. And what will a man, eighty-five years old, be doing in a prostitute’s home? Just think of the absurdity of it. And who is this prostitute – the name is not given – so that she can be asked? Is there any eyewitness who saw his body being dragged? There is none. And it was the greatest city of those days, Vaishali, in Bihar, where Makkhali Gosal died. And the whole city was composed of his followers. Even the king was his follower; the king was one of the four persons carrying his body on his shoulders. So it is absolutely wrong and absolutely a lie – and from a man like Mahavira who is talking about truth, nonviolence, love!
That’s why I say all these people – whether they call themselves messiahs, or they call themselves paigambaras, or they call themselves tirthankaras – are somehow still rooted in the ego…very sophisticated, very polished, and very subtle; so that unless you have X-ray eyes, you cannot penetrate and see the ego.
Mohammedans have been asking me, “Are you a paigambara?” That is their word for messiah…. I am not to be included in any ego game – messiah, avatara, paigambara, tirthankara; I have nothing to do with these people. I am just an ordinary man, just like everybody else. If there is any difference, it is not of quality; it is only of knowing. I know myself; you don’t know.
As far as our beings are concerned, I belong to the same existence, I breathe the same air. You belong to the same existence, you breathe the same air. You just have not tried to know yourself. The moment you know yourself, there is no difference at all.
It is just as if I am standing and looking at the sunrise and you are standing by my side with closed eyes. The sun is rising for you too, just as it is rising for me. It is so beautiful and so colorful – not only for me, for you too. But what can the sun do? You are standing with closed eyes. That is the only difference. Is it much of a difference?
You just have to be shaken and told, “Just open your eyes. It is morning, the night is over.”

============================================================

Osho,
Yesterday you were speaking to us about various people asking you if you were an avatara, a tirthankara, a paigambara, etcetera. Is there anything more that you wish to say to us?
Yes, there are a few things. I would not like to be put in the company of these people called messiahs, paigambaras, avataras, tirthankaras. I am just an ordinary man, and I feel their company is disgusting.
Let me give you a few examples: Hindus believe that Parasurama is one of the incarnations of God. Parasurama murdered his mother because his father was suspicious….
In fact, almost every husband is suspicious of the wife, every wife is suspicious of the husband. The very phenomenon of marriage exists because you cannot trust, hence you have to bring the law between you. Otherwise, love would be enough.
But nobody trusts love, and there is reason not to trust it. A real roseflower flowers, spreads its fragrance and dies. Only a plastic roseflower is not born, never dies. Love, to be real – you have to understand – one day it arises, blossoms, flowers, but it is nothing eternal. It fades, it disappears, it dies. You cannot trust it.
You have to bring law, instead of love, between you. Law is a plastic thing. That’s what marriage is: love become plastic. Now you can rest assured the law will prevail. Love will die sooner than it would have died if there was no marriage. But you will go on pretending that it is there, hence the suspicion.
True lovers will understand it – that there was something tremendously beautiful: it fulfilled them, it transported them to another dimension, but now it is gone. They will be grateful to each other. They will not quarrel. They have given to each other a few moments of eternity – they will remember those moments, but they will not have any grudge. And they will depart as friends, tremendously grateful to each other.
While love is there, everything is right. When love is not there, everything is ugly. A husband living with a wife whom he does not love, a wife sleeping with her husband whom she does not love, what are they doing? Is it not prostitution? The whole institution of marriage is nothing but the legalization of prostitution….
Naturally, Parasurama’s father was suspicious: his wife was immensely beautiful. He ordered Parasurama to behead her. While she was sleeping one night, he told him, “Go and cut off her head.” And Parasurama – just to follow the father’s order, because that is what Hindus call a great religious quality: obedience – he cut off the head of his mother. He is respected as an incarnation of God.
Do you want me to be included in such company? And it is not only in this case where he murdered his mother and proved his obedience, which in Hindu eyes is one of the most religious qualities. All religions believe that you should be obedient. No religion has ever said to you that to be a rebel is to be authentically religious.
That’s what I say to you: to be rebellious is to be religious.
Obedience is a strategy of the priest, of the politicians, to exploit you, to keep you in slavery, in mental slavery. All religions praise obedience.
And when he committed this murder – and to kill one’s mother is not an ordinary murder, and without even asking why, because true obedience never asks why – then his father made him a professional murderer. His father was a great priest, and there had been a conflict between the priest and the warrior, the priest and the politician. So his father said, “You destroy all the warriors in the country, all the politicians in the country” – so brahmins, the priests, become both temporal heads and spiritual leaders. It is just like the pope in his tiny empire of the Vatican, which is only eight square miles – our commune is far bigger; one hundred and twenty-six square miles – but in that eight square miles of the Vatican the pope has two things together. He is the temporal head and he is the spiritual head.
That was the effort that Parasurama tried to make. Naturally, brahmins have awarded him the title of avatara, incarnation of God. If Parasurama is an incarnation of God, then what is the incarnation of the Devil? The story may be exaggerated, as all religious stories are: it says that he destroyed single-handedly all the warriors on earth thirty-six times. Perhaps Genghis Khan, Tamerlane, Adolf Hitler, Joseph Stalin, Mussolini, Mao Zedong, all put together have not killed as many people as Parasurama has done; but still he is an avatara, an incarnation of God.
I am not an avatara. I would prefer just to be an ordinary man. And there is so much beauty in just being ordinary, so much peace, so much joy, so much blessedness – who wants to be a messiah? Who wants to be a paigambara?
Mohammed is the paigambara. He had nine wives. It suits a paigambara, because in those days a person’s prestige was counted by how many wives he had – he had nine wives, and God has chosen him to be his messenger to the world? This man is behaving with women as if they are cattle. He has no respect for women, he does not believe them to be human beings.
But this is nothing. If you look at his whole life, he was continuously killing, fighting. He was killing to spread the word of God, he was killing to spread the message of peace. The word islam means peace; that is the name of his religion. He used to carry a sword on which these words were written: “Peace is my Message.” On his sword: “Peace is my Message.” But there is a condition: if you are converted to Mohammedanism, to Islam, then you are saved; otherwise, it is better for you that you should be killed, because at least by killing you, you will be prevented from committing many sins. He was compassionate in killing you for your own good. Would you like me to sit with Mohammed?
Parasurama is thought by Hindus to be only an anshavatara – that means the partial incarnation of God. The second most important incarnation is Rama, who is worshipped all over India. He is the most worshipped incarnation in India, but the reasons why he is worshipped are again the same.
His father had four wives; Rama was his eldest son, and when he felt that he was getting too old and death was coming close, he wanted Rama to be enthroned as his successor. But his fourth wife, who was the youngest and the most beautiful, whom he had just chosen…. Now this dirty old man, who knows that he is going to die, is almost on his deathbed – why should he have married at this time? She persuaded him that Rama should be sent, exiled, into the forest beyond the kingdom for fourteen years – because her own son by that time would be adult and she wanted her son to be the king. And this old man, so infatuated with that young woman, for no reason at all exiled Rama for fourteen years, for no crime he had committed. And Hindus worship him because he obeyed his father: obedience to tradition, to your father, to your forefathers; obedience to the past, obedience to the dead.
Rama’s wife, Sita, followed him, because in India a woman is thought to be a true, authentic woman if she simply becomes a shadow to her husband, with no soul of her own. She followed like a shadow, but was stolen from the forest by another king, Ravana. For three years Rama had to fight, collect his friends, sympathizers, and fight with Ravana to take his wife back. He recovered his wife.
But the words he said to her are so ugly that I cannot conceive that a human being with any sense of dignity would utter such words. He said, “Listen, woman, don’t get this idea in your head that I have been fighting for you. It was a question of my prestige. I can get thousands of women like you, and before I can accept you, you will have to pass through a fire test. You will have to pass through fire. If you can come through it alive, I will know that you are pure, that you have not deceived me, that you have not cheated me. If you don’t come out alive, it is settled.”
Now, it is strange; it seems there are double standards. If Sita was to take this fire test, then he should have also gone through the fire test. For three years he was also alone, living with thousands of other people. What is the guarantee of his character, his morality, his purity? No, it is a man’s world. Man can ask the woman about her character, but the woman cannot ask.
The story is: Sita passed the fire test, came out of it alive. Still, when they came back home there was great suspicion in the kingdom: for three years Rama’s wife had remained in the palace of Ravana, and Rama had accepted her back. He knew perfectly; she had even taken the fire test, which is absolutely unscientific.
You can try and you can find out. Two plus two are four. You say two plus two are four; you are saying a truth – then put your hand in the fire. Is your statement true or false? It will be decided. Fire will decide it – whether two plus two make four, or five, or six. And if you are burned then two plus two are not four; you are being untrue. Any small thing can make it clear that it is absolutely foolish. I can ask you, “What is the time?” You can look at your watch and say, “This is the time.” And I can put your hand over a candle to find out whether you are saying the truth or not. Do you think your hand will not be burned? And if it is burned, then whatever you were saying was not true. It can be true only if your hand is not burned. Now, fire has nothing to do with your character, your mathematics, your watch. Fire follows its own law, it has nothing to do with your morality.
Seeing the situation back in the capital of Ayodhya, Rama again threw Sita into the forest, because people were suspicious and that suspicion was dangerous to his power. This man was a politician, a third rate politician, and Hindus have been worshipping him as the great incarnation of God! But he is still a partial incarnation. Hindus have an even bigger surprise for you – that is Krishna. He is the perfect, total incarnation of God – purnavatara. And you cannot find a more cunning, more political character than Krishna. You were surprised that Mohammed had nine wives; now what will you do when you hear Krishna had sixteen thousand wives? And don’t think that this is just a story; it is not, it is factual.
In India, just before India became independent, the Nizam of Hyderabad had five hundred wives. If in the twentieth century a man can have five hundred wives, it is not inconceivable that just five thousand years before a man could have sixteen thousand; just thirty-two times more than the Nizam – not much. And these sixteen thousand wives were not married socially, legally, conventionally – no, most of them were stolen from other people. They were other people’s wives, forcibly taken away. And this man is worshipped as a purnavatara!
No, I don’t want to be in this company at all. I am perfectly happy just to be an ordinary human being like you. Don’t put me in difficulties. If I have to be a messiah, then I have to walk on water. Jesus must have known where the rocks are in the lake of Galilee; otherwise there is no other way of walking on water. Then I will have to manage miracles, because without miracles, who is going to accept me as a messiah?

I have a friend who is now in Bangladesh. Before the partition of India into India and Pakistan, he was in Calcutta. He was known as a man of miracles, but to me he was a friend, and he used to tell me how he managed his miracles. Just for example I will tell you one miracle that he managed, and became famous all over Bengal as the greatest living miracle man. What was the miracle? Very simple. On the station at Howrah, he gets into the express train going to Bombay. The ticket collector comes. He inquires of others, he also inquires of this man who is wearing the green robe of the Sufis; he is a Mohammedan. Respectfully the ticket collector asks him, “Baba, where are you going? Will you be kind enough to show me your ticket?”
He becomes angry. He says, “Nobody asks me for tickets. I have been traveling my whole life – you are the first man who has shown this disrespect toward me.”
But the ticket collector is adamant, and he says, “I will not allow you to travel without a ticket. I was asking you respectfully, and now there is no question of respect – you simply show me the ticket, otherwise get off the train.”
The baba says, “I will not get off the train unless you drag me off.” The ticket collector drags him off the train.
He stands there on the platform, and says, “Now I will see how this train moves.” With his eyes closed he is standing there on the platform. The guard shows the flag, the stationmaster shows the flag; the driver is trying everything, but the train is not moving. The engineer looks into every possible thing; everything is alright, there is nothing wrong, but the train is not moving. And a crowd has gathered around the baba. All the passengers have come out and they have started saying that it is because of the insult to a religious man the train will not move. One man shouts that the train will not move unless the ticket collector touches the feet of baba, asks his forgiveness, takes him back into the train respectfully, and promises him never to ask another Sufi with the green robe for a ticket.
Even the stationmaster says to the ticket collector, “What to do?”
The ticket collector says, “I was absolutely legal; why should I touch his feet?” And he is a brahmin; for a brahmin to touch the feet of a Mohammedan…. “I will not touch his feet. And why should I let him on the train? That is an illegal act; I’m allowing him to travel without a ticket and promising him not only that he can travel without a ticket, others of his kind can also travel without a ticket. Then what is my purpose here? My purpose is to catch people who are without a ticket and throw them off the train.”
But the driver comes running, the engineer comes running, and the guard comes running, and they all say, “Nothing can be done if the baba is against it. The train will not move.”
And thousands of people who are traveling in the train, they catch hold of the ticket collector and they say, “You will have to touch his feet; you have insulted a great man.”
And the crowd is furious, so angry, so bloodthirsty, that the ticket collector, a poor ticket collector, touches the feet of the baba, takes him respectfully onto the train, apologizes and says, “I will never ask any Sufi traveling in the train for a ticket. Please forgive me.”
The baba opens his eyes and says, “Okay, now the train can move.” And the train moves.
He told me, “That made me famous all over Bengal. But the miracle was very simple: the ticket collector, the driver and the engineer – three people were bribed. How can the train move?”

I cannot do miracles; miracles have never happened. Nature never changes its rules. It is indifferent to you, whether you are Jesus, Moses, Krishna, Buddha…. Who you are, it does not matter; nature is impartial, fair, it simply follows its own law. That law I call dharma, tao, logos. And a true religious man falls in harmony with the law of nature. The person who is trying to do a miracle is trying to deceive nature, deceive you. He is not in harmony with nature; he is trying to prove himself above nature, super-natural.
There is nothing above nature; nature is all and all. It contains godliness in it. You cannot do anything against it. But you can befool the fools who are waiting to be befooled, who are anxious to be befooled. Because they are so empty, they want to cling to someone who is powerful, so powerful that he can ride over natural laws, so powerful that he can go against the current of nature.
I am not teaching you to go against nature, I am teaching you to go with it. You dissolve yourself in it – in a condition of total let-go. Let nature take over.
Don’t try to go upstream, let the stream take you wherever it is going; don’t fight with it. I teach you non-fight, I teach you harmony. And to me, this is the greatest miracle: to be in harmony with nature, totally in harmony with nature. When it is morning, you are with it; when it is evening, you are with it. When it is pleasure, you are with it; when it is pain, you are with it. You are with it in life, you are with it in death. Not for a single moment on any point do you differ from it.
This total agreement, this absolute agreement, creates the religious man.

Osho,
Bishop Jenkins from Durham has been dismissed by Lord Hailsham, the Lord Chancellor for administration of Britain's courts. In addition, a member of the British parliament has called the bishop “a dangerous joker” because the bishop had characterized the resurrection of Christ as merely “a conjuring trick with bones,” and had said, “My faith in God forces me to raise these questions about the virgin birth and the resurrection.” Lord Hailsham could not support this thinking.
The first thing to understand about the resurrection – it never happened, because in the first place Jesus never died on the cross; it was an arrangement.
Judea was under the Romans, and Pontius Pilate was the governor general, the viceroy of Rome in Judea. Pontius Pilate had nothing against Jesus. At the most he thought him a somewhat hot-blooded young man, which is very natural; that’s how a young man should be. But he had not committed any crime, he had not induced anybody else to commit any crime; and to put him on the cross, which is the ultimate punishment you give to murderers, seems to be absolutely illogical.
And he was a cultured man. He tried to persuade the high priest of the Jews that, “I don’t see what crime this man has committed. Even if he says that he is the son of God, let him say it. Nobody is harmed by his statement. At the most he is a little crazy – but just to be a little crazy is not enough for crucifixion. If he says he is the messiah for whom you all have been waiting for centuries…. If you think he is not the messiah, don’t accept him as the messiah; but he has every right to say what he thinks about himself. He cannot force himself upon you so that you have to accept him as the messiah. He is not killing people or saying of those who will not accept him, ‘I will kill them.’” And to me Pontius Pilate was perfectly right.
So he and a rich follower of Jesus conspired the whole plot. He wanted this young man to be freed. In fact, he had fallen in a certain kind of love with the young man, because he had gone in disguise to many of his meetings, listened, and loved what he was saying. And more than that, he loved the way he was saying it, the authority with which he was saying it. He had heard many orators; he himself was a great orator. Jesus was not an orator. He was saying simple things, but they touched something in the heart. Pontius Pilate was influenced and impressed.
His wife had also gone to listen to Jesus – of course in disguise, because viceroys and their wives cannot go to listen to a poor carpenter’s son and sit with the ignorant, ordinary people. His wife was also very much impressed, impressed just by this man’s very style. He had something charismatic, something magnetic, so that one even wanted to believe in his illogical statements. He had a certain kind of hypnotic influence. Don’t be afraid of the word hypnotic. The word hypnos simply means sleep. And when I say that he had a hypnotic influence, that simply means that while people were listening to him their reason went to sleep. They could listen to him without their heads coming in.
Pontius Pilate even called him to the viceroy’s palace before the crucifixion, to persuade him that “there is no need to use these words, ‘kingdom of God,’ because they create confusion. You are talking of the kingdom of God that is after death, somewhere in the heavens. But the politicians become afraid – kingdom of God! – and they say you are gathering people to conquer the kingdom of God. It seems that you are using a code language and you are trying…. That’s what the priest is trying to tell me” – the viceroy told him – “that ‘He really is a revolutionary politician and he is trying to take over the country from the Romans.’” The priest said it just to influence the viceroy and convince the viceroy that the man was dangerous politically too, he should be crucified.
Pontius Pilate said to Jesus, “You drop these words. You can simply say, ‘I’m talking about the spiritual dimension, I have nothing to do with politics and the kingdom.’ And why do you unnecessarily say that you are the son of God – and the only begotten son of God? This creates jealousy in the rabbis, in the priests, that you are trying to pose yourself higher than them. They are only rabbis, and you are the only begotten son of God! So you are creating unnecessary enemies. Drop these words; say plainly what you want to say to people.”
But Jesus was as much a fanatic as he was a nice man. They are not contradictory qualities; one can be a very nice fellow and yet, about certain things, very fanatical. And Jesus was very fanatical. Whatever he was saying, he was not ready to listen to anything against it. In the end, Pilate felt that this young man was impossible. Finally he said, “I only ask one question: what is truth, about which you are continuously talking? What is truth?” Now that is a question which nobody can answer – nobody who knows, nobody who has ever tried, a little bit, to search for the truth.
Socrates said, “I do not know what the truth is.” Don’t be deceived by the words.
Bodhidharma has said, “I do not know even myself.” Don’t be deceived by the words. These people have a certain glimpse. At least one thing they understand perfectly well, that there are things which cannot be said and talked about.
Jesus remained silent, he did not answer. But this was his answer; silence was his answer. But for Pontius Pilate – a man sophisticated, cultured, educated, a man of words – this was not an answer. It simply proved to him that Jesus did not know. He agreed with the priest; but behind the curtain he also agreed with a disciple of Jesus, who was a very rich man – because only a very rich man would have been able to reach the viceroy.
And this was a simple arrangement – that the crucifixion should happen on Friday, that it should be delayed as much as possible, so almost on Friday afternoon…. The way the Jews used to crucify people was a very torturous method, torturous in the sense that it took sometimes forty-eight hours for the person to die – because it was not like an electric chair, or a gas chamber of Adolf Hitler where within seconds thousands of people evaporated. It was a very crude method: nailing a person to a post. Now blood would ooze drop by drop, it would take time.
So this was the conspiracy – that by the evening, when the sun set, he would not be dead. He was only on the cross for six hours. Nobody ever died on the Jewish cross in six hours. Twenty-four hours, thirty-six hours, forty-eight hours, people had even taken sixty hours to die. And what was the strategy? – because Saturday is the Sabbath, everything stops for the Jews; no work can be done. And the body of Jesus had to be brought down from the cross after six hours, because the sun was setting; now all work stopped. So he was perfectly alive; he had just lost a little blood. He never died on the cross.

So in the first place the bishop knows nothing. He is saying, “I cannot trust God conjuring with the bones and doing this miracle of resurrection.” How can you conjure with bones? He knows nothing about the actuality, the facticity. But at least he is an honest man. He risked his “bishophood.” I respect him for his honesty, but he is stupid also. He does not know the real story behind the façade of the resurrection.
Jesus was taken down from the cross, put into a cave, with a big rock as a door so he could not escape – because the people who brought him down knew perfectly well that he was alive. Even in the Bible it is reported that one soldier poked his sword into Jesus’ side and blood came out. Blood does not come out of a dead man; the soldier was just making sure that he was alive. And in the night he was removed from there. Now it would have been only on the Monday morning that the cave door would be opened – and the cave was found empty.
Jesus escaped from Jerusalem. At last something of sanity had come to his mind; he knew perfectly well that it was foolish – even his own disciples had escaped when he was being crucified. Nobody was there except one disciple. All were afraid they may be caught and thought to be part of Jesus’ conspiracy against Judaism and the Roman Empire.
At the last supper, when Jesus took his departure from his apostles…. To me they were just foolish people. If they had any understanding they would have prevented Jesus: “What is the need to go to Jerusalem when you know that they are going to crucify you there tomorrow?” It was known all over that if he came to this festival they were not going to leave him free: “He has done enough damage to the prestige of the priests, rabbis, and the established religion. Now to allow him more is dangerous, he will become more and more powerful. It is better to finish him right now. Right now he has no power, no following, nothing much to say about it.”
But these twelve apostles simply allowed him to go. Not a single apostle told him, “There is no need. We need you alive, and we would like you to live as long as possible so that what you want to happen can happen.” No, they were just dumb guys.
I feel sorry for Jesus. Buddha was far more fortunate; he had really great giants as his disciples. Lao Tzu was fortunate. Jesus is the most unfortunate in this whole company of messiahs, avataras, tirthankaras – most unfortunate. Fishermen – what could they do and what did they understand?
Do you know what they asked him at the last supper? They accepted the fact that he was going to be crucified. They asked him the question, “In the kingdom of God, of course you will be on the right hand side of God; what will be the position of us twelve fellows who have followed you?” In fact, a very Jewish question: one wants to make sure of one’s position, where one is going to be, who will be second, third, fourth. And they were very ignorant people.
Jesus said, “At least tonight, when I am going to be caught, don’t fall asleep. At least tonight, remain awake!” And hour after hour he went to pray in the Garden of Gethsemane; he went into a corner to pray. What was he praying? He was praying: “God give me strength, that I can pass through this fire test that is ahead of me.”
Just as I have always told you, every belief is carrying its doubt underneath. He knew perhaps he would be crucified and there would be no miracle to save him; perhaps there is no God. But he went on praying, and hour after hour he came back to see the disciples. Whenever he came back, they were all fast asleep, snoring. They could not even remain awake one night. And the next day the master was going to die.
They could not even sacrifice one night’s sleep – people sacrifice it sitting before a television, looking at a Hollywood movie, any crap – and they could not remain awake. And why was he insisting? – because that’s what he was telling them their whole lives: “Be aware, be awake. Get out of this sleep in which you are walking and living. You are not awake; you are almost like a sleepwalker. On the last night….” But to try on the last night also seems to be unintelligent; now there was no time to teach these people how to remain awake.
All that he did was, he came again and woke them and shouted at them and told them, “What kind of disciples are you? You cannot remain awake and I am going to be crucified, and they are coming to catch me at any moment.” And when he came after one hour…. So he moved the whole night between the God that he thought was going to do the miracle, and the disciples that he thought were his apostles, who would spread the golden word to the very corners of the earth. And both were bogus. Neither is there a God who was listening to his prayers, nor were there any disciples who were listening to his teaching of remaining awake.
He said to them, “When I am crucified, of course you will not be there.”
One disciple said, “I will be there, master.”
And he said, “No. Even before the cock crows in the morning you will have denied me three times.”
And that’s how it happened. He was caught, the people of the priests took hold of him. They had found a stranger amongst them and they asked him, “Who are you? Are you with this madman who thinks he is the son of God?”
He said, “No, I don’t know who this man is. I am a stranger in this city. And seeing the light” – because they were all carrying torches – “I have just followed to find some place. I don’t know the city and its whereabouts.”
And Jesus had said that time, “Remember that the cock has not crowed yet.” And this happened three times. Before the first cock crowed to signal the morning, the disciple had denied him three times, saying that he did not know this man at all. These cowards, they had no idea. But Jesus, seeing the situation on the cross, hanging for six hours, must have considered the whole situation. He escaped from Jerusalem. He lived to the age of one hundred and twelve years in Kashmir.
So there is no question of resurrection, because in the first place the crucifixion did not materialize. And in Kashmir, as I told you, there is the grave of Jesus by the side of the grave of Moses. No Christian bothers, because that grave would endanger their belief in the resurrection. On the grave it is written clearly – of course Jesus is not the name mentioned there, because Jesus is the Greek translation of Joshua; Joshua was his real name – that, “Joshua came here, lived here to the ripe age of one hundred and twelve years, died here. And in his memory we have changed the name of the place.” The village where the graves are is called Pahalgam; it means the village of the shepherd.
But Jesus remained silent. Only one disciple, Thomas, had followed him there; he was his most beloved disciple. He sent Thomas to South India, the other corner from Kashmir. And you will be surprised to know that Indian Christianity is the oldest Christianity in the world. The Vatican is not that old. The popes came into existence after Jesus’ so-called crucifixion had happened – three hundred years afterward. But Thomas started working in South India, and must have been the only authentic disciple amongst the whole lot.
Thomas’ body is still preserved. That is the only body preserved like this in the whole world. And science is absolutely at a loss to know how the body is preserved, because no chemicals have been used. The body is in Goa. Every year it is taken out from the church and remains open for one day for the visitors to see it. It has not deteriorated; it seems as if he has just gone to sleep. I have seen Thomas. Two thousand years have passed, and he is almost in a deep sleep. This man seems to be the only one, amongst the disciples of Jesus, who had something.
Now, in India there are yoga methods, prescribed by Patanjali five thousand years ago. If you practice them for at least thirty years, certain breathing exercises can purify you so much. And those breathing exercises are such, that slowly, slowly, your breathing starts stopping for moments and, suddenly, there is no breath going in or coming out. You are, more than ever, in that tremendous silence where even breathing is no more a disturbance. Then those gaps become bigger: minutes, hours, days. And there have been many people in India and many people in Egypt, who borrowed the science from India.
In Egypt one person lived, buried in the ground, for forty years. He was buried in 1880, and he told the people who were present there, and the government, “For forty years I should not be disturbed. My grave should be opened in 1920.” In forty years almost all the people who had been present had died. Governments changed, and you know what can happen to a file in forty years…. Everybody forgot about the man; forty years is a long time.
It was just by coincidence that somebody doing some research found an old newspaper describing this incident. He informed the government. The grave was opened, the man was pulled out. They thought he was dead, because he was not breathing. And medical science knows only one thing: if you are not breathing, you are dead. His heart was not pulsating, his breath was not there, his pulse was not there. The doctors said he was dead. But within seconds he opened his eyes; he started breathing, his pulse came back, his heartbeat came back. For forty years he had stopped his breathing. If breathing can be consciously stopped, without enforcement, with relaxation – then forty years or four hundred years or four thousand years does not make any difference.
Thomas must have learned it in South India; and he was very much interested in learning. He lived like a brahmin – you will be surprised. He used clothes that in South India the brahmins used, just a wraparound lungi. He used the Hindu thread. He had his hair cut in the Hindu style, leaving a small part just on the seventh chakra, with the Hindu skull sikha. He walked on sandals made of wood – Hindu brahmins use wooden sandals; it is a difficult thing, one needs training to walk on them. He lived absolutely like a Hindu, just in order to understand every possibility that Hinduism had developed, particularly the yogic methods. He must have practiced the breathing exercises which can keep the body without any deterioration even after death.

So the bishop is courageous, but ignorant. He knows nothing about Jesus and his crucifixion. One thing he says, that he cannot believe in the Virgin Mary giving birth to Jesus – no sane man can believe that. Christians think it was the Holy Ghost who made the poor girl pregnant. Strange…I would like to say some unholy ghost must have played a trick on poor Joseph, the father of Jesus. Joseph was being betrayed. And if it was done by the “Holy Ghost,” then that “Holy Ghost” should have been punished, because he made Jesus a bastard. But Christianity is based on these things: resurrection, virgin birth, walking on water, raising the dead back to life, curing the sick, the blind.
The bishop says faith in God is enough. On that point he is absolutely wrong. What grounds have you for faith? These are the grounds, that’s why Christianity continues to emphasize that the birth was from a virgin girl; that after the crucifixion Jesus was restored by God’s miracle; that he walked on water; that he turned water into wine and he turned stones into bread. Christianity cannot drop these things, because if you drop these things – and they have to be dropped because they are all nonsense and false – then what ground is left to have faith in God? That’s where the bishop is wrong. How can you have any belief? What is the reason to believe?
Then there is only one possibility – that I have been teaching you: you meditate. Meditation does not require faith in God as a necessary step – in fact it is a hindrance. Meditation simply wants you to begin without any belief, because any belief can become a hypnotizing factor. If you believe too much, and if you go on believing in a certain thing, you will start hallucinating about it.
Christians have seen Christ, Hindus have seen Krishna, Buddhists have seen Buddha – and there is nobody to be seen. It is all their projection. Their faith creates the image and then the image strengthens the faith. That becomes a vicious circle. Then you have more faith because you have seen Jesus; then Jesus becomes more alive, then your faith is even deeper; then Jesus starts talking to you…. Your faith becomes absolute. But it is just a mind game; you are just playing with your own mind.
Meditation is without any faith, without any belief…entering into silence to see what is there.
There is no need to assume beforehand what is there. If you have assumed beforehand what is there, you will find it. That’s the trouble. If you think Jesus is there, you will find him. Jesus says, “Believe and I am there.” Belief creates the phenomenon.
Meditation is the most scientific method. It needs no belief, no faith – just inquiry. And the inquiry, to be scientific, has to be without belief.

I am reminded of a Hindu professor, Dr. Bannerji. He is world famous for his work on reincarnation. He is head of the department of parapsychology at the university of Rajasthan, in Jaipur. He came to see me because he had been researching and meeting people who could give evidence that there have been past lives. I asked him only one question: “Before you inquire anything of me, I have every right to be acquainted with you. And this question will do. I don’t want to know what your name is and your degrees – that is not your real introduction. My question will be your introduction to me, and then you can ask anything you want.” I asked him a very simple thing, “What are you trying to do? What is this whole research for?”
He said, “I want to prove that there is a chain of births, that the soul goes from one birth to another birth to another birth.”
I said, “Stop now. I will not answer any of your questions. You say, ‘I want to prove….’ It means you have already accepted the fact, and all that you want now is evidence. As far as you are concerned, you have accepted the fact that life goes on changing forms, death is not a real death; it is only a changing of the clothes, a changing of the body, a changing of the house. Your Hindu mind wants to prove scientifically a Hindu belief. Certainly you will find evidence, because you are looking for it. No Christian is trying to look for it, no Mohammedan is trying to look for it, no Jew is trying to look for it. Why are only Hindus concerned? What business is it of yours? Have you any remembrance of your past life?”
He said, “No, I don’t have any remembrance.”
Then I said, “What are you trying to prove? You yourself don’t know. You must have been before…you don’t remember, so it is not based on any experience – just a belief. Now the belief is there and you are trying to put a scientific cover over it.” That’s what people go on doing. They start with a belief; that’s a wrong beginning.

Start fresh: a clean slate with no belief, with no dogma, with no faith. Then there is a possibility that you may find what the truth is. And the truth is neither Hindu, nor Mohammedan, nor Christian. And the truth is not in the Bible, nor in the Koran, nor in the Gita.
The truth that you will find – you will be surprised – is written nowhere, cannot be written. It is impossible to write it. It has never been uttered by anybody and it is not going to be uttered by anybody. Only fingers have been pointing to the moon, saying nothing. And you should not get attached to the finger, because the finger is not the moon. You have to forget the finger completely and look at the moon. And the moon has nothing to do with the finger.
And the bishop says that his faith in God is enough. No, it will not be enough. His faith was based on those beliefs that he has now criticized. Soon, his faith will be gone. He has taken away the foundation of the house; the house will fall soon.
But just look at these religious people…. Because he was honest and said what he felt, he was expelled, thrown out; he is no longer a bishop, now he has become a joker. Just the day before he was a bishop; now he is a joker. Just see how people change. They don’t want you to be honest. If he had continued to say what he had been saying, and kept all that he has said to himself, he would have remained a bishop. Perhaps one day he would have become the pope. They are all carrying the same nonsense. Now, the chancellor who has thrown him out of the bishopric, he will also be carrying the same thing. But people are not honest. They don’t open their hearts. And that should be the basic quality of a religious man.

============================================================

Osho,
What do you think about the attitude of the messiahs, avataras, tirthankaras, paigambaras toward women?
Just disgusting. These people, who have been thought to be messengers of God, who have been teaching compassion, love, have never considered at all that a woman is also human. They are born out of a woman. Still, they have all shown nauseating disrespect toward womanhood. The reason is very clear. The reason is: they are afraid of women.
And it is a psychological truth that you are afraid and at the same time fascinated. Fear and fascination exist together. In fact, the fear is the by-product of fascination. They are fascinated, which is natural. There is nothing wrong in it, it is absolutely human. But if they want to be a messiah or a tirthankara or a paigambara or an avatara, then they have to fulfill the conditions which the tradition prescribes for them to fulfill. And all the traditions are made up by man. Up to now we have lived in a man-made society in which the woman has not been taken into consideration at all.
Confucius – and the whole of China is influenced by Confucius’ thinking – believes that there is no soul in a woman, she is only body. Killing a woman is not a murder. So for thousands of years in China, if somebody killed his own wife it was not a crime. It was just as if you want to destroy your chair, your furniture, or anything that belongs to you; you possess it, it is yours – exactly as the woman is yours. You are the possessor; you can kill her. There was no law in China to prevent a husband from killing his wife. And there was no punishment either, because the woman was a thing, not a being. And Confucius is thought to be one of the wisest men in the world. Now, what kind of wisdom is this? He is the founder of Confucianism, but all that Confucius has done is to confuse the human mind and nothing else.
Every religion is afraid of women, because every religion is afraid of sex. Every religion is repressive of sex, against sex. Naturally, it is a by-product that every religion has to be against the woman, the woman has to be condemned. If you condemn sex you are bound to condemn the woman. If you respect the woman – it is a corollary – you will respect sex also, as a natural thing.
And why were these people against sex? They are different in their attitudes about everything except sex. About sex all religions agree; that seems to be the only agreement amongst religions. So it seems to be tremendously important that we should go deep into the whole phenomenon: why they are afraid of it. They are afraid of sex because it is the greatest energy in man, the most powerful pull of nature and biology. There is no way to destroy it. Either you can condemn and repress it, or you can understand and transform it. But the second is a long and arduous path and needs tremendous intelligence, awareness – because sex is an unconscious force in you. Each cell in your body is made of it, is vibrant with it. Your conscious mind is nothing compared to your unconscious sexual energy; hence the fear that the unconscious can take possession of you any moment.
But to repress seems to be easier. Repression needs no intelligence in the first place; any idiot can do it. In fact, only idiots do it. I have been surprised, seeing hundreds of monks in India belonging to different religions – they are all repressing their sexuality. My surprise was that the more they repress their sexuality, the more stupid they become, exactly in the same proportion. Repressing nature is such an idiotic effort that it is bound to destroy your intelligence.
The Jaina monk is the most repressive of all in the whole world. There are only twenty-two Jaina monks left in India who live like Mahavira: naked, following exactly the ancient path. I have met all the twenty-two, because I was roaming all over India, so it was not difficult to meet these people or anybody I wanted to meet; sooner or later, somewhere or other it was bound to happen. Strange, all twenty-two are in the same way, stupid – no sign of intelligence. You cannot see a single ray of light in their eyes. They are dull, dead. It has to be so, because they have been repressing life energy, life force.
When you repress life energy you will become dull. And the methods you are going to use to repress life energy are bound to make you more and more stupid. For example, they cannot eat even twice a day. They have thousands of rules – so they can eat only a few things, which cannot provide them with all the vitamins, proteins, which are needed for intelligence to function. They are starving. And intellect is a luxury. When all the needs of your body are fulfilled, only then intellect gets energy, because it is at the highest level of your being. If on the lower levels your energy is starving, then it cannot rise to reach to the higher levels.
A Jaina monk’s food is absolutely devoid of proteins. He’s not a meat eater, and I am not suggesting that he should eat meat. But I have suggested to them, “You can use soya bean, which is as good as meat, or even better.” But those fools will not use the soya bean because it is not written in their scriptures – at that time the soya bean was not discovered. I have argued with them that it is not non-vegetarian, it is vegetarian. They say, “It is vegetarian, but it is not written in the scriptures. And Mahavira, who is omniscient, must have known better than anybody else what has to be eaten.”
Now Mahavira is not a chemist, is not a physician, is not a physiologist; he knows nothing about the inner working of the body. He knows nothing about vitamins or protein, or anything that is absolutely necessary as nourishment for intelligence. They cannot take milk because it is animal food. They cannot take anything made of milk – it is animal food. And their logic is: “You are depriving the animal’s kids – that is violent.” Naturally, they become dull, they lose gusto for life. In fact they want to lose it; they are afraid of it. If it is there, then who knows, in some weaker moment it may take possession of you. Hence, the fear of the woman.
No Jaina monk is allowed to touch a woman. What to say of touching a woman, the Jaina monk is not allowed to sit in the place where a woman has been sitting before, because she leaves her vibes there! What to say to these fools? Nine months they have been in their mother’s womb, continually showering in the woman’s vibe. Then for years they have been nurtured and nourished by the mother’s milk. Their whole body is made up by the woman.
The father is almost an inactive partner in the business; I say almost – any injection can do his work. He can be easily removed from the whole process of reproduction and he will be removed, sooner or later, because we can find better methods, better seeds. Right now it is all accidental. Now science has come to a certain maturity. About animals we are not so accidental now; their breeding has evolved. But about man we are not scientific; the breed is not evolving, because everybody and anybody is allowed to reproduce children. This is not going to be for long. This should not be continued for long. Man’s business is finished. He only triggers the process, then the whole burden falls on the woman.
These fools are saying that you cannot sit in the same place where a woman has been sitting before. Jaina monks carry their own small rug with them, because who knows, by mistake you may sit in a place where a woman was sitting before. So they carry two things: a small brush with which they clean the place – as if with a brush you can remove the vibrations. Then they spread their small mattress that they are carrying with them, always carrying – you cannot touch it, you are not allowed to touch it – and then they will sit on it.
I have asked these monks, “If you are really a little bit alert, then please, I will show you two places. In one place a man has been sitting and in the other place a woman has been sitting. You decide by feeling the vibration which one is the man’s and which one is the woman’s….” Even science has not been able to discover any such detector yet.
And of course they decline: “We are not going to do any such thing.”
But I said, “The reality is you cannot do it. You have just learned gibberish. Vibrations – what do you know about vibrations? And what can those vibrations do to you?”
Now, the fear is the fascination. The woman fascinates, comes into their dreams; they have been able to throw her out from their waking hours, but in their nights…. Mahatma Gandhi was very much impressed by Jaina monks. He was a strange fellow – born a Hindu, but not much of a Hindu: ninety percent Christian, nine percent Jaina, one percent Hindu. Many times in his life he was on the verge of converting to Christianity; one time he was ready to convert to Jainism. He accepted three persons as his masters: one is a Jaina, Shrimad Rajchandra; the second is Leo Tolstoy, who was a fanatic Christian; and the third is Henry Thoreau, who was also a fanatic Christian.
I have been talking to these Jaina monks and telling them the story of Mahatma Gandhi, what happened to him. In his ashram no love affair was allowed; even husbands and wives, if they wanted to become inmates of the ashram, had to take the vow of brahmacharya, celibacy. That was a basic rule. So there were husbands and wives but they were both celibate. It was not being followed; they were caught again and again. And Gandhi was a masochist, just as I have told you that Mahavira had masochism in him – enjoying torturing oneself.
There is a certain mind disease which gives you pleasure out of pain. So what Mahatma Gandhi used to do, whenever a couple was found that had broken celibacy – and it was such a sensitive affair that there was no need for an actual sexual relationship to happen. Just holding hands; if somebody had seen them, that was enough; or hugging each other – one’s own wife. What Mahatma Gandhi would do is, he would go on a fast, he would torture himself. He would not punish those people, but it was really a greater punishment than any you could have invented because the whole ashram would condemn the couple. The couple would be tortured by their own conscience: “It is because of us he is fasting.” They would weep and cry and persuade him, “Forgive us, we will never do it again; but break your fast.”
He would say, “I am not punishing you; I am punishing myself. This is a signal to me that I am not pure enough; that’s why around me such impure things happen. I am simply purifying myself.” Now this too is a very subtle way of the ego: you have done something and I decide to be responsible for it. How saintly it looks on the surface! – but deep down nothing can be more egoistic. Who am I? How does my purity or impurity come into your life? But he was just thinking in terms of the old scriptures: if you are a real saint then around you nothing impure can happen. But what is impure? A man loving a woman – what is impure in it? His own woman, not against her will – what is impure in it? And if it is impure, then everybody is born of impurity. Your very birth is in impurity.
I have asked these Jaina monks, “What happened to Mahatma Gandhi in the last years of his life?” – because his whole life he was repressing, repressing, repressing, and the moment came when it became too much, beyond his capacity to control it anymore. Then people find rationalizations. Then he started to sleep with a naked woman – but he had a cunning mind, he rationalized it. He said he was just testing whether anywhere in his unconscious the woman still had some attraction. Does he still feel fascinated by a naked young girl? And he was beyond seventy and the girl he was sleeping with was only twenty.
This was not told to the public at large, because his disciples were afraid that he would lose his mahatmahood. People would start thinking, “What is this?” It was suppressed from reaching the public; only a few disciples, close disciples who could keep their mouths shut, knew about it. But in the eyes of those close disciples Gandhi had already fallen, he was no more the same mahatma he used to be.
I have been telling these Jaina monks, “Try to understand Gandhi, what happened to him. And this will happen to you. But you can remain so starved that there is no energy left in you.” That was Mahatma Gandhi’s mistake; otherwise this would not have happened. It was because he was eating well, nourishing food, milk, everything that was needed for the body. He was very concerned about the body, very careful about the body. That was the reason that it happened. Energy was there, and he was not a dull man. He was tremendously intelligent. But as the energy rises to intelligence, it also goes deeper, to your very foundation of sexuality. It goes to the roots. If the energy goes to the flowers, it has to go to the roots. There is no other way to reach the flowers; it has to go through the roots. But I have found these people so dull. I would be talking to them and I could see they have not heard anything; their eyes look almost dead, their bodies have shrunk. They look ugly.
They have been against sex, that’s why they have to be against the woman. Jainas believe that nobody can be liberated from a woman’s body. Only man can be liberated, can attain to the ultimate – their word is moksha – but only from a man’s body, not from a woman’s body. What is wrong with a woman’s body? There is no difference at all. The only difference is physiological, and that too is not much of a difference – not a difference that can make a difference.
Man’s sexual organs are hanging out and woman’s sexual organs are hanging in, that’s the only difference. Just turn your pocket and let it hang out; the pocket becomes male. Put it back to its original position, it becomes female. This you call a difference? The same pocket? It is because there is not much difference that now science has discovered a man can become a woman just by simple plastic surgery; a woman can become a man just by plastic surgery. If there was some fundamental difference then it would not be possible. By plastic surgery you are just turning the pocket out or in, and nothing much is there.
Jainas say a woman is condemned by her female body. First she has to become a man. So there are Jaina nuns – they are not striving for liberation, they are striving to be born in the next life as a man, then they will work for liberation. There is one step more for them than for a man. “Ladies first” does not apply.

One woman in the history of the Jainas must have been a woman of tremendous courage, intelligence, and a rebel; she rebelled against this idea. Her name was Mallibai. She simply rebelled against this whole idea; she said, “This is just created by man.” And she must have been a charismatic woman, certainly, to become a Jaina monk. She was not going to become a nun, because a nun has the goal to become a monk in the next life. She became a Jaina monk. A Jaina nun is allowed to have clothes, she is not to be in the nude; that stage will come in the next life, if she succeeds.
But this woman Mallibai is a rare rebel. I have looked all around the world – I don’t find another woman of the same rebelliousness. She became a monk. She dropped her clothes and she declared to the Jainas, “I am a monk and I am striving for liberation, and I don’t care a bit what your scriptures say.” She was certainly charismatic, and she fulfilled all the requirements that are prescribed for a tirthankara, and the Jainas had to accept her as a tirthankara.
But they played a trick. When she died they changed her name: Mallibai – bai designates a woman; they made the name Mallinath – nath designates man. So if you read the history you will not find in twenty-four tirthankaras that there has been a woman, because for her name they don’t say Mallibai, they say Mallinath. And they have deceived the whole world, and they have continued on the old trip. One woman has proved it, and one woman’s proof is enough for all women. But the cunning priesthood changed the name when she died. They not only changed her name, they changed the statue. It is a man’s statue in the temples; in Jaina temples there are twenty-four tirthankaras’ statues – all men!
I used to go to Jaina temples and ask, “Who is Mallibai?”
And the priest would become shaky and he would say, “Er…Mallibai? Are you a Jaina?”
I said, “No, I am not a Jaina. But I am not a male chauvinist. Who is Mallibai out of these twenty-four?” And he would show me.
But I would say, “This is a man’s statue. The sexual organs are hanging out and I am absolutely certain there was no plastic surgery at that time.”
Soon they became aware, so whenever I would go to a Jaina temple they would say, “The temple is closed. You are not allowed in the temple.”
In Indore, in India, there is one of the most beautiful Jaina temples, perhaps the most beautiful in India. It is made all of glass – the whole temple. When you enter it you see yourself reflected in a million mirrors around you, because the whole temple is just small pieces of mirror. I love the place for its beautiful land, its quiet – but they would not allow me to enter. Once I had been in, then the door was closed on me.
I approached the man who had made the temple and said, “This is strange. You allow even spectators who are not Jainas, you allow visitors; Christians can come, anybody can come in the visiting hours” – because the temple was such a unique piece of art, up to twelve in the morning only Jainas could enter it to worship, but after twelve visitors were allowed – “I am not even allowed in with the visitors. The moment the priest – and he is always standing at the door – the moment he sees me, he says, ‘You are not allowed.’” I asked the man who had made it…and it was a very precious gift that he had given to the country.
He told me, “I know, and I myself wanted to meet you. The priest has informed me.” And it happened that for six months I had to stay in Indore, because my father was very sick and he would not let me go. So I had to stay and the hospital was just five minutes’ walk from the temple, so whenever I had time I would knock on the door and the priest would hit his head with his hand and he would say, “I have told you again and again that for you, this temple is closed forever.”
The man who had made it said, “I wanted to meet you. I can tell the priest you should be allowed in, but please don’t ask questions which we cannot answer. Your question is valid; I know you are right. Actually Mallinath was a woman. But why disturb things? For twenty-five centuries we have maintained that he was a man, and now nobody asks about it. All the history books have accepted it. You are a strange fellow. From where have you got this idea? We have made it absolutely clear in all the history books, in every possible way. In every temple the statue is of a man.”
I said, “Don’t be bothered from where I got the idea. The question is…. On the temple door you have written, ‘Truth is the highest religion.’ Inside, where the shrine is for twenty-four tirthankaras, you have written satyameva jayate: ‘Truth is always victorious.’ I am not concerned. Who cares? What business is it of mine to be bothered whether this was a man or a woman, whether this person even existed or not? I am not interested in that. But you should erase these words: satyameva jayate. And just underneath you have the statue of Mallibai as Mallinath – and truth is the highest religion! Erase these two words, and I will never come to this temple again; if you don’t erase them, I am going to continue this every day. You go on refusing, I will go on continuing.”
And by and by many people became aware, because at odd hours I would go there – sometimes in the morning when Jainas were worshipping – and he would be closing the door and saying, “You cannot come in,” and sometimes when spectators were going in he would close the door. And for six months I had no other business; my father was sick, and the temple was just five minutes away. I could go two, three times, four times, as many times as I liked. Even in the night sometimes I would knock and the priest would wake up and he would say, “What! Even in the night…?”
I said, “Unless you erase those two words I am not going to leave.”
Finally they had to erase those two words. I said, “I am finished with your temple. Now you can do whatsoever you want. You have accepted that even in the name of truth there is untruth; even in the temple of truth, you have been lying for twenty-five centuries. One rebellious woman – and you have destroyed her completely. And you have been repeating the same again, that the woman cannot achieve salvation; and the woman has proved that she has become a tirthankara.” Jainas had to accept her. She must have been a tremendously strong woman to say that she is going directly to moksha, she is not going to be born in a man’s body; because bodies are left behind – a man’s or a woman’s, they will be burned on the funeral pyre and the soul is not feminine or masculine. And it is the soul, the innermost consciousness, which is being transformed. “The woman had proved it absolutely and you had accepted her; and still, when she died, you started lying again.”

It is a male chauvinist world. All Hindu avataras are men; not a single woman is accepted. Not that there have not been women of much more strength, of much more power than these so-called avataras, but they have not been accepted just because they are women, and it is a man’s world.
A Mohammedan can marry four women, he is allowed to by the Koran. A woman is not allowed to marry four men. Now this is unjust. A woman cannot enter into the Mohammedan mosque, she has to pray from the outside. She is filthy, just because she is a woman; she is not even allowed to pray inside the mosque. In a synagogue there is a separate place for the woman, partitioned; she cannot sit with the man. Mostly at the back she has a place, or on the balcony she has a place.

I am reminded of a story – I don’t know whether it is right or wrong. When Golda Meir was prime minister of Israel, Indira Gandhi, who was prime minister of India, went on a visit to Israel. She wanted to see a synagogue and how the Jews worship and what they do. So Golda Meir took Indira Gandhi and they sat on the balcony. Indira Gandhi asked Golda Meir, “Is it a rule of the synagogue that only prime ministers can sit on the balcony?” – because Golda Meir and Indira Gandhi both were women. Golda Meir did not want to say that in the Jewish tradition the woman is kept separate. But Indira Gandhi thought, “It is because we are both prime ministers, so a special place is being given to us.” Yes, it was a special place, but not for prime ministers – it was for two women. Even though they are prime ministers, it doesn’t matter; a woman is a woman.

The people I have spoken of in the past with great respect – I have to confess to you that I had to drop many aspects of their life, otherwise you would not have been able to understand me at all. Now I want to make the whole thing complete. I want you to know them in their utter nudity – good, bad, right, wrong. Many of my statements will look contradictory to my old statements. Don’t be worried. What I am saying now is the right thing, and whatever I say tomorrow will be more right. The last sentence that I will utter on my deathbed will be ultimately right – before that you cannot decide. I am alive and I am not in any bondage to the past.
On Buddha, how much I have spoken! But he was very disrespectful about women. He wouldn’t allow women to become nuns, he would not initiate them. There seems to be some fear of women deep inside him. And it is clear in his statement – for almost fifteen years he continued to deny them: “I am not going to initiate women.” What is the fear? Why not initiate a woman, when the women are asking to be initiated? Why prevent them from seeking and searching the truth? Is it man’s monopoly? Truth also; is it a commodity and man’s monopoly?
Finally, very reluctantly he agreed – but not happily. He had to agree, because the woman who came to ask was the woman who had mothered him. His own mother died in giving birth to Gautam Buddha. His mother’s sister remained unmarried, sacrificed her whole life to raise Gautam Buddha. And she gave him more love than any mother can give and she sacrificed her own life, naturally; she poured all that she had on him. When she came – her name was Mahamaya – old, tears in her eyes, and she said, “I know for fifteen years you have been rejecting women, but I am your mother. Just remember, I have sacrificed my whole life. Can’t you even give initiation to me? Can’t you share the truth that you have found?”
It was under compulsion; he could not refuse Mahamaya, it would have been too cruel. But what he said is still cruel. He accepted her, he gave initiation to her, sadly, without any ceremony, and said after the initiation, “My religion was going to last for five thousand years, now it will last only five hundred years, because I have allowed women to enter. They will destroy it.” How can women destroy it? I don’t see the point at all.
In my commune there are more women than men; they work as hard as men, perhaps more lovingly than men. They have more capacity to love than man has. They have not destroyed, they have created the commune.
Why is Buddha so afraid? I know why he is afraid. He is afraid…his own fear, deep down, is that perhaps he is still fascinated with women. At least he is not able to trust his monks. He knows that they will be fascinated, and soon what he has been teaching – celibacy – will be destroyed. It is celibacy that will be destroyed, why the religion? What has religion to do with celibacy? In fact, with men and women together, the religion will grow. There will be children and there will be more children and it will become a vast tree.
If I was in his place I would have said, “My religion was going to last only five thousand years, now it is going to last forever; because a woman has entered, now it is complete. With only men it is incomplete. Now it is a real commune, alive, because it can give birth to living beings.” But the fear…and the fear is possible only if it is somewhere deep down in your own unconscious too.
As far as I’m concerned, I trust everybody, even those who have betrayed me. I still trust them, because my trust is unconditional. It does not depend on you, it depends on me. If you choose to betray, that is your business, but you cannot destroy my trust in you. Do you see the point? Because I trust unconditionally, you cannot destroy it; but if there are conditions, then certainly you can destroy it – you don’t fulfill the conditions and you have destroyed the trust. But trust with conditions is a bargain, it is not trust.
Trust can only be unconditional, and its source is within me. It does not depend on you or your behavior or action.
Even if you killed me, my trust in you would remain the same. You betrayed yourself really; you fell, really, in your own eyes. But for me you remain the same person.
Shiva had been my bodyguard for years. Then he dropped sannyas. Then he started speaking, against me. He wrote articles in German magazines – Stern and other magazines – against me. But if he comes back and wants to be my bodyguard he will be again by my side. And I know perfectly well what he has done. That does not matter at all, it is his doing; he should be worried and concerned about it. As far as I am concerned, I have remained exactly the same. He can come again and be my bodyguard. Nobody else will accept him as a bodyguard, because that is the easiest place from which to kill a man.
Just now Indira Gandhi has been assassinated by her own bodyguards. Three bodyguards shot her – eight bullets, creating sixteen wounds, because all the bullets passed through her chest, belly, from the back to the other side. And if the bodyguards want to kill, that is the easiest and the safest place from which to kill a person.
But if Shiva comes back and wants to be my bodyguard, I will be immensely happy to have him. It does not matter. He has to take responsibility for whatsoever he is doing, whatsoever he has done; he has to take the whole responsibility for it. But it is none of my business to interfere in his doings. If he feels it right to write against me, perfectly good; if he feels happy to write against me, perfectly good. But for ten years he was sitting by my side. He must have a tremendously idiotic mind – in ten years he could not see anything wrong. It took ten years for him, and now, after dropping sannyas, he becomes suddenly articulate. So what was he doing for ten years – sleeping?
No, it is not against me that he is writing those articles. It is just to console himself that what he has done by dropping sannyas is right, because the man was wrong. He has to prove it to himself that “the man was wrong, that’s why I have dropped sannyas.” Otherwise it will continuously be a wound – that I loved him so much, trusted him so much, so unconditionally, and this is what he has done to me. I can understand his difficult situation. So writing against me, he is simply trying to cover up the wound that he has inflicted upon himself.
So remember that if Buddha is afraid of women, women are still fascinating to him. That’s why he projects the idea…a simple arithmetic. He knows that, “if even to me, once in a while, the woman becomes attractive, then what about my monks? They will be spoiled.” But the idea of their being spoiled arises only if you deny sex; otherwise there is no spoiling, I don’t see anybody spoiled. No natural instinct spoils you. But repress it, then it is perverted, and slowly, slowly, you are spoiled by the perversion.
You will be surprised – there are Catholic monasteries where women have not entered for one thousand years. What to say about a woman, a six-month-old baby girl is not allowed to enter into the monastery with her father or brother. A six-month-old baby! Inside the monastery, what do you think – monks are living or monsters are living, who are afraid of a six-month-old girl? What kinds of people are living inside? So sexually perverted – all sexual perversion has come through your religions. Ninety percent of mental diseases have come through your religions, because of sexual perversion.
You ask me what my attitude is about these messiahs, apostles, tirthankaras, avataras, paigambaras. What to say to you? I say: simply disgusting, nauseating. They have done so much harm to humanity that when humanity becomes aware, they are going to destroy all these synagogues and temples and mosques and gurudwaras and churches. These people are your real enemies, but hidden behind a façade, a mask.
The Christian Trinity could not allow a woman in it. What was so difficult? They could have done, instead of the Holy Ghost – what is the need of the Holy Ghost? I can’t think what kind of phenomenon this Holy Ghost is, and what is his purpose, and what is the need. A woman would have been far better; father, mother, son – it would have looked more logical. This Holy Ghost, is he man or woman? But no, even though millions of Christians worship Mary, she is not accepted in the ultimate hierarchy. A woman is, after all, a woman.
Jesus had not a single woman among his twelve apostles. And you will be shocked to know that when he was crucified, all those apostles escaped. Only three women did not escape: one was his mother Mary; another was Mary Magdalene, a prostitute, but she had fallen in tremendous love with this man Jesus; and the third was also named Mary, sister of Martha. These three women proved far more courageous, not afraid; thousands of enemies all around, everyone against Jesus; they were shouting, rejoicing in his crucifixion. All the apostles had escaped, afraid that if they were caught perhaps they would be crucified too. They may have said sometime to the master, “We will live with you and we will die with you.” Saying is one thing, doing is totally another.
Only these three women were ready to dare, to be crucified – if that is what is going to happen, then it is okay. It is worth dying with the master rather than to live without him. But this loving heart is very rare to find in a man. When it happens in a man then there is no difference. Still they were not apostles – they should have been the only apostles. Those cowards who had escaped should have been rejected.
But just the other day the lord chancellor in England, who has thrown a bishop out of the church, said, “I would believe more in Matthew, Luke, Mark – the apostles whose words are in the New Testament – because they were eyewitnesses.” He’s absolutely wrong, they were not eyewitnesses; they had escaped. The eyewitnesses were three women, but he does not mention them. Those three men have written the story, but they were not eyewitnesses. Those three women have not written; they must have thought, who would bother about their writing? Who would listen to them? But the lord chancellor is absolutely wrong in making those three fellows eyewitnesses; they were not. And what they have written is different from each other. If they were eyewitnesses it would have been exactly the same.
To me, what Thomas has written – which is not included in the Bible because Thomas was not available there; he had gone to India with Jesus, he had written his gospel in India; I have spoken on it – his words seem to be truer, more authentic, closer, for the simple reason that he himself must have attained to a certain state of light. That light filters through his words. It is not in the New Testament that you find that light.

============================================================

Osho,
I have been asked again and again by journalists and politicians: “Is there some possibility of another Jonestown in your commune?”
It is absolutely impossible. Even to think of it is absurd, because my whole philosophy of life is just the very opposite of Jim Jones’. What happened in Jonestown can happen anywhere in the world – but not here. One thing is completely forgotten: Jim Jones was a Christian priest. He was a reverend, and nobody has tried to discover the roots of his philosophy in Christianity – where they are! If he is related to anybody, he is related to Jesus, not to me. What happened was bound to happen; in fact, Jesus himself has a suicidal tendency.
Because you have been brought up, conditioned by Christianity…. To me, Christianity is not Christianity, but Crossianity. Its symbol is the cross, not Christ. It is based on the crucifixion. If there had been no crucifixion there would have been no Christianity; nobody would have remembered even the name of Jesus. It was the foolishness of the Jews that they crucified him and created Christianity. If he had been simply ignored by his people…and there was nothing much in it. What he was saying were very simple truths which have been known for thousands of years. There was nothing new in it, there was nothing dangerous in it.
To crucify him was absolutely baseless. But it seems Jesus wanted it to happen, because before the crucifixion he was aware that he was going to be caught if he went to the festival; if he went into Jerusalem he was going to be caught and crucified. He was fully aware, it was known to everybody. There was no need to go there, but he was pulled toward Jerusalem as if pulled by a magnet, irresistibly. He was filled with this idea that “crucifixion will prove my messiahhood.”
You have to understand the background. Jews have certain things that a messiah has to fulfill; one of them is crucifixion and resurrection. But resurrection is possible only if crucifixion happens. And Jesus was declaring himself to be the messiah, the awaited one, for whom the Jews have been waiting for centuries, who would redeem them from their suffering, their misery, and who would open the doors of heaven for them. They could not believe that this poor carpenter’s son, utterly uneducated, was the messiah – that “he is going to redeem us, he is going to redeem the whole of humanity from suffering.”
And that’s why they were insisting that the only test would be the cross. Jews were insisting on the cross, because that would prove whether he is a messiah or not. And Jesus was hankering for the cross and crucifixion, because unless crucifixion happens, resurrection is impossible. It might happen, it might not happen, after crucifixion, but it could not happen without crucifixion – that much was certain. So when he heard the news that he was going to be crucified at that year’s festival he started moving toward Jerusalem.
He was a fanatic. In fact, all old so-called religions are fanatic because their faith is not based on reason, on science. Their faith is based on absolutely unprovable beliefs. Faith requires that you should not ask why. But the question why is absolutely natural. So to force the “why” into your unconscious, to destroy your reason completely, you have to be a fanatic – utterly stubborn; otherwise those questions will arise. If you are flexible, those “why’s” will come up, and they will destroy your faith.
What grounds had Jesus got to prove that he was the messiah? He had not got any certificate from God…just because he said so. Jews wanted to bring this stupid young man to his senses. If he had a little intelligence and rationality he would have not gone there; there was no need. But then there was no need even to declare himself a messiah or son of God – which are all foolish. You cannot prove you are the son of God; nobody can prove it. Nobody can prove that God exists, what to say about the son! God is an unproved hypothesis. From one unproved hypothesis, another unproved hypothesis – the son. A fanatic mind is needed, almost a madman. He really believed that he was the messiah. You can go to any madhouse….

When Winston Churchill was the prime minister of England, there were eight Churchills in the madhouses of England – and each absolutely certain of it. And there was no way to disprove it – that they were not Winston Churchill. How to disprove it? The man says, “I know I am Winston Churchill.”
A strange incident happened that brought this fact to light. Because of the war, after six in the evening everybody had to move into their houses; nobody was to remain outside. After six there was a strict curfew order. One day Churchill went for a walk and forgot that he had to return exactly at six. By the time he heard Big Ben, he was afraid: the house was still too far, he would not be able to reach it – and if he was caught! So he thought the best would be to knock at the first house rather than to be in a police station. And you know the British mind: they would have dragged him to a police station. Even if the man had recognized that he was Winston Churchill, it would have been of no help in Britain. He would have to prove it in the police station, and unless he proved it he would not be released. He thought it better to knock at the first door and ask, “Can I stay overnight?”
He knocked on the door. The man opened the door and he asked, “Can I stay overnight?”
The man who had opened the door asked, “Who are you?”
He said, “I am Winston Churchill, prime minister of England. You must have heard about me.”
The man simply grabbed him and pulled him in. He said, “Come in. I have heard about you.”
Churchill could not understand why he was behaving that way. He said, “What are you doing? I am really Winston Churchill.”
He said, “I know. Three others are already here. This is a madhouse.”
The whole night Winston Churchill had to remain there. He asked again and again, “Let me phone and inform your higher authorities that I am really Winston Churchill.”
But the man said, “They all say that they are really Winston Churchill, and they all want to phone to higher authorities. Whom do we listen to? You four can discuss and argue and decide.”
The whole night Winston Churchill had to live with three other Winston Churchills, who were absolutely, as absolutely certain as he was. Even he became suspicious: “Perhaps I have gone mad, perhaps these people are right.”
And this is not the only case, it has happened many times. It happened in India when Jawaharlal Nehru was prime minister. The biggest madhouse in India is in Bareilli. Jawaharlal was going to visit the madhouse, and the authorities of the madhouse thought, “It will be good if we can release someone as cured. And one man, the psychologist and the psychiatrist have found, is completely cured.” So they thought this would be good: from Jawaharlal’s hands this man can be released from the madhouse, cured. He will be happy – and certainly he was happy. Jawaharlal gave him a hug and told him, “I am happy that you are cured.”
He said, “Yes, I am also happy. And believe me, if you remain here for three years you will be cured also. When I first came I also used to believe that I am Jawaharlal Nehru – just like you.”

Now, these messiahs are basically insane. And Jesus totally believed that crucifixion was going to prove him right. That’s why I say there must be a hidden current of a suicidal wish, which nobody has bothered to look into. He went to the cross, and on the cross also he was still asking God, “Now is the time. Have you forsaken me?” He was asking for the miracle, for the resurrection, so he could prove to the Jews that he was their messiah. If anybody was responsible for the crucifixion, he himself was responsible. He asked for it.
And no Jewish source says that there was a resurrection, no contemporary source says that there was a resurrection. Only the New Testament, the four disciples of Jesus, say that there was a resurrection. It is fictitious. If there was a resurrection, then what happened? If Jesus resurrected, then when did he die? Where did he die? Where lies his body? Christians don’t have any answer for that. There was no resurrection. But because of the resurrection and the crucifixion, the cross became the symbol of Christianity. I call it, therefore, Crossianity. It became death-oriented. It became anti-life. In fact, all the religions have been anti-life. They are all looking for a better life – after death.
You know the Jewish and Christian story, why Adam and Eve were expelled from the paradise of God. What was their crime? For what were they punished? God had told them that they were not to eat fruits from two trees. Ordinarily, Christians only mention one tree. That is not true. God had told them not to eat from two trees. One tree, that Christians mention, is the tree of knowledge. And the other tree, that Christians don’t mention – are afraid to mention – is the tree of life, eternal life.
And what kind of God – who is preventing his son, his daughter…telling them to remain ignorant, not to eat from the tree of knowledge, and remain lifeless, without the juice of life, eternal life, flowing in them – what kind of father is this? This man seems to be the enemy, not the father. And that’s why it was very easy for the serpent to persuade Eve. You would have been persuaded, anybody would have been persuaded. The argument that the Devil gave to Eve was, “God wants you to remain ignorant, and also wants you to remain unaware of the possibility of eternal life energy, because if you know these two things, you will be yourself equal to God; and he is jealous.” And it makes sense, because the Jewish God is very jealous; he does not want Eve and Adam to become equal to him. They should remain dependent. For wisdom, for life, they should always remain dependent on him.
No, this is not love. This is not compassion. This is not like a father. But you see, he is dividing them from two things: knowledge – which today we call science; science means knowledge. All that you have today, all your comforts, your luxuries, your health, your long life, is because of science. Take away whatever science has given to you and where will you be? What will you be? – just a naked animal, far weaker than any animal around. You will not be able to survive.
Knowledge is not a sin. And to feel life and to live life in its totality, and to live it with such passion and intensity that each moment becomes a moment of eternity – that should be the goal of a religion. And that is what I have been teaching to you: eat from the tree of knowledge. Become a knower. All ignorance and darkness should disappear from you. You should become more conscious, more knowing, more aware – that’s what I have been teaching. And live life so passionately, so lovingly, so totally, that you can taste something of eternity in it. And whenever you live any moment, forgetting the past, forgetting the future, that moment gives you the taste of eternity.
Exactly what God has told Adam and Eve, I am telling you just the opposite: those are the two trees you have to search for and eat their fruit.
If I have to write the Bible, then I cannot make God say, “Don’t eat the fruit of knowledge, the fruit of life.” Then what is left? Just to vegetate like animals? Then what is the difference between animals and man? But God was very angry. It says he drove out Adam and Eve. I don’t know what model of car he was using – must have been a Ford, Model T. He drove them out! What was their crime? Disobedience – but it was worth it.
I teach you that disobedience.
If Adam and Eve had not disobeyed, there would have been no humanity. You would have been still in the jungles, naked animals. You would not have been able to create the world that you have created.
Reverend Jim Jones is a Christian priest. He is against knowledge, he is against life – as all Christians are, whether they know it or not. You can look at the whole tradition of the popes. They have been fighting, at each step, any progress of science. They have been trying to cripple science, to destroy science. This is the same story: the fruit of knowledge should not be eaten.
The popes are all criminals, because to stop knowledge, to stop the growth of science, is far more criminal than to murder man. Nothing can be more criminal than that. But even today, any progress in science and every effort is made to stop it; because it is dangerous to the vested interests of politicians and the priests. It has to be stopped. Man should not become too wise; otherwise you will not be able to make humanity a breeding ground for slaves.
On small things the popes have been reluctant…very small things. The Bible says the earth is flat. Of course, it looks flat – because it is so vast you can’t see its roundness. Just standing on the earth you can see it is flat. Don’t believe your eyes, they can deceive you many times. So when for the first time it was said that the earth is a globe, it is round, immediately the pope comes in – that it goes against the Bible. So what?
If it goes against the Bible, throw the Bible away! It proves the Bible is wrong. It proves that the Bible is not written by God; otherwise he would not have been so stupid. At least God sitting in heaven could have seen the roundness of the earth. Human beings cannot see it; they are standing on the earth itself, their vision is not so vast. But God, sitting in seventh heaven…. You can see the roundness of the moon, the roundness of other planets – cannot God see the roundness of the earth? It is a planet.
If the Bible was listened to, America would not have been discovered. It was discovered against the Bible, remember; it stands as proof against the Bible. This man Columbus did not listen to the priests, to the popes, did not listen to all the advisors. He jumped and risked his life. “Because,” he argued, “if the earth is round, then how many days it takes does not matter; if I go on and on and on, I will come back to the same point – if the earth is round.” It was through tremendous courage, rebelliousness, disobedience, that he discovered America. He thought it was India – hence the Red Indians; he thought he had discovered India. It was only later on that he found that this was not India, this was an absolutely new place, a new world.
The Bible says the sun goes around the earth. Yes, it appears so, because we are on the planet earth, and the earth is moving so fast we cannot feel its movement. And to feel movement you have to see something unmoving; only in comparison can you feel the movement. When you are moving in a train, you know that you are moving because the trees are standing by the side, the stations are standing by the side, and you are passing them by. But sometimes, if two trains are moving together in the same direction, with the same speed, you may for a moment become confused as to whether your train is standing or moving, or whether the other train is moving or standing, unless you see something static to compare with. Because we are on the planet earth and everything is moving with us – the trees, the mountains, the oceans, everything is moving with us with tremendous speed – we cannot feel it.
But Galileo was forced to change his statement. The pope dictated to him: “You have to write in your discoveries that the sun goes round the earth, not vice versa” – because if the earth goes round the sun, then the Bible is proved wrong. It is so idiotic. As if we are here just to prove everything in the Bible right! Nobody is concerned about truth: the Bible has to be proved right by the Christians, the Koran has to be proved right by the Mohammedans, the Gita has to be proved right by the Hindus. Nobody is interested in the truth.
My whole interest is truth.
And truth is expanding every day, opening new dimensions. And of course the old books and old messiahs are bound to become outdated – but they don’t. The dead go on ruling over the living.
They have all taught that this life is a punishment. Hindus say it is a punishment, Buddhists say it is a punishment, Christians say it is a punishment. Hindus, Jainas, Mohammedans, they all say it is a punishment. And if it is a punishment, if you are imprisoned in life, then naturally suicide should not be condemned. That’s a way out.
I say to you, it is a reward, not a punishment. You have been rewarded with life and consciousness. You are unique in this existence. Trees have life, but not consciousness. Animals have brains, but not the possibility of awareness. Man is the supreme-most in this whole existence.
How can I say destroy yourself? Reverend Jim Jones can say it: it is a punishment. If it is an imprisonment, get out of it – any way! The way does not matter. And after life is the “real” paradise. All these religions have been anti-life, against life. Then naturally they have been teaching you, some way or other, “Accept the misery, accept the suffering. Soon death will come and all will be over, and you will be in heaven.”
And you should look at their contradictions. Jesus says, “Blessed are the poor, for they shall inherit the kingdom of God.” Do you see the contradiction? Blessed are the poor – for what reason? Poverty is the source of all kinds of crimes, miseries, sufferings. But blessed are the poor – good consolation, to keep the poor drugged. This consolation is far more successful than any LSD, because LSD wears off within hours. This drug has not gone out of the system of man for thousands of years – blessed are the poor. And what is the reason that they are blessed? – because they are going to inherit the kingdom of God.
I would like you to see the contradiction: if the kingdom of God is the reason that makes them blessed, then poverty is not a blessing. It is just a means to the kingdom of God, where all pleasures will be available, all your fantasies will be fulfilled.
Jesus says, “It is possible for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle, but it is not possible for a rich man to pass through the gates of heaven.” Ninety-nine percent of the people on the earth have been poor. And these people, Jesus or Buddha or Mohammed, have no idea how to destroy this poverty. Only science is capable of destroying it, and only a scientific mind can manage to make the earth rich, and can make it a blessing. But the unscientific religious mind goes on interfering.
The pope is continually interfering. He will not allow birth control. It is a sin, sin against God. And what kind of God is this who can’t see that the earth is overburdened with the population? People are starving and dying and he goes on sending people. With each person he should send a small piece of earth and other things too – just naked he sends them. And the pope is there, the shankaracharya is there, Jaina monks are there, Mohammedan imams are there – all against birth control, because it is against God.
Now these are the people…if some day this whole earth dies out of this explosion of population, then these people will be responsible for it. They are against abortion. Now, without birth control, without abortion, there is no possibility for this earth to be rich. And all these religions go on praising poverty. When you praise poverty, how are you going to destroy it? When you respect and praise poverty, of course you are going to protect it. It is something respectable – they don’t condemn it. They can’t condemn it, because they are living off it, exploiting it.
Now Mother Teresa…where will she be, and who is going to give a Nobel Prize to a Mother Teresa if there are no orphans dying in the streets? Those orphans are needed for a Mother Teresa to be. Those orphans are absolutely needed, otherwise the Nobel Prize will be missed by Mother Teresa. So she is against abortion, against birth control. Let orphans come; let them come more and more – because these are the people who are being turned into Christians.
You will be surprised – in India I have been watching for thirty years – not a single rich man is being converted to Christianity. I was amazed. Not a single rich man, not even a middle-class man; not a single educated person, cultured person; not a single brahmin, not a single Jaina is converted to Christianity. Who is converted to Christianity? Orphans, aboriginals who were living almost five thousand years ago, and to change them to Christianity is so easy.

I am reminded of an incident that happened in front of my eyes. In central India there is a state, Bastar – it is populated only by aboriginals: no schools, no hospitals, no education, nothing. They lived naked. With much difficulty they manage one meal a day, and what is that meal? – just a little rice and fish, that’s all. These people are being converted to Christianity. You don’t need great argumentation with them. How do you convert these people? I went to see one conversion. I had to walk twenty-five miles to reach that place, because no road goes there, no train goes there.
How was the conversion being managed? A Christian priest was talking to the aboriginals. I listened, sitting at the back: a cold winter night, so there is a bonfire, and in that light – that is the only light and the only warmth – those people are naked and shivering. And the Christian priest takes out from his bag two statues, one of Jesus and one of Rama. Those aboriginals believe in Rama, the Hindu avatara, the incarnation of God according to Hindus.
The priest has a bucket full of water by his side and he says, “Look, I will do a simple thing for you. This is Rama and this is Christ.” Both statues look exactly the same. He puts both the statues in the bucket of water. Rama’s statue drowns, of course, because Rama never walked on water. Jesus’ statue remains floating and the aboriginals all clap, and they say, “This is great!”
And the missionary says, “Jesus saves. How can Rama save you? He cannot save himself. You are seeing it in front of your eyes….”
I had to stand up, and I said, “Wait.” I asked the aboriginals, “Have you ever heard of a water test?”
They said, “No.”
“Have you ever heard of a fire test?”
They said, “Yes!” The fire test is the only real test. When Rama had to test his wife’s purity, she had to pass through fire.
I said, “Okay, the bonfire is there, now bring both those statues.” The priest started hesitating. I said, “You stop, and don’t try to escape from here. The fire test has to be taken” – because I can see the statue of Jesus is of wood and Rama’s statue is of steel. I threw both the statues in the fire. Of course, Jesus – poor Jesus! – burned; Rama came out alive. And the aboriginals were very angry; they were ready to beat the priest. I said, “No, there is no need to beat him.”
But poor people, uneducated people, who know no argumentation, they are being converted. And they are being told to go on creating more and more children, because there is this politics of numbers. How many Catholics, how many Christians, how many Mohammedans – that is going to decide who is going to rule the world. They are not interested in humanity. And they are all promising these people that in future, after life, they will be getting all that rich people are getting here. It’s strange: all that the rich people are getting here is possible here for everybody. Why wait for death? And what basis have you got, that after death you get these things? Has anybody returned and told?
In India there is a place, Surat, and in that area is a Mohammedan sect. Its high priest lives there. It is a very rich sect, the Boharas. And the high priest has been exploiting those poor, rich Boharas for centuries. When a Bohara dies, he has to donate a large amount of money to the high priest. And the high priest gives him a certificate, and promises him – just like a promissory note – promises him, “You will get back a thousandfold when you will show this note to God.” And people have been giving millions of rupees and getting those certificates. Those certificates are put with them in their pocket, and they go into the grave believing that when they show it to God….
I was staying at a Bohara friend’s house. His father had died just a few days before, and they had donated a lot of money. They were really rich people and he said that this type of certificate had been given.
I said, “Do one thing: take me to your father’s grave tonight, and we will see whether the certificate is still there or not.”
He said, “But what is the point of it?”
I said, “I will tell you the point later on. First let us see.” Of course, the certificate was there. I said, “Look. Your father is gone, this is only the dead body. And he has not taken the certificate with him. Now what is he going to show to God? – and you are an educated person, and putting a certificate in a dead man’s pocket…!” But it continues, it goes on.
I have met the high priest who is a Ph.D., D.Litt. from Oxford – a very educated man. I said, “At least a man of your education should not do such exploitation.”
He could not look me in the eye. He said, “Whenever you come to me, you disturb my sleep. For a few days it becomes difficult to sleep, you create such inconvenient questions.”
I said, “It is not me creating them, it is you. You drop all this nonsense. A man of education, a cultured man, should come out, should say to people, ‘You have been deceived.’”
There is no life after death, as you know life. And if there is any life you have to learn to live now, and you have to live it so totally and intensely that if there is any life after death you will be able to live there too. If there is not, there is no question. That should always be the rational person’s approach.
I don’t say anything about heaven or hell, punishment or reward. I simply say to you: go on dying to the past so it is not a burden on your head. And do not live in the future, which is not yet. Concentrate your whole energy here now. Pour it into this moment, with totality, with as much intensity as you can manage. And in that moment you will feel life. To me that life is equivalent to God. There is no other God than this life. Of course, if after death you survive, you will know the art of living and you will continue. If you don’t survive, there is no problem.
So it is impossible in my commune, absolutely impossible, that anything like Jonestown could happen. But journalists go on searching for sensation. Their whole business depends on sensation. They exploit the lowest instincts of humanity. Journalism has not yet come of age. It has not become mature yet. So if there is a rape, it is news. If there is murder, it is news. If there is suicide, it is news. Anything ugly, disgusting, criminal, is news, and anything beautiful is not news. If a dog bites a man it is not news, it is natural; but if a man bites a dog, then it is news. Then the journalist is not interested whether it is true or not; then it is enough, the rumor is enough.
There is an old definition of a philosopher: a philosopher is a blind man in a dark house with no light, on a dark night, looking for a black cat which is not there. This is an old definition of a philosopher. Let me add something more to it: the journalist is the man who finds it. Then it is news.

This commune, which knows only love, life and laughter; this commune, which does not believe in any heaven, in any hell; this commune, which does not believe in following, in believing, in faith – how is a Jonestown possible here? This is the only place where it is impossible. Anywhere else it could be possible, because death everywhere is worshipped, glorified, and the world beyond death is emphasized continuously: that you have to sacrifice this life for that life which is to come after death.
My emphasis is just the opposite: sacrifice that for this. Sacrifice everything for this moment. Rejoice this moment, and if you are capable of rejoicing this moment, you will be able to erase the suicidal instinct from your being completely.
If you can rejoice in this life totally, you will not be bothered at all what happens after death – because so much will be happening now that you cannot imagine that more is possible.
And you say journalists and politicians have been asking you the question. Journalists are poor people – just living, exploiting the lower instincts of man and the lower curiosities of man. They are not very harmful, they are not dangerous. At the most they create amusement and people just enjoy. They themselves cannot rape; they enjoy a rape story. They would like to murder, but they cannot murder, it is too risky; they enjoy the murder story. They have thought many times to commit suicide – remember, it is very difficult to find a man who has not at one time in his life thought of dropping it all, and being finished with it all – but they have not been able to gather courage. It needs a little courage to commit suicide – just a little courage, not much. Real courage is needed to live. Just a little courage is needed to commit suicide – a momentary emotional courage, just for a moment, for a flash. But they have not been able to do it themselves. Somebody else has done it; they enjoy the story.
People enjoy only that which they would like to do but are not capable of – their circumstances don’t permit, whatsoever the cause – but they can at least enjoy it. They can get identified. In a movie, on television, in a story, in a novel, in a newspaper, they get identified with those people that they would like to become but they cannot. They may condemn, that is their mask; deep down they are enjoying it.
Otherwise, why so much interest in Jonestown? He was mad. And who were his followers? All uneducated, mostly black people, not understanding anything – what kind of congregation had he got? But he managed to draw the attention of the whole world just by committing suicide. Otherwise nobody would have ever known the Reverend Jim Jones and his people. By committing suicide he has managed good publicity. And that’s all he wanted: to become famous.
One university has done research in my commune. Sixty percent of people are graduates from some university. Twenty percent have postgraduate degrees – one M.A., two M.A.’s, three M.A.’s. Ten percent of people have Ph.D.’s – one Ph.D., two Ph.D.’s, three Ph.D.’s. Three percent of people have D.Litt.’s, B.Sc.’s, Doctor of Education, LL.D.’s. Now, this kind of people you compare with Jonestown? You cannot find such a caliber anywhere in one commune. These intelligent people have not gathered here to commit suicide – that they could have done anywhere. They have gathered here to share life with me, to have something of the eternal, to taste it.
But the politicians are dangerous people. Journalists are nothing to be much worried about, but politicians are dangerous people. It can never become a Jonestown, but politicians can make it a Dachau, an Auschwitz, a Buchenwald. Politicians can do that, they have already started doing it. They declare the city illegal. Now, where seven thousand people are living without any crime, without any drugs, without any problem, without harming anybody – the city is illegal! No illegality is committed – the city is illegal. And the illegal cities, which are committing all illegalities, are legal.
They want this city to be demolished because of their land-use laws. And none of those idiots has come to see how we are using the land. Can they use it more creatively than we are using it? And for fifty years nobody was using the land; they were happy, that was good use. Now we are creating out of it. We are a self-sufficient commune. We are producing our food, our vegetables, our fruits; we are making every effort to make it self-sufficient.
This desert…somehow it seems to be a destiny of people like me. Moses ended up in a desert. I have ended up in a desert and we are trying to make it green. We have made it green. If you go around my house you cannot think it is Oregon; you will think it is Kashmir. There was not a single tree when I arrived. There was no greenery. I was simply shocked when I was brought here; the house was standing naked. And I have always lived in beautiful gardens; wherever I have lived, I have created a beautiful garden.
We have turned the place, with great effort, into fertility. Our people are working twelve, fourteen hours a day; and they don’t come to see what has happened here. Just sitting in the Capitol they decide that it is land-use, and it is against land-use laws. If this is against land-use laws, then your land-use laws are bogus and should be burned. But first come and see, and prove that this is against land-use laws. But they are afraid to come here.
They would like to come one day, which they are trying…. The county asked for the city plan, it incorporated the city plan – and then after pressure from above the city plan was rejected, it was taken out. But in their own county plan there are many places where Rajneeshpuram is mentioned that they forgot. So just two days ago, they have again crossed it out everywhere, because they want that no place like this exists.
Seven thousand people are living here and no place like this exists! First they will cross it out from their books, from their maps, because it has come onto their maps – because for two years it has been a legal city and the government has been giving it every support that a city needs. But now suddenly it has become illegal. Now from maps the name will be removed, from geography books the name will be removed, from road signs the name will be removed.
I have heard that it used to happen in Soviet Russia: Stalin removed all those names that he did not want. When the Russian revolution succeeded, Trotsky was the second man to Lenin, not Stalin; Stalin was nowhere. But Trotsky was killed, murdered, in Mexico. He had had to escape. Then there is every possibility Lenin was poisoned…. And then Stalin started writing the whole history again. Then pictures of Trotsky disappeared, and Stalin’s pictures started appearing in place of Trotsky’s pictures, second to Lenin – all tricks with photography. All history books were changed. When Khrushchev came to power he did the same with Stalin – his name was removed, his books were pulled out, burned. Not only that, his grave, which was made by the side of Lenin, near the Kremlin wall, was removed. His bones were taken out and sent back to his village where he was born.
I have heard: Khrushchev was addressing the presidium, and was telling them that Stalin has committed a great crime against communism. He has murdered millions of men. One man from the back said, “But you were with Stalin all this time, why did not you say anything?”
Khrushchev said, “Please stand up and tell your name.” Nobody stood. Khrushchev said, “Do you know now why I was silent?”
I have always respected America as a country of democracy. I have always appreciated the respect for the individual, for freedom, freedom of expression. I have always loved the American Constitution. And now I feel it would have been better if I had not come here, because now I am feeling absolutely disappointed. That constitution is bogus. These words: individual, freedom, capitalism, freedom of expression, are all just words. Behind the screen it is the same politician, the same ugly face, the same mean mind – because in my opinion only the meanest people in the world are attracted toward politics; the meanest, the lowest, because they know they can only do something if they have power. You only need power to do something harmful; otherwise love is enough, compassion is enough. And for compassion you need not be a president of a country, for love you need not be a prime minister.
So I say to you: this commune by itself can never become a Jonestown – that is impossible. But these politicians can bomb it, can destroy it. They have been talking in those exact terms: that we should be thrown out of America, that we should be slaughtered. It is possible, because for the politician everything is possible – because every politician is a potential Adolf Hitler, a Joseph Stalin, a Benito Mussolini.

============================================================

Osho,
Why are you against the politicians?
I am not against anybody. I have no grudge, no competition, no jealousy. Why should I be against the politicians? I am not a politician, but my statements can be misunderstood.
I am against the disease called will-to-power. This is the greatest disease, as far as man’s consciousness and its growth are concerned. It is just like cancer; it is the cancer of the soul. Will-to-power can express itself in many ways. The easiest is politics, because it does not need much intelligence. All that it needs is the capacity to create false hopes in the masses, hopes which have never been fulfilled, which were never meant to be fulfilled; their purpose was something else. And the masses are in suffering. They are poor, they are ignorant. They also need all the comforts of life, they also want to live like human beings, with dignity. The politician gives them the hope, and exploits the hope for his own purpose, because once he gets the power, once he becomes somebody – a prime minister, a president – then something in him feels at ease. It was his psychological need.
These people are basically, deep down, impotent – hence the urge to power. They feel their weakness and powerlessness; they know they are nobodies. But if they can convince the mediocre mob that they will be fulfilling their needs, then it is a mutual understanding, a bargain. Then the masses give them power. Once they have got the power, they forget all their promises; in fact, they never meant them; and once they have the power, then you see their real face.
Lord Acton was absolutely right when he said, “Power corrupts, and absolute power corrupts absolutely.” But he was not aware of why power corrupts, how power can corrupt. The man must be carrying the seeds of corruption already but was incapable of doing anything; he needed power. Once he has the power, then slowly his mask starts falling away and you will see within him the egoist in its utter nudity. The politician is nothing but an egoist. Inside he feels empty – and afraid of that emptiness. He wants to be somebody so that he can forget his own emptiness. Power gives him the chance. He can see that millions of people are under his thumb. He can convince himself that he is not a nobody, he is somebody special. And he starts behaving that way. He starts misusing the power. Once he is in power, then he never wants to be out of it. Then he always wants to remain in power, because now he knows perfectly well, that out of power he will be more aware than ever of his emptiness and his impotence.

What I am against is the game of the ego. Who plays it, in what subtle ways one plays it, is a totally different matter. The politician is the most apparent player of the game. The religious messiah, avatara, tirthankara, paigambara – Jesus, Mohammed, Krishna, Buddha – they are on the same trip, it is the same number; but it will need tremendous intelligence to see their power game. The politician is nothing compared to them. The politician is playing a very trivial game.
But when Jesus says, “I am the son of God, the only begotten son” – what is it, if not a power trip? He says, “I am the awaited messiah of the Jews and I have come to redeem the whole of humanity from suffering, misery. Those who follow me will enter into the kingdom of God, and those who do not follow me will fall into hell’s darkness for eternity.” This is the same will-to-power, but in a religious garb. It is difficult to detect it; it is more subtle, more refined, more polished. When Krishna says to Arjuna, “Leave everything aside and come to my feet; I am your deliverance” – what is he saying? What is he asking? It is the same need.
When Mohammed says, “I am the messenger of God, and I am the last messenger; after me no messenger will be coming again. I have brought you the ultimate word. Yes, before me there have been a few messengers, but because humanity was not prepared, their messages were incomplete. I bring you the complete message, the absolute message; all that you have to do is to believe in me.” One God, one messenger of God – that is Mohammed – and one book of God – that is Mohammed’s written book, the Koran – these are the three fundamentals of a Mohammedan. One God, one messenger, one book – nothing has to be added. These power-hungry people have always been afraid that somebody later on may prove to be better.
Mahavira says, “I am the last tirthankara of the Jainas. Now the message is delivered in its total completeness, and there will be no more tirthankaras.” What is he saying? Twenty-five hundred years ago he closed the door. Darwin had not happened yet, Freud had not happened yet, Marx had not happened yet, Einstein had not happened yet – and he closed the doors. The message was complete.
In fact the whole of science has happened within three hundred years, and the last religion is Sikhism, which is five hundred years old. After Sikhism there has not been any great religion. And in these three hundred years everything has gone upside down. Up to three hundred years ago, Aristotle was the father of logic and the last word in logic. Not any more. His logic has not proved true to the latest discoveries of science. It was such a great problem for the scientists when they discovered phenomena which went against Aristotle’s logic. They had never thought that anything could happen contrary to Aristotle’s logic. But Aristotle cannot dictate to existence. These people tried in every way somehow to fit things into the Aristotelian system, but it was impossible.
And then, finally, they had to accept non-Aristotelian logic. They had to accept a simple fact – that nature, existence, has to be listened to. What we impose upon it may be true for the time being; tomorrow we may discover more, it may be proved wrong. Three hundred years ago, Euclid’s geometry was the only geometry, and a complete science. It is not anymore. Non-Euclidian geometry has taken its place. Because of the great discoveries in science, it became absolutely necessary that we have to think against Euclid, against Aristotle.
Mahavira, Krishna, Buddha, Jesus, Moses, Mohammed – they all happened before science had even started scratching the very beginning of things. But they all thought that with them evolution stops, with them time stops. No, time does not stop with anybody. Evolution does not stop with anybody. These are all egoistic claims. The ego would like to say that “everything stops with me – I am the ultimate happening. Nothing more, nothing better, nothing higher is going to happen.” Even Gautam Buddha forgets completely. He declares, “I am the highest awakened person, the supreme-most awakened person. Nobody has been so awakened before, and nobody will be so awakened again. Nobody is higher than me, and nobody will ever be higher than me.”
And these people, on the other hand, go on teaching, “Be humble. Drop the ego.” It seems to be a beautiful arrangement. To the people say, “Be humble” – and you are the only begotten son of God! To the people say, “Be egoless” – and you declare yourself the supreme-most awakened person! Not only are you the highest up to now, you are even closing it for the future – nobody can transcend you.

In India there is a religion, Radhaswami. They have a list; they think there are fifteen stages of the evolution of the soul. Mohammed is at the third stage – I am just telling you as an example – Jesus is at the fourth stage, one stage higher; Krishna is at the fifth, one stage higher; Buddha at the tenth. They have put all the names in categories. Their guru, who is not known outside India, not known outside the city of Agra – a very small sect – he has reached to the fifteenth, the last. There is no other stage above it.
I was visiting their temple – they are making a temple just according to the same power trip. Agra has the Taj Mahal, one of the most beautiful creations of man; they are making a better temple, just to defeat the Taj Mahal. They have been working for almost sixty years on it; only one floor, the ground floor, is ready. It will take at least two hundred years more. But the way they are doing it…even from the incomplete structure you can see that, if they succeed – which seems to be difficult – if they succeed in making it they will defeat the Taj Mahal. You can see, just whatsoever they have done is superb. That was their guru’s wish: that his samadhi, his memorial, should be better than the Taj Mahal, “Otherwise don’t make it. If you make it, then it has to be better than the Taj Mahal. If you cannot manage….”
It was difficult. The Taj Mahal was made by a great emperor, Shahjehan, who ruled over India. Perhaps at the time Shahjehan ruled, India was four times bigger than it is today, because his empire spread beyond, far beyond the boundaries of today’s India. Afghanistan was part of it, Burma was part of it, Ceylon was part of it. Shahjehan’s empire was certainly at least four times bigger than India is today.
And he was making this memorial for his wife – that too, again, the same game. You will be surprised: it was not out of love. He had many wives; Mumtaj Mahal was just one of them. Perhaps she used to meet him once a year, because if you have four or five hundred wives…. And I don’t think he would have recognized her if he had suddenly met her in the marketplace. He may not have seen her more than a half-a-dozen times in her whole life. But she died. She was the first one in the whole army of his wives, so he decided to make a memorial which would be the best in the world. He forgot at the time…what about his memorial?
Twenty thousand people continued to work for twenty years to make the Taj Mahal. All the best artists who could work on marble, from all over the known world, were brought to Agra. And when the Taj Mahal was complete…. Taj Mahal is named because the wife’s name was Mumtaj; hence Taj Mahal, the palace of Taj – he used to call her “Taj” lovingly. Then he started making his own memorial before he died, because he was absolutely certain that his son would not be able to put so much energy and so much money into it.
And now it was a great problem before him – he recognized it only when the Taj Mahal was complete – that “my memorial has to be better than the Taj Mahal.” Of course the husband’s memorial has to be better than the wife’s; the male chauvinist is everywhere – but it is the same power trip. So on one side of the River Yamuna is the Taj Mahal; it is made of white marble. He started to make another memorial on the other side of the river with black marble, and it was going to be better than the Taj Mahal. It is only half complete, but you can see it would have been better if Shahjehan had lived to complete it. He died – he was old – and his son simply dropped the whole project, it was too costly.
So there lies an incomplete memorial which was going to be bigger than the Taj Mahal. And then, with these Radhaswamis, there is again another which is certainly better – if it succeeds, which is almost impossible because it is such a small sect: very rich, very creative, but to compete with Shahjehan is not possible. And do you know what Shahjehan’s son Jehangir did? Not only did he discontinue the project, he cut off the hands of the best artists so that nobody could make anything comparable to the complete Taj Mahal or the incomplete memorial of his father. That was the reward given to those people who had worked almost three generations. Ego trips….
So I was invited to this temple. They told me, “Our master has taught us that there are fifteen stages, and this is the way he has described who is where – who is who and who is where. What do you think?” they asked me.
I said, “Your master is right, because from the fifteenth I can see him trying to reach to the sixteenth, but he goes on slipping, it is very slippery – this is the last. The poor fellow goes on falling – I know him.” These stupid people! But, in the name of religion, it is the same will-to-power. You will find it very refined in the poets, in the painters, in other artists, singers, dancers – but it is the same.

So I am not against the politicians, I am against the will-to-power, because the will-to-power is nothing but ego projection, and that is the greatest barrier between you and existence. The bigger ego you have, the farther away you are from existence. If it is not there – the meeting, the merger.
But I will not tell you to drop the ego. I am fully aware how cunning the ego is. It can even play the game of dropping itself, and you can say, “Look, I am the humblest person in the world, the most egoless.” It has come in from the back door again; now you are the humblest, the most egoless – but you have to be somebody special and extraordinary.
I only say to you: if you try to drop it, it will come in from the back door. Just try to understand its games, that’s enough. Just try to see how many games it can play, in how many ways it can deceive you. Just be alert. And if you are aware of all the possible ways of the ego, it disappears just like darkness disappears when you bring a lighted candle in, and you start looking with the candle where the darkness is. You go on looking, and wherever you go it is not, wherever you go it is not.
When the light is there, the darkness disappears. It is not that darkness escapes; darkness does not exist at all. It is only an absence of light.
Ego is just like darkness; it has no existence of its own. It is only the absence of awareness. So I don’t say drop the ego, I say watch it. Be watchful, observe it – and you will find it in so many layers that you will be surprised. The politician is a gross egoist. The saint may be a very subtle egoist. He is in more danger than the politician, because the gross can be caught very easily. I know both. I know the grossest politician and I know the subtlest saint, and I know all the categories in between. I have met all these people.
My whole life’s work is to find out the basic problem of humanity. And once we know the basic problem of humanity, it is not difficult at all to dissolve it. In fact, in the very finding it dissolves, because your awareness becomes a light unto itself.
I cannot say I am a messiah, I cannot say I am the avatara, because I know those are subtle ego games. All that I can say is: I am just as ordinary as anybody, or as extraordinary as everybody.
In existence, the smallest blade of grass has the same significance and the same beauty as the greatest star. There is no hierarchy. There is nobody higher, nobody lower.
I am not against anybody. But my basic work is to expose before you all the diseases, the bondages, so that you are not caught in them, so you can remain free, so you can have a merger with existence, without any barrier. And ego is the only barrier. It can come in so many ways that unless you are really alert it will deceive you. It can become so subtle – almost like a shadow – that it will follow you, and you will not be aware of it.

I would like to tell you a small story. Two monks, Buddhist monks, are returning to their monastery; they come to a ford. The current is very powerful. It is a hilly place. A young, beautiful girl is waiting there, waiting for somebody to help her to cross. She is afraid to enter alone.
One monk, the older one of course, – because he is older, he walks ahead: all games of the ego. If you are older, you have to walk ahead; younger monks have to walk a little back. They cannot walk parallel to the older monk; of course, they cannot walk ahead. And these are the people who are talking continuously of dropping the ego! Even physical age is used to fulfill a certain ego. The older monk comes first. The young girl asks him, “Bhante” – bhante is the Buddhist equivalent of “reverend” – “Bhante, would you help me; just hold my hand? I am afraid, the current is so strong and perhaps it may be deep.”
The old man closes his eyes – that’s what Buddha had said to the monks: that if you see a woman, particularly if she is beautiful, close your eyes. But I am surprised: you have already seen her, then you close your eyes; otherwise how can you determine she is a woman, and beautiful? You are already affected, and now you close your eyes. And remember, with closed eyes the beautiful woman will become even more beautiful – she will become a dream girl. And Buddha had said, “Don’t talk, don’t touch a woman” – because just talking, you may get caught; touching, you may forget that you are a monk.
So he closes his eyes and enters the ford without answering the woman. You see the ugliness of it. And these people are saying, “Help, serve” – and that poor girl was simply asking, “Hold my hand, just for a few seconds, so I can pass the ford.” And the man closed his eyes.
Then the second, younger monk comes. The girl is afraid, but there is nothing else to call upon: the sun is setting, soon it will be night. She cannot go back, the town is far away. She has to go ahead, only then can she reach her home before it becomes too dark. But how to pass this ford? So under compulsion she asks the young monk, “Bhante, will you please hold my hand? The ford seems to be deep and the current strong, and I am afraid.”
The monk says, “It is deep, I know, because we pass through it every day. On the other side is our monastery, so to beg food we have to come to this side to the village. It is deep, and it is good that you have not entered alone, otherwise you would have gone with it. And just holding hands won’t do; you just sit on my shoulders and I will carry you to the other side.”
The young girl jumps on his shoulders; he carries her to the other side. When they are just in the middle of the ford, the old monk remembers that a younger fellow is coming behind, and he is too young and too new, he may get caught in the Devil’s net – the woman is the Devil’s net. Perhaps it is the Devil himself standing in the form of a young, beautiful girl. He opens his eyes, and what he sees he cannot believe: the young monk is carrying the beautiful girl on his shoulders. Now he is tremendously angry, shaking with anger.
The young monk leaves the girl on the other shore and follows the older monk toward the monastery. When they reach the monastery door – it must have been two or three miles from the ford – on the steps the older monk stands and says to the young one, “You, fellow, you have committed a sin and I am going to report to the Buddha that you not only touched a woman, not only talked with her, but you carried her on your shoulders. You should be expelled from the community; you are not worthy of being a monk.”
The young man simply laughs and says, “Bhante, it seems although I have dropped that girl three miles back, you are still carrying her on your shoulders. Three miles have passed, and you are still bothered by it?”

This is what happens if you start fighting with anything – it may be sex, it may be ego, it may be greed, it may be fear, it may be anger, whatsoever – if you start fighting with it. And how will you drop it? Other than fight, how are you going to drop it? You will push hard but where will you push it? Anything pushed goes deep down into your own unconscious. And anything in the unconscious is far more powerful than in the conscious, because conscious is only one part; the unconscious is nine times bigger than that. And in the conscious mind at least you are aware what is there. In the unconscious mind it is so dark, you don’t know what is there; and it is nine times bigger, more powerful. It can take over your conscious effort any moment.
Now, what is happening to this old monk? Many things at the same time. The girl was beautiful; he has missed a chance. He is angry. He is jealous. He is full of sexuality. He is what he is saying the younger one is – really in a mess. The younger one is completely clean. He took the girl over and left her on the other shore, and that’s that, the thing is finished. But the younger monk must have been of tremendous awareness.
That awareness is my teaching. Never fight with greed, ego, anger, jealousy, hatred – all those enemies that the religions have been telling you, “Fight with them, crush them, kill them.” You cannot kill them, you cannot crush them, you cannot fight with them; all that you can do is just be aware of them. And the moment you are aware, they are gone. In the light, the darkness simply disappears.

Osho,
Are you in favor of communism?
Yes and no. First let us discuss the no. I am against the communism that exists in the Soviet Union, in China, and in other communist countries. I am against the communism that Karl Marx, Engels, Lenin, Stalin, Mao, these people, have given birth to, because what they have given birth to is not communism. That’s why I am against it.
What they have given birth to is a dictatorial, inhuman, slave society – undemocratic, with no respect for the individual and even no recognition for the individual. He is only a number, just as in the army numbers exist. One man dies: on the army board, number eight is killed, or number eight is lost, not found. But do you see the psychological difference? Number eight has no wife, no children, no mother, no old father, no old grandmother. Number eight is just number eight: arithmetic. It has nothing to do with humanity. But if you replace it with his real name, then you feel differently. You start thinking, what will happen to his wife? He was a friend to someone – what will happen to his mother, to his old father, who were looking to him and depending on him? What will happen to his children?
Hence, in the army they don’t use names – they will create psychological disturbance in other people – only numbers, and numbers are replaceable. Number eight has fallen, let him go; somebody else becomes number eight. He will not become the husband of number eight’s wife, and he will not become the son of number eight’s father. The army is not concerned about that. Numbers are replaceable; human beings are not. The communism that has arisen out of Karl Marx is inhuman, because it does not take into account your individuality at all.
Marx says you are nothing but matter. And if you are nothing but matter, then what does it matter whether you live or die? So it was very easy for Stalin to kill millions of people in Russia. It would not have been so easy if Marx had not said that you are only matter, there is no problem. Stalin feels no prick in his conscience destroying millions of people: they are not people, they don’t have any souls. They are only mechanisms.
I am not going to be a supporter of this idiotic ideology, which takes humanity from man. His humanity has to be enriched, his individuality has to be sharpened.
They destroy everything that is individual. They want you just to be a part of the collective whole – just a part, a cog in the wheel, which is always replaceable. And I know that no human being is replaceable, because every human being is so unique, so utterly unique, that there is no way to replace him. In Marxian communism there is no respect for the individual. What are they closing, do you know? They are closing the door to your own being, and if the door is closed to your own being, you are separated from existence totally. Then there is no question of seeking and searching the truth; there is no question of knowing thyself, of being thyself. In fact it is dangerous, being thyself, knowing thyself. It is better to be just a cog in the wheel, with no self.
Marx’s idea is not based on any inner search. I pity the man; he was intelligent, but he remained only intellectual, bookish, a bookworm. He entered the British Museum library every day, the first man, and he had to be forced out every night because the museum was going to be closed. And sometimes he had to be taken on a stretcher, because reading the whole day and smoking cigarettes – that was all that he was doing – he would become unconscious. For forty years continually the British Museum had to deal with this man. But they became aware that “we have to accept him. He is the first man – before the door opens, he is standing there – and he is the last man. If you find him conscious you can take him out; if you find him unconscious you carry him on the stretcher to the hospital.”
This man never meditated, even for a single moment. He knew nothing of the inner; he was just concerned with books. What he has written in Das Kapital – no communist reads it. I have met hundreds of communists; no communist reads it. Every communist keeps it in his house, just as a Christian keeps the Bible. It is the bible of communism – and they have created the Trinity exactly: Marx, Engels, Lenin; and the bible is Das Kapital – but nobody reads it. I have gone through it, from the first page to the last. It is all words, no experience; quotations from other books, but no authentic experience, not a single experience of his own.
What kind of man is Karl Marx? Jews give a strange type of people to the world. First they gave us Moses, who for forty years drove the whole Jewish community – seventy-five percent of his people died in forty years, searching for Israel. And what a coincidence, that he passed over all those places which are now the richest – the Middle East, all the oil sources, he passed all those. He is God’s chosen prophet, and he knows nothing about the oil! And he stopped at Israel, where there is nothing – just a desert. If he had stopped somewhere before, Jews would have been immensely happy; they could have created a paradise.
Then comes Jesus, another Jew. And because of Jesus, Jews gave birth to Christianity. They are responsible. If they had not crucified Jesus there would have been no Christianity. And what has Christianity done to humanity, do you know? In the past twenty centuries, how many million people have Christians killed, burned alive? – in the name of God, and the Holy Ghost, and the Son. They could burn people alive because they were absolutely certain that what they were doing was right. Jesus has given them the right to bring everybody to the fold. So there were crusades going on continually against the pagans.
And you will be surprised: the pagans are far closer to existence than anybody else. The pagans are the people who worship nature, trees, mountains, oceans, rivers, stars. The pagans are those who accept this whole that surrounds you as divine. They are far closer to me than these so-called religious people.
They were killing pagans because they did not believe in a creator God. And the pagans were being killed by everybody. Jews were killing them because they did not believe in the Jewish god, Christians were killing them because they did not believe in the Christian god, Mohammedans were killing them because they did not believe in the Mohammedan god – and there are so many gods. It is good that Hindus never started killing, because Hindus have thirty-three million gods! If they had started killing, then there would have been no humanity at all. Thirty-three million gods…the idea is so old that at that time there were not thirty-three million people even on the whole earth, what to say about Hindus. The whole earth had not thirty-three million people, but the Hindus had thirty-three million gods. Why did these Hindus have thirty-three million gods?
Jainas have twenty-four tirthankaras and Buddhists, just not to be left behind – that ego goes on – invented…. They have only one Gautam Buddha, but they invented…it is a fiction. They had to compete with the Jainas; they were their competitors, their contemporaries. Jainas authentically had twenty-four tirthankaras; Buddha was alone. First he tried to say that he was the twenty-fourth tirthankara. When he was not accepted by the Jainas, and Mahavira succeeded in being accepted, he created the fiction that there have been twenty-four buddhas – twenty-three before him. In fact, those twenty-three were his lives; he has been twenty-three times before as a buddha in the world, and this is his twenty-fourth life.
Now this is pure fiction; just to compete with the Jainas there had to be twenty-four. But Hindus at that time had the idea of only ten avataras. Seeing that Jainas and Buddhists had twenty-four, they immediately changed their number; so any scripture that is written after Gautam Buddha and Mahavira says, “We also have twenty-four avataras.” But then, to defeat this competition forever, they managed this idea of thirty-three million gods.

Marx is another gift of the Jews to the world – and really a Jew! And the reason that he is the founder of communism is not any compassion for the poor. No, not at all – it is jealousy of the rich. This you have to understand clearly, because that will change the whole attitude. His father was poor, his father’s father was poor. He was poor; he remained dependent on the support of a friend, Frederick Engels, who was a rich man who went on giving him money.
Frederick Engels is not a great intellectual or anything, but because he was supporting him financially, Marx went on putting Engels’ name with his own on every book he wrote. Nothing is written by Frederick Engels, it is just Marx showing his respect. In fact it is in a way right, because without him Marx would not have been able to write; he would have starved and died.
And to be a Jew and poor is a very difficult situation. I know because I was born in a Jaina family – Jainas are the Jews of India. You will not find a single Jaina beggar all over India; all the beggars are Hindu, not a single Jaina beggar. I have searched all over India, I have not been able to find a single Jaina beggar. They are not poor; everybody is comfortably rich, and most of them are the richest people in the country.
Now, to be a Jew and poor, when all other Jews are rich, naturally creates jealousy. It is not compassion for the poor. Nowhere in Das Kapital, The Communist Manifesto, and other books of Marx can you find a single statement which shows compassion for the poor – no, not at all. It is jealousy of the rich.
So if I have to define it, the exact definition will be: Marx’s communism means, destroy the rich, divide the riches equally. That’s what they have done in Russia, in China. The poor are still poor, but in a way satisfied because the riches have been distributed. The rich people have been destroyed. The comparison has disappeared; now there is nobody rich to make you feel poor. You are still poor. The poverty, of course, is equally distributed. Everybody is equally poor, so nobody can compare, nobody can feel jealous. Nobody can think that things can be better than they are.
I am not in favor of distributing poverty, of destroying the rich. So I say no to the communism that exists today, the Marxian communism. But I say yes to a totally different concept of communism. To me communism is the last and the highest stage of capitalism.
It is not against capitalism that communism can succeed. It is in the fulfillment of capitalism that communism happens.
Capitalism is the first system in the world which creates capital, wealth. Before, there was feudalism – it never created wealth; it exploited people, it robbed people. The wealth that the kings had in the past was a crime. It was exploited, forcibly taken from the people, from the poor; it was not their creation.
Capitalism is the first system which creates wealth. It needs intelligence to create wealth. And unless we create so much wealth that wealth loses all meaning, unless we create a standard of wealth so high that the poor automatically start becoming richer…. Nobody can eat wealth – what are you going to do with it? There comes a point of saturation. And when capitalism comes to the point of saturation, then only comes the flowering of communism. Hence I call my community a commune. Communism, the word communism, is made from commune.
I believe in capitalism. Perhaps I am the only person in the whole world to say so clearly that I believe in capitalism, because this is the first time in the history of man that there is a system which creates wealth, and can create so much wealth that with science and scientific technology added to it, there is no need for poverty. There is no need to distribute wealth, it will be distributed automatically. There is no need for any dictatorship of the proletariat. Capitalism can remain perfectly in tune with democracy, with individuality, with freedom of speech. It destroys nothing.
So my approach is that we have to spread the idea of creating wealth rather than distributing it. What are you going to distribute if you don’t have it in the first place?
Even Marx never said that communism would happen in Russia or China, because these countries are so poor – what are you going to distribute? Even Marx’s idea was that communism would happen first in America. But it happened in Russia. Of course, it is something false. It is something not exactly making people happier and richer and freer, but spoiling all that they have and giving them a false hope that, “Soon you will all be rich.” When will that “soon” come? Sixty years have passed, more than sixty, since the revolution. All the revolutionaries have died. All were hoping that it is coming. Russia has remained poor, is still poor.
Even the poorest man in America is in a better position than a well-salaried person in Russia. And what they have lost is of immense value. They have lost freedom, they have lost individuality, they have lost freedom of expression. They have lost everything. They are living in a vast concentration camp: no justice available, nowhere to appeal, no possibility to be heard.
I am against this kind of communism; this is so destructive. But I have my own idea of communism; hence I say yes and no. “No” for the communism that you are aware of, and “yes” for the communism of which I am continually talking to you.
Create wealth, richness. And now that science and technology have given you all the means to create it, it is simply foolish to think of distribution. Forget about distribution. Create it so much that it comes to a saturation point. Then from there it starts spreading to everyone.
Communism is the ultimate flowering of capitalism.

============================================================

Osho,
The people visiting the commune ask us again and again, why do we lead such a rich life?
I wonder why they do not ask why we live at all. That should be the right question. Life means abundance, richness, in every possible dimension. Just look at existence. Do you think it is poor? Look at the millions of flowers, their fragrance; look at the millions of stars. Man has not yet been able to count them, and I don’t think he is ever going to be able to count them. With your bare, naked eye you only see, at the most, three thousand stars – and that is nothing. And these stars are expanding. Just as a flower opens up and the petals start going away from the center, the universe is continuously flowering, blossoming, opening – and with a tremendous speed. The stars are going farther away from the center. We don’t know exactly where the center is; but one thing is certain, that the whole universe is running fast, moving, alive.
Those people who come here to visit don’t know what life is for. They have never lived. Yes, they have been born; but just to be born is not enough to be alive. They will vegetate and think they are living. And one day they will die, without ever having lived at all. These are the miracles that go on happening all around the world; people who have never lived, die – such an impossibility! But it happens every day. And many have recognized it at the moment of death, and have said it is so: “It is strange; for the first time I am realizing that I missed life.”
If you live, for what? To love, to enjoy, to be ecstatic – otherwise why live at all?
And what is “richness”? – just making life more and more enjoyable, more and more lovable, more and more comfortable, more and more luxurious.
The man who knows nothing of the great world of music is poor; he is missing one of the greatest luxuries of life. The man who does not know how to enjoy Picasso, van Gogh, does not know anything about the colors. If he cannot enjoy Leonardo da Vinci, how can he enjoy a sunrise, a sunset? Millions of people go on living, never recognizing a sunrise, never stopping for a moment to look at a sunset and all the colors that the sunset leaves behind in the sky. Millions of people never raise their eyes toward the sky and the splendor of it.
Living can only mean one thing: living it multidimensionally – the music, the poetry, the painting, the sculpture…but it is all luxury. I am not a worshipper of poverty; I worship luxury. And existence is luxurious, abundantly luxurious. Where one flower will do, millions of flowers blossom. Have you ever felt that existence is miserly? What is the need of so many stars?
If these fools who ask you the question, if they meet the creator they believe in, they will ask, “What is the need of so many stars? Why this luxury? A few less won’t do? What is the need of so many birds, animals, human beings?”
And do you know, now the scientists have recognized the fact that life exists on at least fifty thousand planets. We don’t know what colors it has taken there – what shape, what beauty, what kind of beings have evolved there – but one thing is certain, that existence is overflowing. With everything it is luxurious. It is not a poor existence, no. Poverty is man’s creation.
And the people who come here to see the commune must be coming with a certain idea in their mind. Perhaps they have just seen the film Gandhi – they have heard about the ascetics of the East. I am not an ascetic. I am not that stupid. I am not a Mahatma Gandhi. I am absolutely against him. People like Mahatma Gandhi are responsible for poverty in the world.
Yes, nobody can ask such a question in Gandhi’s commune. If you go there you will simply feel sad and sorry. The small ashram still exists where Gandhi used to live. Gandhi’s son Ramdas was very much interested in me, so once he invited me. I went there – it was after Gandhi’s death. Thirty, thirty-five people were there – the whole group was there that had lived with Gandhi – and I told Ramdas, “Why are you torturing these people? This is sheer masochism and nothing else. In the name of poverty, in the name of simplicity, you have completely deprived these people of life.” What they were eating was absolutely tasteless, because taste, in India, for the religious man, is one of the things to be abandoned. Mahavira has given five great principles: one of the five great principles is tastelessness. Great principles! With truth, nonviolence, nonpossession, nonstealing…tastelessness.
And of course Mahatma Gandhi improved upon it. It is not only tasteless, it is nauseating. In India there is a tree called the neem, which is the bitterest tree in the whole world. Its leaves are so bitter, once you have tasted it you will never forget it – for a few lives at least. Now, it was a rule in Gandhi’s ashram that neem chutney – neem sauce – should be provided for everyone. Another rule for the ascetic in India is that nothing should be left on your plate; you cannot leave anything, you have to eat everything. So it was not possible that you could leave that big cup full of neem.

When an American, Louis Fisher, was visiting Mahatma Gandhi – he was very much attracted to his philosophy, and he wrote the most beautiful book on Gandhi – he was a special guest, so Gandhi himself took him to the kitchen. That was a great privilege – somebody sitting by the side of Gandhi to eat. He saw this cup full of something green; he asked, “What is it?”
Gandhi said, “This is the most precious thing. You taste it.” He tasted it; he had never tasted anything like this. And he saw Gandhi eating it so happily, and everybody else eating it happily.
So he thought, “It is better to keep silent about it, not to say anything; it will look bad.” And he thought that rather than spoiling all the food – because all these people were dipping their bread in it and eating – he thought, “It is better to finish it in one gulp and then take the food; that is easier.” So he took one gulp, with closed eyes, with closed breath – just somehow to finish it, because nothing could be left. And do you know what Gandhi did? Gandhi called the cook and said, “Look how much he liked it! Bring another cup; he loved it!” So the cup was filled again.
To live the life of the poor, Gandhi would not allow anybody to use a mosquito net; that is luxury. And the place where he used to live, Wardha, is a very hot place, exactly in the middle of India, exactly in the center – one of the hottest places. And so many mosquitoes all around, that even in the daytime you had to use a mosquito net and sit inside it if you wanted to do any work: reading, writing, or anything. Even in the day, hundreds of mosquitoes are all over your body; how can you sleep in the night? But the idea of poverty…how can you use a mosquito net? That is a great luxury.
So Gandhi had discovered – and he was a great discoverer of things, such things – he discovered that if you put kerosene oil on your face, your hands, then mosquitoes cannot come close to you because of the smell. Certainly they don’t come, they are not so foolish as you are; but because of the smell you cannot sleep! I simply refused to stay there. I told Ramdas, “This is not the place for me. What kind of nonsense is going on here? And you are torturing these thirty-five people in the name of asceticism. You are glorifying all this.”
Gandhi was doing this his whole life. He was absolutely a masochist, who enjoyed torturing himself – and also a sadist. It is a rare combination, very unique. There are people who are masochists, there are people who are sadists, but to be a sadomasochist is a very unique phenomenon. There are very few people – but there are some – who enjoy both: torturing themselves and torturing others. In the name of religion it is very easy because you can give a motivation to people – that if you torture yourself, you will gain much in the other life.
That motivation, that greed…they don’t call it motivation or greed, and they don’t call it torture what I am calling torture – they call it tapascharya, sadhana, spiritual discipline. But just giving a good name to an ugly thing does not change its nature. It is not a spiritual discipline, it is simple torture. But under the name of spiritual discipline you can torture yourself.

Down the ages, in how many ways have religious people tortured themselves? If you come to know the whole story you will be simply amazed. There have been Christian ascetics whose practice consisted – still consists, they are still in existence – in beating themselves, early in the morning, naked. And the person who managed to beat himself the most was thought to be the greatest saint. The blood would be oozing out of the body, and they would go on flagellating. And the crowd would gather around their monastery to see this scene. And that crowd would support them, appreciate them, clap them, and help them to beat themselves more. And of course when a big crowd is appreciating you, you can go to any limit. Many times a person would die beating himself. Then he would be declared a saint by the pope. These people are still in existence.
There has been a Christian sect which used shoes with nails inside, going into the feet, so there were wounds in the feet, and the nails were going into the feet, and they would walk on these shoes. And those nails would keep those wounds alive, bleeding. They could not heal; there was no way for them to heal, nothing was being done to heal them. On the contrary, the nails were put in the shoes in such a way that they went on and on creating the wound, so the wound would not be allowed to heal naturally. They used belts also around their waist, with nails going into their bodies…with wounds all around. And these people have been worshipped.
You have been worshipping mad people; these people needed psychiatric treatment. They were not religious; they were simply mental cases, tremendously sick, suicidal. And the person who was their leader was a unique person. He was torturing himself, and he was the leader because he tortured himself more than anybody else; that was the only criterion of who was going to be the leader. And he was teaching others to torture themselves in every possible way.
All around the world poverty has been respected for the simple reason that people had no idea how to get rid of it. And why was it respected? If you are born poor, then nobody will respect you; if you are born a beggar, nobody will respect you. But if you are the son of a king and you renounce the kingdom and become a beggar, then the whole country will respect you.
Do you know that all the twenty-four tirthankaras of the Jainas were kings who had renounced their kingdoms? Why does not a single one come from another profession? For the simple reason, if you are already poor what can you renounce? First you have to have it to renounce. And these kings were respected because they had never walked; they were carried in golden chariots. They had never suffered anything, and now they were standing naked in the hot sun of India, burning.
The Jaina tirthankara was not allowed to take a bath; that was considered to be a luxury. A bath is a luxury! And in India, where you are perspiring the whole day…. And a naked monk perspiring the whole day, and India – a country full of dust – he remained in filth. Only once in a year – and then too, he was not to take the bath – his followers poured water on him…not to give him a bath, because that would be a sin, dragging him into luxury. No, that was not the purpose; the purpose was that they wanted that holy water. You cannot find more unholy water. A man who had not taken a single shower in the whole year – has been naked, perspiring, collecting all kinds of dust, and all kinds of germs – was now being given a bath, and that water was collected. And people, the followers, drank it, because it was the purest water, from a tirthankara!
These people have strange ways. In India, to avoid luxury these people are walking in the nude, eating once a day – and very little food; they are starving. You see their bodies, their faces, their eyes – everything has faded, has lost color and life. And what kind of life are they living? What are they doing? They don’t create anything. They don’t paint, they don’t compose music, they don’t create poetry, they don’t make beautiful sculpture. They do not make anything. They do not discover: they are not scientists. They do not help humanity in any way. They are simply burdens, exploiting the poor and making them even poorer.
How many Hindu monks do you think there are? Five million right now. Five million Hindu monks, continuously exploiting the poor masses…because they have to be fed. The masses themselves are starving, and they have to feed these parasites. But these parasites are respected, for the simple reason that they give consolation to the poor.
Each religion has found some way of consoling the poor. Jainas, Hindus, Buddhists – these three great Indian religions – say to the poor: “You are poor because in your past life you committed sins.” Accept your poverty, just as a punishment. If you try to avoid it you will be spoiling your next life too. It is better to be finished with it in this life, so that in the next life you will not be in such pain, in such suffering. The rich people are not rich because they have created wealth, or exploited, or done something; they are rich because in the past life they were virtuous. And what is virtue? To be poor, to torture yourself, to commit a slow suicide – that is virtue. “So you are fortunate that you are born poor; you have been given a great opportunity to exercise virtue. Don’t miss it; accept it.”
Hence, there has been no revolution in India. India must have been the oldest country which has been suffering for thousands of years in poverty – but not a single revolution from the poor, not even the idea of a revolution. Nobody in ten thousand years has even mentioned the idea that the poor should rebel against their situation. No, if you rebel against your situation you are missing an opportunity.

You will be surprised: there is a Jaina sect still alive, and very prominent – Terapanth is the name of the sect. They have seven hundred monks and one head, Acharya Tulsi, who is just like a pope to the sect. I have been fighting with him for years on each and every point. Their philosophy is the logical conclusion of the theory of karma, so nobody can speak against them – I must have been the only person who has challenged Acharya Tulsi. He was surprised. He said, “But this is what the whole country believes, we have just brought it to its logical conclusion.”
What is the logical conclusion? You will be surprised. They believe that if a person is drowning in the river, and shouting, “Help me! Save me!” you simply go on your way. He is suffering because of his past life’s bad actions. Don’t disturb him, because if you save him he will have to suffer again. Let it be finished, once and forever. If you save him, in his next life maybe he will again have to fall in a river and drown. So why prolong his suffering? Let him close the chapter. He had done the bad action, now he is reaping the crop. He has sown the seed somewhere in the past, who are you to disturb and interfere? You simply go on your way.
And moreover, they say, “If you save him you have disturbed his life pattern; you have disturbed his whole opportunity of being finished with a bad, evil act. And you have done something more: if this man, saved by you, commits a murder tomorrow, you will also be responsible.” Naturally, if you had not saved him, who would have committed the murder?
So you have disturbed his life, you are disturbing your life, and you are disturbing the life of somebody else, who can be murdered. He may rape a woman, he can do anything, and his whole life he will be doing something or other. You will be responsible for everything he does, you will be a partner in it. Knowingly, unknowingly, you have become an inactive partner in the life that you have saved, so why take such a risk? You are not helping him, you are not helping yourself, you are not helping anybody. You just go on your path, and let him go through whatever is his fate.

Jainism, Hinduism, Buddhism, all have been teaching India that poverty is a by-product of your past life. So is richness. It has nothing to do with this life. So, revolution…? The question does not arise – against whom? You cannot undo your past actions, you have to suffer them; you have to fulfill the existential law of karma. You committed the sin, now who is going to suffer the punishment? You are responsible for it. Against what are you going to revolt? Against whom? The past is no more there, you cannot undo it. You have to simply accept whatsoever you have done and whatsoever it brings to you. Hence there has been no revolution, no possibility at all.
The Christians, the Mohammedans, the Jews, they all have been giving some explanation. It is not an explanation; it is just to explain away the situation, and make people feel that whatsoever is happening is destined to happen. Nothing can be done about it. It is God’s will in some religions. In some religions it is your fate, which is written before you are born. In some religions it is your past life. But all the religions agree that it has nothing to do with the present, because once you raise the question that something has to do with the present, then something can be done. Then the situation can be changed.
And all these people have been giving respect to poverty. Why this respect for poverty? Why this respect for suffering? This is just to satisfy the poor man’s ego, to make him feel that although he is poor, he is in a respectable situation. So condemn the rich, respect the poor: in this way you keep the poor remaining poor and you keep the rich becoming richer. The rich understand perfectly well: “Go on condemning, that doesn’t matter; in fact it is needed.” That condemnation takes away the possibility of revolution.
And what is the condemnation? The rich will not be allowed in the kingdom of God. And the rich are far more educated than the poor, far more sophisticated; they understand. Most of the rich people don’t bother a bit about your kingdom of God. They may go to the church, just to show that they are good Christians; to the synagogue, just to show they are good Jews; but they know perfectly well that it is just social conformity.
Synagogues and churches are nothing but social clubs, like the Rotary club, the Lions club. They help you. They are good meeting places, and they give you a certain respect. The rich man comes to the synagogue, and the poor man feels that although he is rich he is so humble – bowing down before the cross in the church – how humble. And to the rich man it is all hypocrisy. He knows it is good diplomacy: to go on pretending to be religious, to go on giving some donations to the churches, to the temples, to the mosques. It helps in every possible way. It helps his taxation problems, it helps his otherworldly problems, it helps his respectability. The poor people think that he is really a nice, good man.
And the rich man also says, “Although I am not so capable, I am a weak person, at least I can respect the saint who has renounced, the saint who has renounced things which I cannot renounce.” So he goes to touch the feet of the saint who has renounced. Kings go, rich people go to touch the feet of the saint in India – just to show to the crowd that, “Although we cannot renounce, we are not strong enough, or perhaps it is not yet time for us, but deep down this is our goal. If not today, tomorrow; if not in this life, then in the next life – but this is our goal.”
Those people who come to visit here, they come with an idea, a fixed idea. They think this is a religious commune, so it must be like a Catholic monastery or a Hindu ashram. And when they find it just the opposite, they are shocked, and they ask you, “Why do you live so rich a life?” You have simply to tell them, “It’s because we cannot manage a little richer life, that’s why. The day we can manage a little richer life, we will live that life. For the time being, forgive us.”

I teach you to live tremendously, ecstatically, in every possible way. On the physical level, on the mental level, on the spiritual level, live to the uttermost of your possibility. Squeeze from each single moment all the pleasures, all the happinesses possible, so that you don’t repent later on that, “that moment passed and I missed.” Do not think of the past, because in thinking about the past you will be missing the present moment, which is the only moment, which is all that exists. And don’t think of the future: of another life, of the kingdom of God – all sheer nonsense.
Tomorrow does not exist at all. It is always today – always and always today. It is always this moment. So squeeze it. Don’t leave any juice in it. Once you learn to squeeze all the juice out of it, you will never think of the past. What is there left to think of? Then the past leaves no traces on you. It is only the unlived past which becomes your psychological burden.
Let me repeat: the unlived past…those moments which you could have lived, but you have not lived…those love affairs which could have flowered, but you missed…those songs which you could have sung, but you remained stuck to some stupid thing and missed the song…. It is the unlived past which becomes your psychological burden, and it goes on becoming heavier every day.
That’s why the old man becomes so irritable. It is not his fault. He does not know why he is so irritable – why each and every thing irritates him, why he is constantly angry, why he cannot allow anybody to be happy, why he cannot see children dancing, singing, jumping, rejoicing, why he wants everybody to be quiet. What has happened to him?
It is a simple psychological phenomenon: his whole unlived life. When a child starts dancing his inner child who was somehow prevented from dancing – perhaps by his parents, his elders, perhaps by himself because it was respected, honored. He was brought before the neighbors and introduced: “Look at this child, how quiet, calm, silent; no disturbance, no mischief.” – his ego was fulfilled. Anyway, he missed. Now he cannot bear it, he cannot tolerate this child. In fact it is his unlived childhood that starts hurting. It has left a wound. And how many wounds are you carrying? Thousands of wounds are in line, because how much have you left unlived?
So the people who come here, they come here almost dead, carrying their own dead bodies here. When they see you alive, they are shocked. They would have been immensely happy if they had seen ascetics sitting under juniper trees, naked, starving, praying to God – who does not exist. They would have been immensely happy, because then you would have been far more dead than they were; in comparison they have managed better than you. They would have respected you because you helped them to feel better. When they come here, seeing you, they feel themselves empty, spent – meaningless. It hurts. It hurts deeply, hence the question: “Why do you live so rich a life?”
But richness is your birthright.
You have not come with anything written on your forehead. You can go to the surgeon and let him look into your forehead. Nothing is written there, and nothing is written in the lines of your hand. You come in this world absolutely like a plain, unwritten, open book. You have to write your fate; there is nobody else who is writing your fate. And who will write your fate? And how? And for what? You come in the world just an open potentiality, a multidimensional potentiality. You have to write your fate. You have to create your destiny. You have to become yourself.
You are not born with a ready-made self. You are born only as a seed, and you can die also only as a seed. But you can become a flower, can become a tree. And out of one seed there can come millions of seeds. Do you see the abundance and richness of existence? One seed can make the whole earth green, the whole universe green – what to say of the earth! Just one seed: how much potential is carried in a single small seed! But you can keep it in your safe, bank account, and live a life which is not life at all.
I am all for richness in every possible way. And remember that richness is possible only if you allow it in every way.
Do not be deceived by the old idea that you will be spiritually rich if you starve your body; if you physically torture your body you will be spiritually rich – no. It is absolutely unscientific. I have seen people who have tortured their body their whole lives, but I have not seen their souls being enriched by it. In fact their souls have died long ago.
Your body and soul are not enemies. They live in harmony.
You are a harmonious whole. Everything is integrated with everything else. You cannot make one part rich and another part poor. The whole becomes affected, becomes either poor or rich. You have to accept your wholeness.
So live, and live intensely. Burn the torch of your life from both ends together. Only such a man can die blissfully, smiling.

A master was dying…it was just the last moment. His disciples had gathered. One disciple asked, “Master, you are leaving us. What is your last message?”
The master smiled, opened his eyes, and said, “Do you hear the squirrel running on the roof?” Then he closed his eyes, died. The disciples were at a loss – what kind of message is this? “Do you hear the squirrel running on the roof?” But that was his whole life’s message: just the moment. At that moment he was enjoying the squirrel. Who bothers about death? And who bothers about the last message? He was in the moment, herenow. And that was his message: don’t move anywhere else, just remain here and now. Even at the moment of death…the sound of the squirrel on the roof, and he enjoyed it.
Now, such a man must have lived immeasurably, immensely, incredibly. No regret, sheer gratitude – smiled. What else do you want as a last message? A smile is enough. And to smile at the door of death is possible only if there are no unlived moments standing in a row behind you, pulling, asking you: “What about me?” – those incomplete moments.
But if there is nothing incomplete, every moment has been completed, there is nothing; it is just silence. And if every moment is completed, there is nothing in the future either, because it is only the incomplete moment which asks for tomorrow: if you have not been able to fulfill it yesterday, fulfill it tomorrow. But if there is no yesterday incomplete, then there is no projection for tomorrow. Then this moment is all.

Osho,
Why do people attempt to explain away the natural joy and happiness of those around you, by trying to attribute it to such things as brainwashing, hypnosis or drugs?
The same thing that I was saying to you: they cannot believe that people can be so happy. They cannot believe. They have to find some explanation: “Perhaps these people are drugged? Perhaps they are hypnotized? Perhaps they are only pretending? Perhaps they have been trained, so that when visitors come they suddenly become happy, enjoy themselves, dance, sing, hug each other, become immediately loving.” And the moment visitors go you are in your hell again. So once in a while, just to deceive the visitors, you come out of your hell.
That’s what they are doing. They project the same thing onto you. The husband and wife are quarreling, a neighbor knocks on the door – immediately something changes. The quarrel stops, they start smiling. The neighbor cannot see that just a moment before they were ready to kill each other; he cannot conceive of it. And he knows that’s what he has been doing, but still he cannot conceive of it.
He is deceiving his neighbors; everybody is deceiving everybody else. He kisses his wife every day when he goes to the office, and he knows the kiss is phony, it does not mean anything. He has to do it. If he does not do it, then there is trouble. So it is better to do it and get finished with it – the sooner the better. He rushes to the office, as if there is something great going to happen. There is nothing great going to happen, only an escape from that ugly home: the wife, the kids, and the whole business of continual quarreling, nagging, jealousy, fighting. He is not going to the office, he is escaping from the house.
The office is good, a tremendously good help. At least he can fool around with the secretary, who looks as if she is of another world: no nagging, no quarreling. But get married to her – and people do that. In America, I think three years is the average time for people to change their job, to change their wives, to change their husbands. In fact, even three years is a long time. The honeymoon finishes very soon. And after the honeymoon it is all hypocrisy. Those people smile, those people laugh, those people go to parties with beautiful clothes – hiding, just wounds inside.
When they come here and see you all happy, how can they believe it? And when they stay here for longer times, two days, three days, four days, then they are even more puzzled, because for one hour you can pretend – because they know how to pretend, and how to be nice – but two, three days continuously? And three thousand people? Impossible! There must be some trick behind it. These people are hypnotized.
But if hypnotism can give so much happiness, why don’t you get hypnotized? It is strange, because if hypnotism can give so much happiness, then what is wrong with hypnotism? It is a simple process. Get hypnotized! Who is preventing you? You want to be happy, and hypnotism is a very simple method.
But have you seen people who are hypnotized? They walk like zombies; their eyes don’t have any luster. They may smile, but their smile will be just like Jimmy Carter’s – just an exercise of the lips. I don’t know whether it is right or not, but I have heard that his wife used to close his mouth every night, because even in sleep…the whole day practicing, the muscles had become accustomed. Have you seen his picture lately? No smile at all – he looks like another man, suddenly aged at least ten years. Where has that smile gone? It was phony. It was American.
Hypnosis can give you a smiling face, it can give you a sad face, it can give you an angry face, because hypnosis is only a simple method of putting your conscious mind to sleep. Then you are under the power of the person who has hypnotized you. Then whatsoever he orders…he says “Smile,” you smile; he says “Weep,” you weep. But who is hypnotizing anybody here? Who is ordering anybody: “You smile, you laugh, you weep, you do this, you do that”? They don’t know what hypnosis is.
Drugs can make you happy; they can also make you unhappy, because no drug is guaranteed to give you happiness. The drug can only magnify your mood. If you are unhappy, you will be more unhappy with the drug; you will have nightmares. If you are happy, you will be more happy, madly happy. But you can immediately detect a man who is happy under a drug, for the simple reason that his happiness will be tense. It is just forced by chemicals on him. His face will be smiling, but as if somebody is putting a gun behind him and ordering him, “Smile, otherwise I am going to fire.”
Chemicals can force you, but the forced smile, the forced happiness will show the tension. And it can only last for hours, and then you will fall back into a ditch, deeper than you were before, because all that tension has tired your whole system. All that happiness, which was false and forced and chemical, has taken even the little bit of natural happiness which was in you. And once it is gone you will fall into a deep darkness. And with drugs you will become addicted, so soon you will need more quantity, then more quantity, then more quantity, and a moment comes….
In India, we have experienced everything in these thousands of years. There are monks in India who can drink any amount of alcohol and it does not affect them, any amount of marijuana and it does not affect them; not at all, they remain just simply the same. In the end the only thing that they have to try when nothing else affects them is a cobra snake bite. So they keep cobra snakes with them. On their tongue they will take a bite from the cobra which can kill you, but to them it just gives a little…. What drugs give to you, only cobra poison can give them – and sooner or later they become accustomed to it.
In ancient India every kingdom used small girls, beautiful girls – they were called vishkanyas, poison girls. From the very first day of their birth they started to give them poison, small doses with the milk. By the time they became young women their whole blood was poisonous. Snake bite will kill the snake, not the girl. And these girls were kept as detectives, or as murderers. If the king wants to kill another king, the neighboring king, he simply sends the girl, and the girl is so beautiful that the king is bound to get interested in her. Just one kiss from the girl and that is enough; the king is finished – not even a bite, just a kiss.
These people in your question cannot believe it, for the simple reason that they have never known happiness, simple happiness. They have known happiness which is caused by something: they win a lottery – for a few moments they are happy; they fall in love with a beautiful woman – for a few days they are happy. But they have never seen anybody happy without any reason – no lottery, no falling in love…and people are simply happy. Yes, I can understand their difficulty. But you have to help them to understand that happiness needs no reasons. Unhappiness needs reasons; happiness is simply natural.
It is one’s very nature that one should be joyous.
To be unhappy, reasons are needed; but just to be happy, no reasons are needed. Happiness is enough unto itself. It is such a beautiful experience that what more do you need? Why should you need any cause for it? It is enough in itself; it is a cause unto itself.
But it will take time for them to understand. Don’t be angry with them if they cannot understand; just feel compassion for them, be loving to them. Help them to be happy with you, so they can have a little taste of happiness without drugs, without hypnosis, without any reason.
And remember, happiness is infectious. So, if you are happy, just pull them within yourself; when you are dancing, pull them within yourself. And perhaps, without their knowing, they may start dancing, and may catch themselves dancing, and be surprised by what has happened.
When you are singing, pull them within yourself. Let them stand. If they stand like a dead pole for a few minutes, don’t be worried, they are not dead, life is still there. You just dance around them, then fresh life may start arising in them; they may start dancing and singing with you. And unless you make them experience that happiness happens without any cause, they cannot understand. There is no way to convince them logically – but existentially you can convince them. And that’s the whole purpose of the commune.
Three thousand people are a tremendous force. Pull those people within yourself. In the beginning they will be resistant – don’t be bothered, don’t take any note of their resistance. They are doing it without knowing that they are doing it. Don’t take any notice, don’t pay any attention. They think that to be serious is something respectable; let them think that.
You just dance and sing and enjoy, and soon they will be taken over. That’s how we are going to take over the whole of America!

============================================================

Osho,
What is the difference between belief in a messiah and trust in a spiritual master?
Belief is blind. It has no rational proofs for it. It is based on your psychological need, it has no objective proof. You want to believe because without belief you feel empty, just a driftwood going nowhere. Without belief you feel empty, so utterly empty that you don’t even dare to live. Look withinward; that emptiness looks like death.
It is your psychological need that somebody should give you a hope, a belief, some kind of opium, so you can go to sleep. At least for the time being you can put aside all your fears. You have the messiah with you, the son of God – now, what fear is there? Or the messenger of God – now, what more do you need to have a meaningful life? He gives you meaning, he gives you hope, and he has authority. But these are all projected by you and exploited by him. It is a mutual phenomenon.
The messiah, the tirthankara, the avatara, the paigambara, they know your psychological need, everybody’s psychological need; they exploit it. They say, “You need not be worried. You have only to believe in me.” They make it so simple – no risk. You have nothing to do, other than believe – can’t you do even this much? And in the bargain, what are you getting? Everything that you always needed: a hope, a future, a meaningfulness. Otherwise you are bored, otherwise you start thinking: “Why go on living?”
The messiah shows you the way, shows you the goal, makes you significant, that you are not an accident, that God has something special to be fulfilled through you. He fulfills your psychological need. He does not destroy your fear, your meaninglessness, your hopelessness. He simply gives a beautiful cover; he covers your psychological vacuum.
And you fulfill his psychological need. The more you gather around him, the more followers are there, the more he is convinced that he is not insane. Otherwise the suspicion is bound to be there: “What proof have you got that you are the son of God?” It may be just your mind projection. But now he has got some proof: the believers. As they go on increasing, as the following becomes bigger and bigger, now he has solid proof: so many people, millions of people, cannot be wrong.
Do you see the vicious circle? He becomes more authoritative, more determined, more fanatic. And the more he becomes authoritative, determined, fanatic, the more people are bound to fall in the trap because they need authority. They need a father figure, somebody to lead them. On their own they don’t know where to go, what to do, what to be.
That’s the way every child is being brought up, so that the psychological need arises, is bound to arise. Everything is told to the child, that he has to do this, not to do that. Of course the parents think they are doing it for the child’s own good; it is not so. It is just the opposite. They don’t mean it. They really mean that they are doing good for the child, because how can the child decide what is right and what is wrong? So they have to decide. And naturally, the child is so small and in his eyes the father, grandfather are so big, so powerful, so wise – he can believe in them.
So from the very beginning the child is not taught, not brought up, to be an independent individual. He is brought up to be a follower. He is brought up to remain a mental slave for his whole life. His father was brought up in the same way. His father’s father was brought up in the same way. He will do the same to his children. That’s how stupidity goes on from generation to generation: one generation passes it to another generation – that becomes your inheritance.
So you are waiting, waiting for Godot – somebody should come and fulfill all your psychological needs. He will be a father, a guide, a philosopher, a wise man; and then you can relax, you need not worry. You need not use your intelligence, you need not use your reason. You can put all your intelligence aside, you can now be blind – and follow the messiah. And when you see more and more people are coming, of course that also becomes a proof for you that the man must be right.
Put the messiah alone, and you will see him wavering, all his authority gone. Put the believer alone: you will be surprised that in just twenty-one days of absolute isolation you will go mad. Not more than that is needed for you to go mad. Just twenty-one days of absolute isolation – disconnected from the world of your belief, of your religion, of your society, of your club, of your university, of this and that – completely cut off for twenty-one days, just alone, and you will see slowly, slowly, underneath your feet the earth is disappearing; fear is arising, trembling is arising. In twenty-one days you will be insane.
Hence people are afraid to be alone. They will do anything not to be alone. They will go to any rotten movie, just not to be alone. They will play any stupid game, they will watch any idiotic thing: a football match…. Now, can you think of anything more idiotic? A few idiots throwing a football beyond a line to the other side, and a few other idiots throwing it back – and millions of idiots watching, as if something of immense significance is happening. No, the psychological reason is that they want somehow to forget themselves, to forget that they are alone. In the crowd they feel good, healthier, saner, because people just like themselves are all around. Millions of people are watching the game – it cannot be idiotic. Even the president of the country is watching – it cannot be idiotic.
Everybody is supporting everybody else to remain sane. Just twenty-one days of absolute isolation – no newspaper, no television, no radio, cut off from your world completely; no wife, no husband, no children, no love affair – and you will be amazed. Seeing yourself in your utter aloneness, that what you have been doing your whole life was nothing but covering holes in your being, wounds – of course, with beautiful flowers. But those wounds don’t heal. Perhaps uncovered they might have healed. Covered, they gather more pus; covered, they become more canceric. Belief is blind. All belief is blind.
Trust is a totally different thing. Trust has the same meaning in the dictionaries, but the people who have been writing those dictionaries have not tasted trust, they don’t know what it is. For one thing there is no messiah, no avatara, no one claiming, “I am God’s only begotten son, I am the only messenger, the true messenger.”
When I say I’m just an ordinary man, I’m cutting the very root of belief.
I don’t want you to believe in me, because believing has destroyed millions of people down the ages. It is time that believing should be destroyed. From my side I am saying I am just an ordinary man. I don’t give you any support to believe in me. In fact, I make every possible effort for you not to believe in me.
Look: Mahavira fulfills the conditions that Jainas ask of a tirthankara – painful conditions, arduous conditions. But to be so special, a tirthankara…the word tirthankara means one who makes his way to the other world, or to the other shore. He is the last tirthankara. Now, for millions of years people will be treading on the path that he is making. For millions of years now, he is going to dominate millions of souls – so he is ready to fulfill any condition. If they say that the tirthankara has to live naked, he lives naked. If they say he has to eat once a day, he eats once a day. If they say he has not to take a bath, he does not take a bath. If they say he should not clean his teeth, he will not. He must have been stinking.
I have known Jaina monks – it is so difficult to talk to them. And you know, I am a straightforward man, I will say simply : “You stink. You sit twenty feet away. I cannot talk sitting that close to you.” Their breath smells, it is bound to; their whole life they have not cleaned their mouth. Their body stinks. But they are ready to fulfill any stupid demand, because what they are gaining in reward is tremendous psychological fulfillment. It is only psychological, just ego fulfillment.
I am saying to you, I am an ordinary man, just like you, with no difference at all.
I am cutting the very root of your believing in me; hence my insistence on being ordinary.
I don’t want you to cling to me in any way. I am not your enemy. I don’t want you to remain crippled, blind, dependent, a slave, because of me. I don’t want to take that responsibility. So from my side I am completely clear. I don’t give you any support. And from your side I am continually hammering you, sometimes even hurting you, because whatever you think is meaningful may not be so, and I have to destroy it. Before I can make you completely clean, I have to remove many, many rocks that are in the way of my reaching you and are not allowing you to reach me.

Trust is a totally different matter. It has two steps. First is hypothetical trust. Hypothesis is a scientific term. When you start an experiment you hypothetically take it for granted that it will succeed – only hypothetically, there is no guarantee. It is not a belief, you are not risking anything on it. Just to do the experiment you hypothetically accept that perhaps this is the case – let us look into it, go deep into it, experiment with it. It may turn out right, it may not turn out right. The hypothesis does not close the door. The hypothesis is not the answer, it is only the beginning of the search. It is a question mark.
Belief begins with no doubt; hypothesis is full of doubt. A man who has no doubt cannot experiment. For what reason is he going to experiment? It is the doubt – he wants to find the truth. Now, the doubt can be covered by a belief, or it can be removed by the search for the truth. These are the only two ways. If you believe, then there is no need for experiment. So anybody who does not want to risk anything, who has not the intelligence to search – any mediocre – is bound to believe. Only mediocres believe. The greater their stupidity, the bigger is their belief; the greater their mediocrity, the stronger is their fanaticism.
The other way is to start with the doubt, don’t cover it. But to start you need a hypothesis. If I say that water is composed of oxygen and hydrogen – now, either you can believe me or you can take it as a hypothesis. If you take it as a hypothesis you are not believing in me. What I have said, you have accepted only to experiment whether it is true or not.
So the first part of trust is the willingness to experiment.
The master’s function is not to make you believe. His function is to create the atmosphere around himself, the vibe, that attracts a person to experiment, that pulls you toward him, not to believe but to go with him; not to follow but to go with him, “because,” he says, “I have seen something. I have seen a door and through the door I have seen the vast sky.”
The master has to be a certain magnetic force, a tremendous impact. And this comes easily. If I have seen the open sky, something of that open sky will be carried by my eyes. If I have seen the stars, then something of those stars is bound to be reflected in me. I need not claim it.
In fact, those who claim it don’t have it; hence the claim. Jesus calling himself the son of God – what is the need of it? If you are the son of God, will it not be enough for people to feel the vibe of it? When the sun rises there is no need to declare itself. Even the birds start singing – the sun has not knocked on their doors that: “Wake up! It is morning and I have come back.” No, there is no need. Even flowers know that the sun has risen; they start opening. For the night they had closed; now they would like communion with the sun again. It is life! The whole existence understands the sun is there, becomes vibrant with its energy.
What is the need for Jesus to continuously claim that “I am the son of God”? He must be suspicious himself, he must be doubting himself – and it is absolutely intelligible. Nor has he seen God. Nobody has ever seen God. On what grounds can he be without doubt that he is the son of God? The doubt is there. It is to dispel the doubt that he has to claim and shout. He has to convince others in order to be convinced himself that he is the son of God.
A real master claims nothing.
His very being, his presence, is enough to create in you a desire to explore – remember, not to follow, but to explore – to go with this man, perhaps a few steps, and to look on your own whether the sky is there or not.
All that the master does is to create in you a desire to walk with him, to experiment with him with an open mind.
Because he knows – there is no need to tell you to believe in it. The need to tell someone to believe in something arises only when the person himself knows that unless you believe, you are not going to find the truth – because the belief is going to create the truth out of your imagination. It is the belief that is going to project the hallucination. The master tries in every way so that you should not believe, because belief is a barrier in the search. Yes, you should be receptive, ready to explore, available for the new, the unknown, to happen. That I call the first part, the hypothesis.
I have said that my religion is scientific, and every science is based on hypotheses. It is not necessary that every hypothesis will prove right. But for the explorer it is not a sad affair if one hypothesis fails. In fact he rejoices that now there is one hypothesis less: “My search is becoming narrower, closer to the truth.”
Edison was working on electricity. It took three years for him. All his colleagues became frustrated. Many left; many thought that, “He is mad, and we will go mad with him.” Only a few remained. But they were also hesitant whether to remain with this man or not, whether he is sane or insane: “because every hypothesis that we have tried has failed.” But this man begins the search again next day with the same zeal, enthusiasm, as they had seen in him on the first day – no difference. It was this quality that was holding them back from going away.
It is said that nine hundred and ninety-nine times they failed. And the last colleague – because all others by that time had left; it was enough – the last colleague said, “Now what? Nine hundred and ninety-nine times we have failed. In three years it has been nothing but failure, failure, failure. But you are a strange man; you begin next day again with the same gusto.”
Edison said, “I am more enthusiastic than the first day we began. You are wrong, it is not the same gusto; it is much more, because I am aware that nine hundred and ninety-nine hypotheses are rejected. Now truth is very close. If there are one thousand doors, nine hundred and ninety-nine doors we have knocked on and found empty. Now only one is left.” He was just saying it as an example, and by coincidence it was so. That day they succeeded.
Hypothesis simply means readiness to experiment – readiness on the part of the disciple, openness, acceptance: “We don’t know: perhaps we may discover, perhaps we may not. Perhaps we are moving in the right direction, perhaps we are not.” That is the first part of the hypothesis, the trust: “But in any case, whether we succeed or fail, we never failed, because even if we fail, that simply means one direction is not right – try another direction; one method has not worked – try another method. Somewhere, someday, in some moment, the door is going to open.”
On the master’s part, the business is not to create belief in the disciple but only this enthusiasm, this gusto to go on searching in spite of any failures.
A master is an inspiration. He is not a belief. He does not fulfill any of your psychological sickness. He simply shows you how he has arrived. He explains to you the way, the method, the experiment that has been fulfillment to him. His being gives you the feeling of fulfillment, contentment, the feeling that he has arrived – that is something in the air around him that you breathe. And he gives you the way, the method, how it has happened to him.
He never says that it is going to happen to you exactly in the same way. All that he says is that, “It has happened to me, so there is no impossibility of it happening to you. I am just an ordinary man, just as you are. If it can happen to this ordinary man, then why not to you? Perhaps you will have to move from a little different angle; perhaps you will have to use a little different method. Perhaps you will have to go a little longer, perhaps from your side the mountain is a little arduous, but – it happens! So it can happen.”

The second part of trust arises when you experience something that the master has given you through his vibe, which is invisible. So only those who are very sensitive and very receptive will be able to feel it. What the master had given you as something felt in the heart – that is not the end, that is only the beginning of the journey. Now you can accept some hypothesis. The second part of trust will happen the day you also taste something the master has been telling you about, talking about, being about.
The day you taste something, that day it will not be a belief, it will be a trust. Now you know. Now you know that you were with a man who knew it. And that was the only difference; now that difference has disappeared. The trust is complete when the difference between the master and the disciple disappears, when the disciple knows the same way as the master knows. He has seen the light, he has smelled the flower. This is the moment of gratitude.
No believer has real gratitude toward these messiahs, avataras – no, because what have they given to you? Just beliefs – unfounded, ungrounded. How can you feel grateful to them? You may pray, and you may praise them, and that is just a policy. Perhaps by their grace, by your praise and prayer – which is nothing but a kind of bribery – they may feel a special compassion for you, they will grant you some miracle. But no miracle ever happens. Yes, truth happens, love happens, but miracles don’t happen.
You cannot really feel gratitude toward these people. On the contrary, if you search within yourself you will feel anger. You will be surprised when I say that all Christians, deep down, are angry with Jesus. He promised to redeem them, and nothing is redeemed. He promised, and he was saying, “Soon you will be in the kingdom of God, soon you will be with me in the kingdom of God.” And two thousand years have passed; that “soon” has not yet been completed. When is it going to be completed?
There is anger in every Christian against Jesus. And because of this anger he shows too much fanaticism for Jesus, so that nobody knows that he is angry. In fact he himself does not want to know that he is angry, that he has been deceived, that he has been given a bogus belief, that for two thousand years millions of people have lived with this belief and died with this belief – attaining no growth, reaching nowhere, finding nothing. One is afraid of this anger, this rage. To suppress it, he goes to the church, he prays to Jesus, or to Krishna, or to Mohammed. But every believer, sooner or later, is going to be frustrated because belief is not going to give him the truth. It is not going to give him the living waters of life.
What Judas did, every Christian would like to do. It is another thing that he does not – because he has not that much courage. Nobody has tried to understand Judas, because even to try to understand Judas seems to be against Christianity. But the man has to be explored. He was the only one who was educated, cultured – more than Jesus and more than any of his apostles. And naturally, as an educated, cultured man, he must have been full of doubts. I can’t think of Judas believing that Jesus is the son of God.
He was with Jesus. The man had a certain charismatic personality, but that is not anything to do with truth. Adolf Hitler had a great charismatic personality, and do you know? – at the end of his life he started believing that he is the reincarnation of the old biblical prophet Elijah. His whole life he killed the Jews! In his gas chambers, millions of Jews simply evaporated into smoke. And at the end of his life he started thinking himself Elijah, one of the very significant Old Testament prophets.
You will think he is mad, but there are still people in the world…. I received a letter from somewhere here in America, from the president of the American Nazi Party, threatening me, saying that I should not speak against Adolf Hitler because “it hurts our religious feelings.” I was simply amazed. Religious feelings! But I was immensely interested too. What religious feelings are hurt? And the man goes on, saying, “Perhaps you do not know that Adolf Hitler was no ordinary man, he was the reincarnation of the prophet Elijah. So please don’t speak against Adolf Hitler because it hurts our feelings, and it is not good of you to hurt anybody’s religious feelings.” Adolf Hitler, a religious leader! But there are people who still believe it – what can you do?
And what must have happened to Adolf Hitler in the end? The defeat was absolutely certain. He was kept unaware; he was continually told lies because he was not ready to listen to any truth. He was not ready to listen to the fact that “our forces are being destroyed, we are being defeated.” No, he was not ready. Anybody who brought this news to him was shot dead immediately: “It is impossible! – the man must be lying.” He killed his own generals for bringing him the advice that “we should step back. Going ahead is simply killing our people.” He shot them, then and there: “We are here to be victorious. This is our destiny, the destiny of the Aryan race, of the Nordics, to rule over the world. Nothing can go against it.”
So by and by his people understood – let him live his fiction. He was living in an underground shelter. All was lost – Russian, American, British armies were entering Berlin – and he was still believing that his forces were in Moscow, in London. When he heard the bombs falling nearby, he could not believe what was happening. He inquired, and they said, “What can we do? If we say the truth to you, you shoot us. The truth is, we have failed. We are defeated, these are enemy forces; Berlin has fallen.”
At that moment the idea arises in him, perhaps as a repentance that he killed so many Jews. How man’s mind works! Perhaps he feels repentant and wants to compensate for it: he becomes the prophet Elijah. That was his last stupidity. He did many in his whole life, but that was his last. But there are people everywhere, even in America, who are forming parties around the religious prophet Adolf Hitler.
Judas remained with Jesus. Jesus certainly had some charisma. There are people who are born leaders, just as there are people who are born poets, there are people who are born painters. Everybody is born with a certain quality. He may know it, he may not know it. The sooner he knows the better, because then he starts moving in the right direction for his fulfillment. Unless he finds the right direction which leads to the fulfillment of his inborn quality he will never feel content.
So the function of the master is not to make you just like himself; his function is to help you discover who you are. You are not like me. There is no need of a duplicate, a carbon copy. But these messiahs and paigambaras and tirthankaras, they are all trying to make everybody a carbon copy. They are the original. And by belief, you can become a carbon copy very easily.
Judas remained with Jesus, but he was full of doubts. Again and again he raises questions which are full of doubts. And Jesus always pushed away his doubts, because nobody else was creating doubt. All were believers. They were unsophisticated people, ready to believe, and very happy that they have become apostles. A really great achievement: God’s only begotten son, and they are his apostles, his messengers. What more can you expect? So they were simply believing, no question of doubt. But Judas was continuously doubting. And Jesus nowhere tried to understand this man, his doubt. And rather than giving him a belief, he should have been given a way, a door, so that he could trust.
My own feeling for Judas is very different from anybody else’s feeling in the world. I am sorry for that man. He was perhaps one of the most genuine seekers amongst Jesus’ followers. But Jesus never gave any rational ground to him. It was Jesus’ fault if the man became frustrated, fed up with all this game of believing. And in this game of believing he was being defeated by fools, because those fools were absolute believers.
It was his doubt that forced him to deliver Jesus into the hands of the enemies – because this was the only way now to know whether he is really the son of God or not. He gives no proof, he gives no way to experience. Now, this is the only way: deliver him to the enemies and let him be crucified and that will be the proof. He will be resurrected and then there will be no question of doubt.
Jesus is responsible for forcing him to take this drastic step. But the resurrection did not happen. And Judas felt really sad, repentant that he had unnecessarily committed a sin, he unnecessarily betrayed him. There was no need; if he was not ready to believe in him he could have left him – what was the need to put him on the cross? He became so repentant that after twenty-four hours he hung himself and committed suicide.
Nobody bothers about his suicide. It is as significant as Jesus’ crucifixion, perhaps more significant; it has much more mystery in it. Why did Judas commit suicide? If he was really an enemy, there was no need to repent. He should have been happy and rejoicing. But he was not an enemy, and this was not his purpose, that Jesus should be killed. He had not imagined it.
But Jesus never gave him any rational ground and pushed him to take this drastic step – because this would be the only proof whether or not he was the son of God. If the resurrection happened, then he would be the son of God, and that would prove everything. Then whatsoever he said was true; then there would be no need to doubt, then there would be no need to think about it, then there would be no question. In fact he was not thinking to help the enemies crucify Jesus; he was trying to find a rational ground to trust, which Jesus had failed to provide.

The master never gives you belief; he gives you a sharing of his atmosphere, so that a hypothesis arises in you, a desire to experiment.
And once that desire is there, he gives you the way that he knows, that he has walked. And you will not find another crazy master like me, for the simple reason that I have traveled on almost all the paths. It is simply crazy, because one path leads to the goal; there is no need to travel on other paths.
There have been masters that traveled a path; they reached the goal, they helped a few people to imbibe their spirit, and if there was somebody ready to experiment, it was okay.
I have never been a follower of anybody, in any of my lives. But I have been traveling with many people, on many paths. One path is enough to know the truth, but my search was not only for the truth, but whether there is only one path to truth, or whether there are many paths which are also as valid as this one.
So I have gone to the goal, come back; moved from another direction, come back; moved from another direction, come back; and I have not left a single path untraveled. Hence I say to you, it is simply crazy. I don’t want you to follow all these paths, unless that urge arises in you and is authentically yours. Otherwise one path is enough.
The moment you experience, then the trust is complete; then it is no more hypothetical, then it is existential. In that moment there is no master, no disciple; just two flames have come so close to each other that they have become one flame. The disciple starts smelling of the same fragrance as the master. His eyes start showing the same raw light as the master. His vibe becomes the same as the master.
And then the tremendous gratitude: the gratitude that this man did not give me a belief, otherwise I would have been lost. This man did not make me dependent on him, otherwise I would have been lost. This man did not exploit me psychologically in any way, for his own ego, otherwise I would not have been able even to find what is happening. Because I was sick, I was needful, he could have easily exploited my needs for his own ego. He could have created the vicious circle of fulfilling the ego: you fulfill the master’s ego, the master fulfills the disciple’s ego.

It happened: I was invited by one of the shankaracharyas in Faridabad; he was holding a big, world religious conference. He must not have known me at all. I became aware of it, he became aware of it; the moment I spoke, within two minutes it was clear he did not know me.
His secretary was interested in me, he was reading my books. He had persuaded him to invite me, and of course it was going to be a world religious conference, so many religious leaders were invited – there was no harm. And the secretary must have done the whole paper work, and the shankaracharya may not have been actually aware of who I am, or what was going to happen.
But when I reached there – I reached in the early morning – the shankaracharya wanted to see me, because in the evening the session would begin and there were at least fifty thousand people gathered, so then there would be no time. And he was to preside at the conference. So I went to his temple where he was staying, from the guesthouse where I was staying.
He was sitting on a wooden platform, three feet higher than everybody else was sitting. By his wooden platform there was another platform, one-and-a-half feet above the floor, one-and-a-half feet below his platform – there, another monk was sitting, very dignified. And on the floor, all the guests who had come to participate in the conference, and address the conference – Hindus, Mohammedans, Christians, Sikhs, Jainas, Buddhists – all were sitting there.
I was also sitting. The shankaracharya said – he started the conversation: “Do you know the man who is sitting by my side, on a lower platform, who he is? He was the Supreme Court’s chief justice. As he retired he renounced everything. And he is so humble – I asked him to sit by my side on the same platform, but he refused. He says, ‘No, you are my guru, my master. How can I sit with you?’ That’s why he sits on a lower platform.”
I asked the shankaracharya, “I understand – he must be very humble, as far as you are concerned, because he is one-and-a-half feet below you – but what about me and all the people sitting in this room? He is a great egoist, one-and-a-half feet above us. Why can’t he sit with us? If he is so humble, then what is the need of this middle stage? He can sit with us. But he is not sitting with us, he is sitting higher – and don’t be deceived that he is humble. He is just waiting. When you die, he will be sitting where you are sitting – just waiting for your death.” And I said to the man, “If you have any sense of dignity, come down from that platform and sit with everybody.”
And I told the shankaracharya also, “It is not a meeting which you are going to address; we are your invited guests, and you are sitting higher, and we are sitting lower. Who is the host here? And who is the guest? Neither is he humble – because I have been telling him insistently, ‘Come down,’ and he is not coming down – nor are you humble. I am saying to you, ‘Come down, sit with everybody,’ but you are not coming down. This is all a bogus show.
“You cannot sit with all these people, Mohammedans, Christians. A shankaracharya and sitting with Mohammedans, Christians, Sikhs, Jainas, Buddhists – although you have invited these people. You are the host, you should behave like a host. But you don’t have the courage to come down. And it is not a meeting which you are going to address – otherwise it is okay, you can be above. It was going to be a small conversation, a friendly conversation, but you have disturbed the friendly conversation. You get down, otherwise I will get up!”
Then too that fool did not get down. Then I had to get up on the platform and sit by his side. And I asked the other people, “Whosoever wants can come. As many as there is space for can come here – otherwise, the second platform. Be humble, sit on the second platform. I am not a humble man. I am perfectly happy here, I will sit here.”
These fools…neither he had any respect, nor had the man he named. And why did he start this conversation in the first place? I asked him, “You wanted to tell us you have a disciple who was chief justice of the supreme court of India, and if he is your disciple, what to say about you! And you wanted to impress the fact that he is very humble because he refuses to sit with you. Neither you are humble, nor is he humble; you both are playing on each other’s psychological need, and exploiting.”
Now he became afraid that he had invited, unknowingly, a dangerous person. He tried in every way to arrange that in the open session, where fifty thousand people or more would be present, somehow I should not be allowed to speak. And the arrangement that he had made was this: he kept three persons just behind me with sticks in their hands, so that everybody was aware of them. The secretary who had invited me and was interested in me, came to me and said, “It seems to be strange, but these three persons are criminals, dangerous people, murderers. And they have been put behind you so that if you speak they can start attacking you and disturb the whole meeting. You will not be allowed to speak.”
I said, “Don’t you be worried. I know my business perfectly well. Just don’t be worried.” I looked at those three people. I told them, “Are you all ready?” They looked at each other. I said, “Be ready, I am going to start.” And without the shankaracharya announcing my name, I went to the mike and said to the public, “You can see three persons standing behind me with sticks. And you must know these three people; they are from this place, Faridabad. They are criminals and murderers. They have been put there by the shankaracharya so that I cannot speak. If I start speaking they will start attacking me. I would like you to raise your hands: do you want to hear me, or don’t you want to hear me?”
Fifty thousand hands were raised. Then I told the shankaracharya, “I don’t care about you at all. Now you are no more the chairman of this conference. These hands have refused you.” And I told those three people, “Be alert. If you do anything, neither you nor your shankaracharya, nor anybody, will leave this stage alive. These fifty thousand people are there.”
And they shouted, “We are here. If any harm is done to you, we will burn everybody on that stage.” I spoke. I said whatsoever I wanted to say, and those three criminals simply slipped away. And this man was talking about humbleness!
Humbleness arises only, gratitude arises only, when you have experienced what the master has been trying to express through words, through actions, through silence, through every possibility – because that experience is something inexpressible.

Okay, one question more:
Osho,
You say you are just an ordinary person. Is your commune just an ordinary collection of people?
I am an ordinary person. That’s why my commune is absolutely extraordinary, because never around an ordinary person has there been any commune. Yes, there was a small commune around Jesus – but he was the son of God. There was a big commune around Buddha – but he was the supreme-most awakened person, past, present, future; nobody is going to transcend him. Of course he had a big commune around him, but he was an extraordinary person. There was a commune with Mahavira – but he was the twenty-fourth tirthankara, a very unique status.
I have no status at all, I am an ordinary person. Hence I say my commune is absolutely extraordinary, because when has it happened that a commune functioned around an ordinary person? This is for the first time. And to be with an ordinary person like me needs tremendous courage, because I don’t fulfill any of your childish desires, I don’t fulfill any of your fantasies, I don’t give you any hope, any promises.
To be with me is enough proof that my commune is absolutely extraordinary – but I am an ordinary person.