---
title: From Darkness to Light 01
series: From Darkness to Light 01-30
talk_number: 1
url: https://oshoworld.com/from-darkness-to-light-01
language: English
duration: 01:53:36
author: TALKS IN AMERICA
scraped_at: 2026-01-03T09:14:04.522531+00:00
---
Osho,
How can we save humanity from falling even more?
It is one of the trade secrets of all the religions to propose propaganda that humanity has to be saved.
It is a very strange idea, but it is so old that nobody seems to look into the implications. Nobody asks why you are worried about saving humanity. And you have been saving humanity for thousands of years, but nothing seems to be saved.
In the first place, does humanity need any saving?
To answer this question all the religions have created an absolutely fictitious idea of the original fall, because unless there is a fall the question of saving does not arise. And the religious conception of the original fall is just rubbish.
Man has been evolving – not falling – in every possible way. The only way the original fall can be supported is by the idea of evolution proposed by Charles Darwin; but religions cannot use that – they are very much offended. Charles Darwin’s idea certainly can be put in such a way – at least by the monkeys if not by man – that it was an original fall. Certainly if man has evolved out of monkeys he must have fallen from the trees, and the monkeys who did not fall must have laughed at these idiots who had fallen. And there is a possibility that these were the weaker monkeys who could not survive in the trees.
In monkeys there exists a hierarchy. Perhaps the same mind and the same hierarchy are carried by man too; it is the same mind. If you see monkeys sitting in a tree you can know who’s the chief: he will be at the top of the tree. Then there will be a big group of ladies, his harem – the most beautiful, young. After that will be a third group.
I was thinking about this third group for many days but I had no word for it. In India we call that group the chamchas. Chamcha means a spoon, and these people are suckers. Just the way you take, with a spoon, things out of a bottle, they go on taking things – power, money – from those who have. Of course, they have to buttress these people, they have to praise these people.
But Devaraj has sent by coincidence today the right word – because chamcha cannot be exactly translated; “spoon” loses all meaning. He has sent me a word which is Californian: the brownnose. And he sent me the Webster’s dictionary also because I might not understand what a brownnose is; and certainly I would not have understood what a brownnose is.
He sent a note also, thinking perhaps that even the dictionary may not be helpful because Webster writes it in such a way that it does not look in any way obscene, dirty. So he sent me a note also: “In Europe we call these people ‘arse-kissers’.” That’s exactly the meaning of chamchas.
The chief on the top, then the harem of the ladies whom he controls, then the brownnoses! And then you come down to lower categories of the hierarchy. On the lowest branches are the poorest monkeys, without girlfriends, boyfriends – servants. But perhaps from this very group humanity has grown.
Even in this group there may have been a few people who were so weak that they could not even manage to stay on the lowest branches. They were pushed, pulled, thrown, and somehow they found themselves fallen onto the earth. That is the original fall.
Monkeys still go on laughing at man. Certainly if you think from the monkey’s side, a monkey walking on two legs…if you are a monkey and you think from its side, seeing a monkey walking on two legs, you will think, “Has he joined a circus or something? And what happened to the poor guy? He just lives on the ground; he never comes to the trees, the wild freedom of the trees, the higher status of the trees. This is really the fallen one, the downtrodden.”
Except for this, religions don’t have any logical support for the idea of the original fall. Stories they have, but stories are not arguments, stories are not proofs. And stories can have just the opposite meaning to that which you wanted to give to them. For example, the original fall in Christianity makes God the real culprit, and if anybody needs saving it is the Christian God.
A father preventing his children from being wise, from living forever, is certainly insane. Even the worst father would like his children to be wise, intelligent. Even the cruelest father would like his children to live forever.
But God prevents man from eating of two trees – the tree of knowledge and the tree of eternal life. This seems to be a strange kind of God; it is not in any way possible to conceive Him as fatherly. He seems to be the enemy of man. Who needs saving? Your God is jealous: that’s what was the argument of the devil who came in the form of a serpent and seduced the mind of Eve.
To me, there are many significant things to be understood. Why did he choose Eve and not Adam? He could have chosen Adam directly, but men by nature are less sensitive, less vulnerable, more arrogant, egoistic. Adam may not even have liked to have a conversation with a serpent, may have thought it was below his dignity. And to be persuaded by a serpent’s argument would have been impossible for man. He would have argued against him; he would have struggled, fought – because to agree with someone seems to the ego as if you are defeated.
The ego knows only disagreement, struggle, victory or defeat – as if there is no other way, as if there are only two ways: victory and defeat. For the ego certainly there are only two ways.
But for a sensitive soul there is only one way – to understand whatever is true. It is not a question of me and you, it is not a question of somebody being defeated or victorious. The question is: What is the truth?
The woman was not interested in arguing. She listened and she found that it was perfectly right. Wisdom was prohibited because, the serpent said, “God does not want man to become godlike, and if you are wise you will be godlike. And once you are wise it will not be very difficult for you to find the tree of eternal life.”
It is really the other side of wisdom – eternity. And if you are wise and you have eternal life, then who bothers about God? What has He got that you have not got? Just to keep you a slave, eternally dependent – never allowing you to become a knowing being, never allowing you to taste something of the eternal – in this vast garden of Eden He has prohibited only two trees. The argument was simply a statement of the fact.
Now, the person who brings the truth to humanity is condemned as the devil; and the person who was preventing humanity from knowing the truth, from knowing life, is praised as God. But the priests can live only with this kind of God; the devil will destroy them completely.
If God himself becomes useless, futile, by man becoming wise and having eternal life, what about the priests? What about all the religions, the churches, the temples, the synagogues? What about these millions of people who are just parasites sucking humanity’s blood in every possible way? They can exist only with that kind of God. Naturally the person who should be condemned as the devil is praised as God, and the person who should be praised as God is condemned as the devil.
Just try to see the story without any prejudice; just try to understand it from many aspects. This is only one of the aspects but it is of tremendous importance – because if God becomes the devil, the devil becomes God: then there is no original fall. If Adam and Eve had declined the devil’s wise advice, that would have been the fall, and then there would have been a need to save man. But they did not decline. And the serpent was certainly wise, certainly wiser than your God.
Just see. Anybody knows, even a very mediocre person knows, that if you say to children, “Don’t eat that fruit: you can eat anything that is available in the house but don’t eat that fruit” – the children will become absolutely disinterested in all kinds of foods; their only interest will be in that fruit which has been prohibited.
Prohibition is invitation.
The God of this story seems to be absolutely a fool. The garden was huge, with millions of trees. If He had not said anything about these two trees I don’t think even by now man would have been able to find those two trees. But He started His religious sermons with this sermon. This is the first sermon: “Don’t eat from these two trees.” He pointed out the trees: “These are the two trees that you have to avoid.” This is provocation.
Who says that the devil seduced Adam and Eve? It was God! Even without the devil, I say to you Adam and Eve would have eaten those fruits. The devil is not needed; God has done the work Himself. Sooner or later it would have been impossible to resist the temptation. Why should God prevent them?
All efforts to make people obedient simply lead them into disobedience. All efforts to enslave people make them more and more strong to rebel, to be free.
Even Sigmund Freud knows more psychology than your God, and Sigmund Freud is a Jew, just in the same tradition of Adam and Eve. Adam and Eve are his forefathers’ forefathers’ forefathers, but somewhere the same bloodstream is flowing. Sigmund Freud is more intelligent; and in fact there is no need for much intelligence to see a simple fact.
In my childhood, in my neighborhood, lived the richest man of the city. He had the only palatial building – all marble. Around his house there was a beautiful garden, lawn. One day I was standing just outside his fence, and he was telling something to his gardener. I told him, “Dada” – he was known as dada; dada means big brother. The whole town called him Dada, even people who were older than him, because he was rich.
I said to him, “You should remember one thing. Put a few posters around the garden that nobody should urinate here, because I have seen a few people urinating around your house.” And it was a good place to urinate because a big garden, trees…you could go behind them.
He said, “That’s right!” The next day he painted a few instructions around the garden: “No Pissing Allowed” – and since that day the whole town has been pissing around his house! He came to see my father. He said, “Where is your boy? – he has made my house hell. And who has said to him that he has to advise me?”
My father said, “But what advice has he given to you? If you had asked me I would have told you never to listen to him; it always leads into some trouble. What happened?”
He said, “Nothing. I was just talking to the gardeners. He said, ‘Dada, I have seen a few people urinating.’ I have never seen them myself, my gardeners said, ‘We have never seen anybody,’ but the idea struck me that it is true: huge trees, bushes…people may be urinating in my garden or around my garden. This is not to be allowed anymore. So he suggested to me to make a few posters around the house: ‘No Pissing Allowed.’ So I did that, and since that day the whole town is pissing around my garden. Where is your boy?”
My father said, “It is very difficult to know where he is. Whenever he comes, he comes; whenever he goes, he goes. He is not under our control. But if he has started giving advice to you, he will come to give more advice – don’t be worried. If his one piece of advice has worked, he will come; you just wait. And if he comes and I find him, I will bring him to you.”
My father caught hold of me in the evening and he said, “You come. Why did you give this advice?”
I said, “My advice was to prohibit people. Nobody can say that my advice is wrong – I have seen it written in many places. And yes, it is true I have seen people pissing there; that’s how I got the idea. And I have inquired why people have started pissing.
“They say, ‘When we read the board suddenly the urge…we remember that the bladder is full; otherwise we were engaged in other kinds of things and other thoughts were there. Who thinks of the bladder? When it becomes absolutely necessary, then only one thinks of it.
“‘But when we look at these boards suddenly the bladder becomes the most important thing, and one feels the place is good, that’s why the board has been put there – people must be pissing here. And we see that there are many marks, many people have pissed already, so we feel it is perfectly right.’“
It is a simple thing: If you prohibit anything, you provoke, you give a challenge.
In India it is not any legal problem to urinate anywhere, wherever you can manage: there is freedom of urination. When I was nearabout ten or eleven years old my father became very sick so we had to take him to a very good hospital, far away in Indore.
The hospital in Indore was famous all over the country. We had to live there for six months. Just at the entrance of the hospital was a board: “No Urination Permitted. Anybody Disobeying Will Be Prosecuted.” And there used to stand a policeman. To me that was even more provocative. The board was enough but a policeman with a gun standing there!
The very first day my father entered hospital and we were given quarters in the hospital to live in, I could not resist; it was impossible. The board alone was enough but to put a policeman there with a gun – this was too much. I went directly.
The policeman was standing there; he looked at me. He could not believe it because it had never happened: I pissed!
He said, “What are you doing? Can’t you read?”
I said, “I can read – better than you.”
And he said, “Can’t you see me with this gun?”
I said, “I can see that too. It is because of your gun and this board – otherwise I had no need. My house is just a two-minute walk from here, and I have just come from the bathroom. It is really difficult to piss because my bladder is empty. But I cannot avoid the temptation.”
He said, “You will have to come with me to the chief administrator of the hospital” – it was a big hospital.
So I said, “Okay, I will come.” I went there. The administrator was very angry.
He said, “You have just entered – the first day, and you do such a thing?”
I said, “But what can I do? This policeman was pissing there!”
He said, “What!”
I said, “Yes, he was pissing there, and when I saw that a policeman was pissing there I thought perhaps it is absolutely legal, this board is nonsense.”
The policeman said, “Who says I was pissing? This is absolutely wrong!”
The administrator said, “This is strange. Let us see.”
What I had done, I had pissed in two places and I showed him those two. The administrator said, “Two places!” He said to the policeman, “Your services are finished! And that innocent boy – he is not wrong. If you are pissing here…you are supposed to prevent people.”
I said, “I saw him, with his gun, pissing here, so I said, ‘Perhaps this is perfectly okay.’ And I am new anyway, I don’t know much.” And the policeman could not deny it; there was no way to deny.
I said, “If you were not pissing you can deny it, but that simply means that you were not here, you were not on duty; somebody else has pissed. Either way you are finished.”
He was thrown out of his job. When we came out he said, “Just listen, how did you manage that second place? You know that I was not pissing.”
I said, “I know, you know, but that does not help. The question is the administrator: he does not know. And you were in every way caught: Either you were not on duty – somebody else has pissed there – or if you were on duty then you had pissed.”
He said, “How did it happen? Perhaps when we were inside somebody else did it.”
I said, “To be true to you now that you are finished – you are no longer a policeman and I feel pity for you – I had to do both the things before we left. You were not observant enough to see that I moved two feet.”
He said, “Yes, I remember. You moved, and I was thinking, Why have you moved? Now I know. But that administrator won’t let me even inside the house; he is a very strict man.”
I said, “He may be a strict man, but he has become a friend to me” – and he remained a friend to me for six months. I did every kind of thing in that hospital, but whenever I was brought to him, he said, “This boy is innocent. From the very first day I have known this boy is innocent and unnecessarily people are harassing him; for all kinds of things people are harassing him.
“Somebody else does something and he is being caught. And I know the reason: he is innocent, simple, from a small village. He knows nothing about the city and the cunningness of the city and all kinds of ruffians so you go and get hold of him: he has become the target.” And I would stand before him very peacefully.
He remained a friend to me all those six months, just because of that one case in which the policeman was thrown out. But to me it was a simple case of provocation.
God could not see a simple thing? – that to these innocent Adam and Eve He is giving a challenge? In the uncorrupted souls, utterly innocent, He is putting the seed of corruption. But to save Him the priests have managed to bring the serpent in, and thrown the whole responsibility on the serpent – that he is the sole cause of man’s original fall. But I don’t see him as the original cause. If anything he is the original incentive to man’s growth.
The devil is the original rebel. And what he said to Adam and Eve is the beginning of a true religion, not what God said – that is the beginning of suicide, not religion.
In the East the serpent is worshipped as the wisest animal in the world; and I think that is far better. If the serpent really did this then he is certainly the wisest animal in the world. He saved man from eternal slavery, ignorance, stupidity.
This is not the original fall, this is the original rise.
You are asking me how to save humanity from falling even further.
Humanity has never been falling.
What has been happening is that all the religious dogmas sooner or later become small and cannot contain man.
Man goes on growing:
Dogmas don’t grow, doctrines don’t grow.
The doctrines remain the same and man outgrows them.
The priest clings to the doctrine. That is his heritage, his power, tradition, ancient wisdom. He clings to it. Now what to say about the man who goes on outgrowing all those doctrines? Certainly to the priest this is a continuous fall; man is falling.
Just take a few examples and you will understand how doctrines are bound to be rigid, static, dead. Man is alive. You cannot hold him in something which does not grow with him. He will break all those prisons, he will shatter all those chains.
For example, in Jainism the Jaina monk is not supposed to use shoes, for the simple reason that in ancient days shoes were made only of leather, and leather comes from animals; animals are killed. It is a symbol of violence, and Mahavira wanted his followers not to be in any way – directly or indirectly – involved in violence.
He prevented everybody from wearing shoes. He was not aware that one day shoes of rubber would be available, which involves no violence. Shoes of synthetic leather would be available, which involves no violence. Shoes of cloth would be available, which involves no violence. He was not aware. So it indicates two things. The claim of the Jainas that Mahavira is omniscient is nonsense; he knew nothing of synthetic leather – he cannot be omniscient.

Secondly, now twenty-five centuries have passed: Jaina monks and nuns are still walking bare-footed on the dusty roads in hot weather in a country like India. You should see their feet; tears will come to your eyes. The skin of their feet is all broken, as broken as when for two or three years rains don’t come and the earth breaks; and blood is oozing out of those wounds. Still they have to go on walking; they cannot use a vehicle, because in those days again a vehicle meant horse-driven, bullock-driven – and that was violence.
And I can understand that it is violence. Who are you to force poor animals to pull your vehicles and to pull you? But Mahavira was not aware that there would be cars which would not be pulled by horses but would have horsepower without horses, that there would be trains, electrical vehicles. He was not aware of that, that there would be airplanes with the least possibility of violence.
Even walking you will do more violence because it is not only when you kill an elephant that it is violence. According to Jainism the soul has the same status in the ant, the smallest ant, and the biggest elephant. Only the bodies are different – the souls are the same. So when you are walking on the road you may be killing many insects; not only insects, even when you are breathing you are killing very small living cells in the air. Just by the hot air coming out of your nose, your mouth, they are being killed.
Perhaps for the Jaina monk and nun the airplane is the most non-violent vehicle. When I suggested it to Jaina monks they said, “What are you saying? If somebody hears it we will be thrown out, expelled!”
I could convince just one Jaina monk, and certainly he was expelled. He was a little stupid. We both were staying in one temple, and I told him, “You unnecessarily walk ten miles every day from this place to the city, while a car comes for me; you can go with me.”
He said, “But if anybody sees?”
I said, “We can always manage.” He used to have a bamboo mat, so I said, “You put the bamboo mat on the sofa in the car, and sit on the bamboo mat.”
He said, “What will that do?”
I said, “You can simply say, ‘I am sitting on my bamboo mat; I am not concerned with the car or anything.’“
He said, “This is perfectly right, because if I am sitting on the bamboo mat and somebody pulls my bamboo mat, what can I do?”
I said, “That’s right – you just sit on the bamboo mat.” I took him in the car, and we reached the place where there was a meeting in which I and he were both going to speak. When they saw him sitting…. And I asked somebody to come and pull the bamboo mat out, with him sitting on top of it.
They said, “What is all this?”
I said, “You first pull him out, because he has nothing to do with the car – he is simply sitting on his bamboo mat. I have pushed his bamboo mat into the car; now we have to take him out.” And I had told him, “You simply sit with your eyes closed.” I said to them, “He is a very meditative person, and don’t disturb him, just pull his mat.”
They pulled, but they were angry that this….”We never heard of it: a Jaina monk sitting in a car! And we know perfectly well this is not a meditative monk; this is the first time we have seen him sitting with closed eyes. He is not very erudite either, not scholarly or anything.”
He knew only three speeches, and he used to ask me which one would be right, so I used to make the sign one, two, or three; that would do. So whichever finger I raised first he would do that speech. And I always managed to let him deliver the wrong speech, one which was not supposed to be for that audience, but he depended on my finger; he was a little stupid.
Finally they expelled him just because he sat in the car. While I was there they could not, because I argued for him, “He has nothing to do with it. You could expel me – but you cannot because I am not your monk, I don’t belong to anybody; nobody in the whole world can expel me. But you can expel me; if you can enjoy expelling, you can expel me. But he is absolutely innocent.”
So in front of me they could not do anything, but the moment I left, the next day, they expelled him. They took away all his symbols of a Jaina monk. Only after five, seven years passed I met him in Lucknow, and what a great coincidence! – he was driving a taxi, he had become a taxi-driver. That’s how I met him – at the railway station, because I had to get down there and go to a hotel and wait at least eight hours; then my next train would come which would take me to the place where I was going.
So in Lucknow I had no work and I had not informed anybody, so I could just rest eight hours. By chance I called the taxi and he came. I said, “What! You are driving a taxi.”
He said, “It is all your doing.”
I said, “But I think it is perfectly logical: from car to car, and from the back seat to the front seat. This is what evolution is! And at that time you were even afraid to sit down; now you are driving. You keep going: soon you will be a pilot and someday I will meet you in the air.”
He said, “Don’t joke with me. I have been so angry with you, but seeing you all my anger has gone – you are such a nice person. But why did you do that to me?”
I said, “I took you out of that bondage; now you can go to the cinema, you can smoke cigarettes. You can do everything that you want.”
“I am. Yes, that is true,” he said, “that you have made me free. I was a slave of those people; I could not even move without their permission. Now I don’t care a bit about anybody; I earn my living and I live the way I want to live. If you could help all the other Jaina monks also….”
I said, “I try my best but the followers are always surrounding them, protecting them, insisting that they should not talk with me. They say ‘Even talk is dangerous because this man may put some idea in your mind.’“
All the religions are afraid of thinking, afraid of raising questions, afraid of doubt, afraid of disobedience, and stuck centuries back – for the simple reason that these things were not available then. Those people who were making those rules had no idea what the future was going to be.
Hence all the religions are agreed that man is continuously falling because he is not following the scriptures, not following the doctrines, not following the messiahs, the prophets. But I don’t see that man is falling. In fact man’s sensitivity has grown.
His intelligence has grown, his life span has grown. He is more capable now of getting rid of slavery and patterns of slavery.
Man is courageous enough to doubt, question, inquire. This is not a fall.
This is the beginning of a true religion spreading. Soon it can become a wildfire.
But to the priests certainly it is a fall. Everything is a fall because it is not according to their scriptures.
Do you know, in India, just a hundred years ago nobody was allowed to go to foreign countries, for the simple reason that in foreign countries you would be mixing with people who cannot be accepted as human beings; they are below human beings.
In India they have the worst class of human beings whom they call untouchables. They cannot be touched. If you touch them you have to take a shower and cleanse yourself. In foreign countries people are even farther down than the untouchables. For them they had a special word, mlechchhas. It is very difficult to translate that word. It means something so ugly, so obscene, so dirty that it creates nausea in you. That will be the full meaning of the word, mlechchha: people whose contact will create nausea in you, a sickness in you.
Even when Gandhi went to England to study, his mother had taken three oaths from him. One was that he would not look at any woman with lustful eyes – a very difficult thing, because by the time you become aware that you have been looking with lustful eyes, you have already looked! I don’t think Gandhi followed that; he could not, it is impossible to follow, although he tried his best.
Secondly, he should not eat meat. And he was in such a trouble because – now in London you can find vegetarian restaurants, health food is now in fashion, but when Gandhi had gone to study, there was no vegetarian food available. He had to live just on fruits, bread, butter, milk. He was almost starving. He would not mix with people because those people were all mlechchhas. And of course he was so much afraid of women: Who knows? – just like a breeze lust comes to the eyes.
Lust is not something that knocks on your door and says, “I am coming.” You see a beautiful woman and suddenly you feel, “She is beautiful” – and that’s enough. Just to say, “She is beautiful,” means you have already looked with lustful eyes; otherwise what business is it for you to judge whether she is beautiful or ugly?
In fact if you go deep down in your judgments you will see, at the moment you say that someone is beautiful, deep down you want to possess. When you say someone is ugly, deep down you don’t want to have anything to do with that person. Your “ugly,” your “beauty,” are really your desires for or against.
So Gandhi was continuously afraid of women. He had to remain confined to his room, because in Europe there were women all over; how could you avoid them?
And the third oath was that he should not change his religion.
The first trouble arose in Alexandria. Their ship was to wait there for three days for loading, unloading cargo. And all the people who were on the ship who had become friendly toward Gandhi – they were all Indians – said to him simply, “What is the point, sitting here for three days? The nights in Alexandria are beautiful!”
But he didn’t understand the meaning, that “nights in Alexandria are beautiful.” In that way he was a simpleton. He had never heard the name of the famous book Arabian Nights; otherwise he would have understood. Alexandria is very close to Arabia, and those are Arabian nights!
So Gandhi said, “Okay, if the nights are beautiful I am coming.” But he was not aware where he was going. They took him into a beautiful house, and he said, “But where are we going?”
“To beautiful nights,” those friends said – and it was a prostitute’s house. Gandhi was so shocked that he lost his voice. He could not say, “I don’t want to go in”; he could not say, “I want to go back to the ship” – for two reasons. One was: “These people will think that I am impotent or something.” Secondly, he was not able to speak; for the first time he found that his throat was choked.
Those people just dragged him. They said, “He is new – nothing to be worried about,” and he went with them. They pushed him into a prostitute’s room and closed the door. The prostitute was also a little puzzled seeing this man trembling, perspiring. She completely forgot that he was a customer. She just made him sit; he wouldn’t sit on her bed but she forced him. She said, “You are not in a position to stand, you will fall down, you are shaking so much. You just sit.”
He could not say that he could not sit on a prostitute’s bed; What will my mother say? I have not looked yet – he was talking to his mother inside – I have not yet looked with lustful eyes. This is just an accident; those idiots have forced me here. The woman understood that it seemed he had been forced. She said, “Don’t be worried, I’m also a human being. What do you want? Simply tell me and I will do it.” But he could not say anything.
The woman said, “It is very difficult now, how…. You don’t speak?”
He said, “I…just….”
So she said, “You please write.”
He had to write on paper, “I have been unnecessarily forced here – I simply want to go. And I look on you as my sister.”
She said, “That’s perfectly okay, don’t be worried.” She opened the door and she said, “Do you have money enough to go to the ship or should I come with you to lead you? – because Alexandria in the middle of the night is dangerous.”
He said, “No” – now he was able to speak for the first time, seeing that a prostitute is not some dangerous animal. She behaved more humanly than any woman had ever behaved with him. She offered him food. He said, “No, I cannot eat; I am okay.” She offered water; he wouldn’t drink water from a prostitute’s house…as if water also becomes dirty because it is in a prostitute’s house.
In India that happens. In Indian stations you will find people shouting, “Hindu water!” “Mohammedan water!” Water Hindu? Mohammedan? And Jainas of course don’t drink either the Hindu water or the Mohammedan water; they carry their own water, Jaina water, because they are such a minority that in stations you won’t find Jaina water, so they have to carry their own water.
But Gandhi thanked the woman, and in his autobiography he wrote about that woman and about the whole incident: “How cowardly I was! I could not even speak, could not even say no.”
Now these three things kept him a slave in England where he could have been free. He could have looked into many aspects of life which were not available in India, but it was impossible because those three oaths were so binding. He did not make friends, he did not go to any meetings, sermons. He simply kept himself with his books and prayed to God, “Somehow finish my course so I can be back in India.”
Now, such a person cannot become a great legal expert. His examination was good, he passed. But when he came to India, in his first case, when he went to the court again the same thing happened as had happened in the prostitute’s house. He simply said, “My lord…” and that was all! People waited a few minutes, then again he said, “My lord….” And he was trembling so that the justice said, “You take him and let him relax.”
That was Gandhi’s first and last case in India, in an Indian court. Then he never dared to take any case because just after “My lord,” he might stop, and that would not make sense. And the reason was simply that he had no experience of meeting people, talking with people, conversing with people. He had become almost like an isolated monk who had lived in a faraway monastery, alone, and then had been brought again to Bombay where he was not at all at ease.
And this man became one of the greatest leaders of the world. In this world things work very strangely. Because Gandhi could not go to the court, he accepted an offer from a friendly Mohammedan family; they had business in South Africa and they needed a legal adviser. He was not to go to the court, he had just to advise the advocate there, to assist him to understand the whole situation of the business in India and in Africa.
So he was just an assistant to the advocate; he was not going to court directly. For this purpose he went to Africa, but on the way two accidents happened which changed not only his life but the whole Indian history, and perhaps made an impact on the whole world.
One was that a friend who had come to see him off at the ship presented him a book, Unto This Last, by John Ruskin – a book which transformed his whole life. It is a simple book and a small book. It professes – “Unto this last” means the poorest one – we should consider the poorest one first. And that became his whole philosophy of life: the poorest should be considered first.
In South Africa, while Gandhi was traveling in a first-class compartment, one Englishman entered and said, “You get out, because no Indian can travel in first class.”
Gandhi said, “But I have a first-class ticket. The question is not whether I am Indian or European; the question is whether I have a first-class ticket or not. Nowhere is it written who can travel; whoever has a first-class ticket can travel.”
But that Englishman was not going to listen. He pulled the emergency chain and threw Gandhi’s things out. And Gandhi was a thin and weak man; the Englishman threw him out also on the platform and told him, “now you travel first class.”
The whole night Gandhi remained on that small station’s platform. The stationmaster told him, “You unnecessarily got into trouble; you should have got down. You seem to be new here. Indians cannot travel first-class. It is not a law but this is how things are.” But the whole night Gandhi spent in a turmoil. It became the very seed of his revolt against the British Empire. That night he decided that this empire has to end.
Gandhi lived many years in Africa and there he learned the whole art of fighting non-violently. And when he came to India in the 1920’s he was a perfectly trained leader of non-violent revolution, and he immediately took over the whole country, for the simple reason that he was conventional, traditional, religious. Nobody could say that he was not a sage, because he was following rules of five thousand years before, laid down five thousand years before.
In fact he was preaching that we should turn the clock backward and we should move to the days of Manu – five thousand years back. To him the greatest and the latest invention was the spinning wheel. After that, no science…science’s work finished with the spinning wheel. Of course he became the leader of those people who are not contemporary.
You are asking me how to save humanity. From whom? I will say from Mahatma Gandhi and people like him.
Yes, save humanity:
Save it from the popes, shankaracharyas, imams. Save it from Jesus Christ, Mahavira, Gautam Buddha. Save it.
But I know your question is not about saving it from Jesus Christ. You are asking just the opposite: you are asking me how to save it for Jesus Christ, not from Jesus Christ. But why? And have you tried to think – are you saved? Can you say that you have come to the point beyond which there is no growth? Can you say that you are utterly contented, that you don’t need even a single moment more to live because there is nothing left for you?
Are you saved from all anxiety, anguish, misery, suffering, anger, jealousy?
Are you saved from your own ego?
If you are not saved from all this rubbish hanging around, all this poison in your being, you have some nerve to ask how to save humanity.
And who are we to save humanity?
On what authority?
I can never conceive myself as a savior, as a messiah, because these are all ego trips. Who am I to save you? If I can save myself, that is more than enough.
But it is a strange world. People are drowning themselves in shit and crying loudly, “Save humanity!”
From whom? From you?
It is psychologically understandable. You start all these ideas of redeeming, saving, helping, serving, just to do one thing: to escape from yourself.
You don’t want to face yourself.
You don’t want to see where you are, what you are. The best way is, start saving humanity so you will be so much involved, engaged, occupied, worried about great problems that your own problems will look negligible. Perhaps you may forget all about them. This is a very psychological device, but very poisonous. You want somehow to be as far away from yourself as possible so you need not see the wounds which are hurting. The best way is: serve.
I used to go to speak in Rotary Clubs, and on their desk they have their motto: We serve. And that was enough to trigger me. “What nonsense is this? Whom do you serve and why should you serve? Who are you to serve?” But Rotarians all over the world believe in service; just believe…. And once in a while they do little things, very clever.
The Rotarians collect all the medicines which are left in your house, unused because the sick person is no longer sick. Half the bottle is left – what are you going to do with it? Have some bank account in the other world; give it to the Rotary Club!
You are not losing anything, you were going to throw it anyway. What were you going to do with that medicine, those tablets, injections or any other things that are left? You just give it to the Rotary Club. The Rotary Club collects all kinds of medicines from everybody and has all the top people of the city. It is a prestigious thing to be a member of a Rotary Club, to be a Rotarian, because only the top man in a certain profession…. Only one professor will be a Rotarian, only one doctor will be a Rotarian, only one engineer will be a Rotarian – only one from every profession, vocation.
So the doctor who is the Rotarian will distribute those medicines to poor people. Great service! The doctor takes his fee and finds out from this junk that they have collected what medicine may be in some way useful. He is doing great service because at least he is giving this much time in finding the medicine from out of the junk: “We serve.” And then he feels great inside that he is doing something of immense value.
One man has been opening schools in India for aboriginal children his whole life. He is a follower of Gandhi. Just by chance he met me, because I had gone into that aboriginal tribe. I was studying those aboriginals from every view, because they are living examples of days when man was not so much burdened with all kinds of morality, religion, civilization, culture, etiquette, manners. They are simple, innocent, still wild, fresh.
This man was going and collecting money from cities, and opening schools and bringing teachers. Just by the way he met me there. I said, “What are you doing? You think you are doing great service to these people?”
He said, “Of course!”
So arrogantly he said, “Of course!” I said, “You are not aware of what you are doing. Schools exist in the cities, better than these: what help have they provided for human beings? And if those schools cannot provide, and colleges and universities cannot provide any help to humanity, what do you think? – your small schools are going to help these poor aboriginals?
“All that you will do is, you will destroy their originality. All that you will do is, you will destroy their primitive wildness. They are still free: your schools will create nothing but trouble for them.”
The man was shocked, but he waited for a few seconds and then said, “Perhaps you are right, because once in a while I have been thinking that these schools and colleges and universities exist on a far wider scale all over the world. What can my small schools do? But then I thought it was Gandhi’s order to me to go to aboriginals and open schools, so I am following my master’s order.”
I said, “If your master was an idiot, that does not mean that you have to continue following the order. Now, stop – I order you! And I tell you why you have been doing all this – just to escape from your own suffering, your own misery. You are a miserable man; anybody can see it from your face. You have never loved anybody, you have never been loved by anybody.”
He said, “How did you manage to infer that? – because it is true. I was an orphan, nobody loved me, and I have been brought up in Gandhi’s ashram where love was only talked about in prayer; otherwise, love was not a thing to be practiced. There was strict discipline, a kind of regimentation. So nobody has ever loved me, that’s true; and you are right, I have never loved anybody because in Gandhi’s ashram it was impossible to fall in love. That was the greatest crime.
“I was one of those whom Gandhi praised because I never fell in his eyes. Even his own sons betrayed him. Devadas, his son, fell in love with Rajgopalchary’s daughter, and then he was expelled from the ashram; they got married. Gandhi’s own personal secretary, Pyarelal, fell in love with a woman and kept the love affair secret for years. When it was exposed it was a scandal, a great scandal.”
I said, “What nonsense! But Gandhi’s personal secretary…that means, what about others?” And this man was praised because he never came in contact with any woman! Gandhi sent him to the aboriginal tribes and he had been doing what the master had said.
But he said to me, “You have disturbed me. Perhaps it is true: I am just trying to escape from myself, from my wounds, from my own anguish.”
So all these people who become interested in saving humanity, in the first place are very egoistic. They are thinking of themselves as saviors. In the second place, they are very sick. They are trying to forget their sickness. And in the third place, whatever they do is going to help man become worse than he is, because they are sick and blind and they are trying to lead people. And when blind people lead then you can be certain sooner or later the whole lot is going to fall into a well.
No, I am not interested in saving anybody. In fact, nobody needs saving. Everybody is perfectly okay as he is. Everybody is what he has chosen to be. Now who am I to disturb him? All that I can do is, I can say about myself what has happened to me. I can tell my story. Perhaps from that story someone may get an insight, a direction. Perhaps from that a door opens up. But I am not doing anything, I am simply sharing my own experience.
It is not service, I am enjoying it, so it is not service. Remember it. A servant has to be very long-faced and very serious – he is doing such a great work. He is carrying the Himalayas on his shoulders, the whole burden of the world.
I am not carrying anything:
No burden of the world, no burden of anybody.
And I am not doing any serious job.
I am just enjoying telling you about my experience. To share it is a joy in itself.
If something reaches to you, thank God!
He does not exist.
Don’t thank me – because I exist!

============================================================

Osho,
How did you manage to stay with your own clarity as a child and not let yourself become intimidated by the grown-ups around you? Where did you get that courage from?
Innocence is courage and clarity both.
There is no need to have courage if you are innocent. There is no need, either, for any clarity because nothing can be more clear, crystal clear, than innocence. So the whole question is how to protect one’s own innocence.
Innocence is not something to be achieved.
It is not something to be learned.
It is not something like a talent: painting, music, poetry, sculpture. It is not like those things. It is more like breathing, something you are born with.
Innocence is everybody’s nature.
Nobody is born other than innocent.
How can one be born other than innocent? Birth means you have entered the world as a tabula rasa, nothing is written on you. You have only future, no past. That is the meaning of innocence. So first try to understand all the meanings of innocence.
The first is: no past, only future.
The past corrupts because it gives you memories, experiences, expectations. All those combined together make you clever but not clear. They make you cunning but not intelligent. They may help you to succeed in the world but in your innermost being you will be a failure. And all the success of the world means nothing compared to the failure that finally you are going to face, because ultimately only your inner self remains with you. All is lost: your glory, your power, your name, your fame – all start disappearing like shadows.
At the end only that remains which you had brought in the very beginning. You can take from this world only that which you have brought in.
In India it is common wisdom that the world is like a waiting room in a railway station; it is not your house. You are not going to remain in the waiting room forever. Nothing in the waiting room belongs to you – the furniture, the paintings on the wall…. You use them – you see the painting, you sit on the chair, you rest on the bed – but nothing belongs to you. You are just here for a few minutes, or for a few hours at the most, then you will be gone.
Yes, what you have brought in with you, into the waiting room, you will take away with you; that’s yours. What have you brought into the world? And the world certainly is a waiting room. The waiting may not be in seconds, minutes, hours, days, it may be in years; but what does it matter whether you wait seven hours, or seventy years?
You may forget, in seventy years, that you are just in a waiting room. You may start thinking perhaps you are the owner, perhaps this is the house you have built. You may start putting your nameplate on the waiting room.
There are people – I have seen it, because I was traveling so much: people have written their names in the bathrooms of the waiting room. People have engraved their names on the furniture of the waiting room. It looks stupid, but it is very similar to what people do in the world. There is a very significant story in ancient Jaina scriptures….
In India it is believed that if somebody can become the emperor of the whole world he is called a chakravartin. The word chakravartin simply means…chakra means the wheel. In ancient India it was a way to avoid unnecessary fighting and violence: a chariot, a golden chariot, very valuable, with beautiful and strong horses, would move from one kingdom to another kingdom. If the other kingdom did not resist and let the chariot pass, that meant that kingdom had accepted the owner of the chariot as its superior. Then there was no need to fight.
This way the chariot would move, and wherever people obstructed the chariot, then there would be war. If the chariot was not obstructed anywhere, then without any war, the superiority of the king was proved: he become a chakravartin – one whose wheel has moved around and whom nobody has been able to obstruct. This has been the desire of all the kings, to become a chakravartin.
Certainly it needs more power than Alexander the Great had. Just to send your chariot…it needs tremendous power to support it. It needs the absolute certainty that if the chariot is obstructed there is going to be a mass slaughter. It means the man is recognized already, that if he wants to conquer anybody there is no way to prevent him conquering you.
But it is a very symbolic way, more civilized than…. There is no need to attack, there is no need to start killing; just send a symbolic message. So with the flag of the king, the chariot will go, and if the other king feels that there is no point in resisting – fighting simply means defeat and unnecessary violence, destruction – he welcomes the chariot, and in his capital, flowers are thrown over the chariot.
This seems to be a far more civilized way than what the Soviet Union and America are going to do. Just send a beautiful chariot – but that means your strength should be something absolutely certain to you; and not only to you, it should be certain to everybody else. Only then can such a symbol be of any help. So every king had the desire to become a chakravartin someday.
The story is that one man became a chakravartin – and it happens only once in thousands of years that a man becomes a chakravartin. Even Alexander the Great was not a world conqueror; there was yet much left unconquered. And he died very young, he was only thirty-three: there was not even time enough to conquer the world. What to say of conquering, the whole world was not even known. Half of the world was unknown, and the half that was known, even that was not conquered. This man, of whom I am going to tell you the story, became the chakravartin.
It is said that when a chakravartin dies – because a chakravartin happens only in thousands of years, he is a rare being – when he dies he is received in heaven with great rejoicings and he is taken to a special place.
In Jaina mythology, in heaven there is a parallel mountain to the Himalayas. The Himalayas are just made of rocks and earth and ice. The parallel Himalayas in heaven is called Sumeru. Sumeru means the ultimate mountain: nothing can be higher than that, nothing can be better than that. It is solid gold; instead of rocks there are diamonds and rubies and emeralds.
When a chakravartin dies he is led to Sumeru mountain to engrave his name on it. That is a rare opportunity; that happens only once in thousands of years. Of course this man was immensely excited that he was going to write his name on Sumeru. That is the ultimate catalogue of all the great ones that have been, and will also be the catalogue of all the great ones who are going to be. This emperor was becoming party to a lineage of supermen.
The gatekeeper gave him the instruments to engrave his name. He wanted a few of his men who had committed suicide just because their emperor was dying – they could not think of living without him. His wife, his prime minister, his commander-in-chief – all the great people who were around him, they all had committed suicide, so they had come with him.
The emperor wanted the gatekeeper to let them all come to see him engrave his name, because what is the joy if you go alone and engrave your name and nobody is there even to see? – because the real joy is that the whole world should see.
The gatekeeper said, “You listen to my advice, because this is my inherited profession. My father was a gatekeeper, his father was a gatekeeper; for centuries we have been gatekeepers to Sumeru mountain. Listen to my advice: Don’t take them with you; otherwise you will repent.”
The emperor could not understand, but he could not even go against his advice – because what interest could that man have in preventing him?
The gatekeeper said, “If you still want them to see, first go engrave your name; then come back and take them with you if you want. I have no objection even now if you want to take them, but just in case you decide not to, then there will be no place, no chance…they will be with you. You go alone.” This was perfectly sane advice.
The emperor said, “That’s good. I will go alone, engrave my name, come back, and call you all.”
The gatekeeper said, “I am perfectly agreeable to that.”
The emperor went and he saw the Sumeru shining under thousands of suns – because in heaven you cannot be so poor as to have just one sun – thousands of suns, and a golden mountain far bigger than the Himalayas – and the Himalayas are almost two thousands miles long! He could not open his eyes for a moment, it was so glaring there. And then he started looking for a space, the right space, but he was very much puzzled: there was no space; the whole mountain was engraved with names.
He could not believe his eyes. For the first time he became aware what he was. Up to now he was thinking he was a superman who happens once in thousands of years. But time has been from eternity; even thousands of years didn’t make any difference, so many chakravartins had happened already. There was no space on that biggest mountain in the whole universe where he could write his small name.
He came back, and now he understood that the gatekeeper was right not to take his wife and his commander-in-chief and his prime minister and other intimate friends. It was good that they had not seen the situation. They would still believe that their emperor was a rare being.
He took the gatekeeper inside and he said, “But there is no space!”
The gatekeeper said, “That’s what I was telling you. What you have to do is to erase a few names and write down your name. That’s what has been done; my whole life I have been seeing this done, my father used to say this has been done. My father’s father – none of my family have seen Sumeru empty, or any space ever.
“Whenever a chakravartin has come he had to erase a few names and write his own name. So this is not the whole history of the chakravartins. Many times it has been erased, many times it has been engraved. You just do your work, and then if you want to show your friends you can bring them in.”
The emperor said, “No, I don’t want to show them and I don’t want to even write my name. What is the point? – someday somebody will come and erase it.
“My whole life has become utterly meaningless. This was my only hope, that Sumeru, the golden mountain in heaven was going to have my name. For this I have lived, for this I have staked my life; for this I was ready to kill the whole world. And anybody else can erase my name and write his. What is the point of writing it? I will not write it.” The gatekeeper laughed.
The emperor said, “Why are you laughing?”
The gatekeeper said, “This is strange, because this too I have been hearing from my grandfathers – that chakravartins come, and seeing the whole story, just turn back; they don’t write their names. You are not new: anybody having a little intelligence would do the same.”
In this whole world what can you gain?
What can you take away with you?
Your name, your prestige, your respectability? Your money, your power – what? Your scholarship?
You cannot take anything.
Everything will have to be dropped here.
And in that moment you will understand that all that you possessed was not yours; the very idea of possession was wrong. And because of that possession you were corrupted.
To increase that possession – to have more money, to have more power, to conquer more lands – you were doing things which even you cannot say were right. You were lying, you were dishonest. You were having hundreds of faces. You were not true even for a single moment to anybody or to yourself; you could not be.
You had to be false, phony, pretending, because these are things that help you to succeed in the world. Authenticity is not going to help you. Honesty is not going to help you. Truthfulness is not going to help you.
Without possessions, success, fame; who are you?
You don’t know.
You are your name, you are your fame, you are your prestige, your power. But other than these, who are you?
So this whole possessiveness becomes your identity. It gives you a false sense of being.
That’s the ego.
Ego is not something mysterious, it is a very simple phenomenon. You don’t know who you are, and to live without knowing who you are is impossible. If I don’t know who I am, then what am I doing here? Then whatsoever I am doing becomes meaningless. The first and the foremost thing is to know who I am. Perhaps then I can do something that fulfills my nature, makes me contented, brings me home.
But if I don’t know who I am, and I go on doing things, how can I manage to reach where my nature was supposed to reach, to lead? I have been running hither and thither but there is not going to be any point that I can say, “Now I have arrived, this was the place I was searching for.”
You don’t know who you are, so some false identity is needed as a substitute. Your possessions give you that false identity.
When Alexander the Great was coming back from India he remembered that his master, Aristotle, had asked him to bring a sannyasin from India. Aristotle had heard about sannyasins. Rumors from business people, travelers, adventurers, were reaching him that a strange kind of man exists in India: the sannyasin. It was absolutely unbelievable because a sannyasin is possible only when a certain civilization reaches its very peak, not before that. A primitive society cannot have sannyasins.
Only a very superior culture, rich, can become fed up with richness, fed up with culture, fed up with civilization. You cannot be fed up with something which you don’t have. To be fed up with something, you need to have it so much that it loses all meaning.
There is a continuous loss in meaning. For example: if you have one million dollars, do you think when you have ten million dollars the dollar will have the same value for you? It will be ten times less. But if you have one hundred thousand million dollars, then in the same proportion the dollar will go on losing its value for you. You can think of a situation where the dollar loses all meaning, it becomes just dust unto dust. But that is possible only when you have so much.
A country poor, hungry, starving cannot have real sannyasins. Yes, India still has sannyasins but that is just the dead corpse of sannyas carried on by tradition. Otherwise sannyasins disappeared at least two thousand years ago in India – they don’t exist.
My effort was the first after two thousand years to bring the sannyasin back in his true color. That became a conflict because the old sannyasin is dead, but he holds the power of tradition, of the past; my sannyasin is alive, but he has no power of the past, no power of tradition, no authority from the scriptures. There was going to be conflict. And the old were afraid: although they knew they had all the authority, one thing was certain – that they were not alive. They may have all the authority but they are a corpse.
My sannyasin may not have any authority, but he is alive, and life is the only authority there is; hence, the fear in all different traditions of sannyas in India against my sannyasins.
We were not doing any harm to anybody; we were not even concerned. We were simply trying to live our way, not interfering with anybody, not even trespassing on anybody’s path. But strangely, the whole of traditional India – and the whole country is traditional – wanted to destroy my people.
The reason is clear: they became aware that if we succeed in surviving then their death has come. Then they cannot remain any more, they will have to disappear. In fact they are living posthumously; they should have disappeared two thousand years before. Exactly at the time when Alexander left India, they should have disappeared.
Alexander inquired in every place he visited, “I want to see a sannyasin. My master has requested me…. I asked him, ‘Would you like anything from India?’“ – because in those days India was the golden bird. Everything valuable was coming from India – in fact Europe was almost in a barbarous state. But Aristotle had asked not for something that Alexander could have thought of, imagined. He asked a very strange thing: “Bring a sannyasin.”
Alexander inquired in every place he visited, and everybody said, “You come a little late.” It was five hundred years after Buddha that Alexander reached India. They said, “You should have come five hundred years before, or at least two hundred years before.
“If you had come five hundred years before you would have been greeted by sannyasins everywhere; they were all over the place. They were a strange tribe of people. Even if you had come two hundred years before you would have found one here, one there. That great era of the sannyasins had passed but a few remnants were still available. Now it is very difficult, but you go on trying; perhaps somewhere you may be able to find one.”
Alexander was very puzzled: he would not even be able to present to his master the simple gift he had asked for; but finally at the border he found a man. People said, “You have come to the right place. This is the man.” Alexander reports in his memoirs that the man’s name was Dandamis; that seems to be a Greek transliteration of some Indian word.
I have been thinking what exactly it could be, because Dandamis is not an Indian word. But there has been a certain group of sannyasins who are called Danda Swami. Danda means a staff – they carry a staff – and swami means a master of oneself. So it seems “Danda swami” somehow has got mixed and become Dandamis.
Alexander sent his people – obviously. Alexander was a great conqueror, emperor: he would not go to the sannyasin. The sannyasin was just a beggar, and Alexander heard from people that he was naked and just lived by the side of the river under a tree.
Alexander sent four soldiers with naked swords and told them, “Invite the swami. Tell him, ‘Alexander the Great wants you to be his guest. He wants to take you to his country with great respect and honor, and you will remain there as a royal guest. This is something very special, because Alexander has never invited anybody the way he is inviting you.’“
They went, and they told Dandamis. The naked man simply laughed. He said, “A man who calls himself Alexander the Great cannot be really great. That is a sign of a very mean mind, to think of oneself as ‘the Great’.”
The soldiers were shocked. They said, “What are you saying? Can’t you see our naked swords?”
Dandamis said, “I am not blind like you, and like your Alexander the Great. If you who are blind can see, can’t I, who am not blind, see? Just go and tell Alexander that a sannyasin moves according to his will. Thanks for your invitation, and in return I invite you to be here with me, my guest under my tree, to have some taste of what sannyas is.”
Alexander was very angry when he heard that this had been the response. He himself went and he said, “I am a dangerous man.”
Again the naked man laughed, and he said, “You cannot be more dangerous than I am. If you are so dangerous, why are you carrying this sword and having so many people around you with naked swords? Look at me, standing naked – and you think you are dangerous? Have you come to accept my invitation and be with me, or have you come to repeat your invitation?”
Alexander said, “I have come to take you forcibly. Now it is no longer an invitation: either you come with us, or this sword will cut your head off and finish you right now.”
Dandamis laughed a third time, and he said, “That’s great! You do it, right now. I am not moving from here. Nobody can move me against my will. Yes, you can cut off my head because that does not belong to me, but you cannot shake me; that is my citadel where I am absolutely the emperor.
“You can cut off my head, you can cut off my hands, you can cut off my legs, you can cut my whole body into pieces, but remember one thing: when you are cutting my body, my head, my hands, I will be watching in the same way as you will be watching. Your sword cannot cut me, my watcher cannot be penetrated by a sword. So start!” he said.
But it is so difficult to kill such a man, who is inviting you to kill him. Alexander said, “I am sorry that I disturbed you, but now I know why my master asked me to bring a sannyasin. And now I also know why I could not find a sannyasin in so many places I have been visiting. Now I understand also why people were saying, ‘You have come five hundred years late. The whole country was full of sannyasins; now they are certainly a rare phenomenon.’
“I don’t know what this watcher is, but seeing you, looking at you – your integrity, your strength – makes me feel that I have wasted my life. Perhaps rather than conquering the whole world, if I had also found this watcher that would have been better.”
You come with an innocent watcher into the world. Everybody comes in the same way, with the same quality of consciousness.
The question is, how did I manage so that nobody could corrupt my innocence, clarity; from where did I get this courage? How could I manage not to be humiliated by grown-ups and their world?
I have not done anything, so there is no question of how. It simply happened, so I cannot take the credit for it.
Perhaps it happens to everybody but you become interested in other things. You start bargaining with the grown-up world. They have many things to give to you; you have only one thing to give, and that is your integrity, your self-respect. You don’t have much, a single thing – you can call it anything: innocence, intelligence, authenticity. You have only one thing.
And the child is naturally very much interested in everything he sees around. He is continuously wanting to have this, to have that; that is part of human nature. If you look at the small child, even a just-born baby, you can see he has started groping for something; his hands are trying to find out something. He has started the journey.
In the journey he will lose himself, because you can’t get anything in this world without paying for it. And the poor child cannot understand that what he is giving is so valuable that if the whole world is on one side, and his integrity on the other side, then too his integrity will be more weighty, more valuable. The child has no way to know about it. This is the problem, because what he has got he has simply got. He takes it for granted.
Let me tell you one story which will make it clear. One rich man, very rich, became in the end very frustrated – which is a natural outcome of all success. Nothing fails like success. Success is significant only if you are a failure. Once you succeed then you know that you have been cheated by the world, by the people, by the society. The man had all the riches but no peace of mind. He started looking for peace of mind.
That’s what is happening in America. In America more people are looking for peace of mind than anywhere else. In India I have never come across a person who is looking for peace of mind. Peace of the stomach has to be taken care of first – peace of mind is too far away. From the stomach the mind is almost millions of miles away.
But in America everybody is looking for peace of mind, and of course when you are looking for it, then people will be there ready to give it to you. This is a simple law of economics: wherever there is demand there is supply. It does not matter whether what you are asking for you really need. Nor does anybody bother about what the supply is going to give you – whether it is just bogus advertisement, propaganda, or whether there is something substantial.
Knowing this simple principle, that wherever there is demand there is supply, the cunning and clever people have gone one step ahead. Now they say, “There is no need to wait for demand to happen, you create the demand.” And that is the whole art of advertisement: it is creating demand.
Before you read the advertisement you had no such demand, you had never felt that this was your need. But reading the advertisement, suddenly you feel, “My God, I have been missing it. And I am such a fool that I never knew that this thing exists.”
Before somebody starts manufacturing something, producing something, even years ahead – three, four years ahead – he starts advertising. The thing is not there yet in the market because first the demand has to reach the minds of people. And once the demand is there, by that time the supply will be ready.
Bernard Shaw has said that when he was new and he published his first book, of course there was no demand – nobody had ever heard about George Bernard Shaw. How can you demand, “I want George Bernard Shaw’s book, his drama?” So what he used to do the whole day…. He published the book – he himself was the publisher, he put together the money himself – and then he went from one bookstore to another bookstore asking, “Have you got George Bernard Shaw’s book?”
They said, “George Bernard Shaw? We never heard the name.”
He said, “Strange, such a great man and you have never heard of him and you run a bookstore? Are you out-of-date or something? The first thing you should do is get George Bernard Shaw’s book.” He had published only one book but he started advertising for several books, because when you are going around, why just publicize one book? And one book does not make a man a great writer.
He would go in different clothes – sometimes with a hat, sometimes with glasses. And people started calling at George Bernard Shaw’s house. And he had to do all this – the advertising, supplying; that’s how he sold his first book. He was asking people on the street, “Have you heard…because I am hearing so much about a certain book written by some George Bernard Shaw. People say it is just great, fantastic. Have you heard?”
They would say, “No, we have never even heard the name.”
He said, “This is strange. I used to think London was a cultured society.” And he went to libraries and clubs and every place where there was a possibility to create a demand, and he created the demand. He sold the book, and finally – that’s what he was continuously doing – finally he became one of the greatest writers of this age. He had created the demand.
But if you succeed, there is no need for anybody to create the demand for peace of mind. If you succeed, you lose peace of mind on the way. That is a natural course. Success takes all peace from your mind. It simply sucks everything that is significant in life: peace, silence, joy, love. It goes on taking everything away from you. Finally your hands are full of junk, and all that was valuable is lost. And suddenly you realize peace of mind is needed.
Immediately there are suppliers, who don’t know anything about mind, who don’t know anything about peace. I have read one book entitled Peace Of Mind by a Jewish rabbi, Joshua Liebman. I have gone through the whole book; the man knows neither about peace nor does he know about the mind. But he is a businessman, he is a Jew: He has done a good job without knowing anything about peace of mind.
His book is one of the best sellers in the world because whoever wants peace of mind is bound to sooner or later find Joshua Liebman’s book. And he has written it beautifully. He is a good writer, very articulate, impressive; you will be influenced by it. But peace of mind will remain as far away as it was before, or it may even have gone farther away by your reading this book.
In fact, if man knows what peace is, and what mind is, he cannot write a book entitled Peace Of Mind, because mind is the cause of all unpeace, all restlessness. Peace is when there is no mind. So peace of mind – no commodity like this exists. If mind is there, then peace is not. If peace is there then mind is not. But to write a book “Peace of No Mind”…nobody is going to purchase it. I have been thinking…but I thought, nobody is going to purchase “Peace of No Mind”. It just will not make sense to them, but that’s exactly the truth.
The child is unaware of what he has brought with him. This rich man was in the same position. He had all the riches in the world, and now he was searching for peace of mind. He went from one sage to another and they all gave great advice, but advice helps nobody.
In fact only fools give advice, and only fools take advice. Wise people are very reluctant to give you advice because a wise man certainly knows that the only thing in the world which is given freely is advice, and that which is never taken by anybody is advice, so why should he bother?
A wise man first prepares you so that you can take the advice. He does not simply give you advice; you need to be prepared. It may take years to prepare you, to prepare the ground, and only then can you sow the seeds. It will be a fool who simply goes on throwing seeds on rocks and stones without even bothering that he is wasting seeds.
All these sages gave him advice but nothing clicked. Finally a man whom he had not asked, who was not in any way a famous man – on the contrary he was thought to be the village idiot – that man stopped him on the road one day and said, “You are unnecessarily wasting your time: none of these are sages. I know them perfectly, but because I am an idiot nobody believes me. Perhaps you will also not believe me, but I know a sage.”
“Just seeing you so tortured continuously for peace of mind, I thought it would be better if I showed you the right person. Otherwise I am an idiot; nobody asks me for advice and I never give any advice to anybody. But it was too much: seeing you so sad and so miserable, I broke my silence. You go to this man in the next village.”
The rich man immediately went, with a big bag full of precious diamonds, on his beautiful horse. He reached there, he saw that man – this man was known to the Sufis as Mulla Nasruddin.
He asked the Mulla, “Can you help me to attain peace of mind?”
Mulla said, “Help? I can give it to you.”
The rich man thought, “This is strange. First that idiot suggested…and just out of desperation I thought there is no harm, so I came here. This seems to be even a greater idiot: he is saying, ‘I can give it to you.’“
The rich man said, “You can give it to me? I have been to all kinds of sages; they all give advice – do this, do that, discipline yourself, do charity, help the poor, open hospitals, this and that. They say all these things, and in fact I have done all those things; nothing helps. In fact more and more trouble arises. And you say you can give it to me?”
The Mulla said, “It is so simple. You get down from the horse.” So the rich man got down from the horse. He was holding his bag, and Mulla asked, “What are you holding in your bag so closely to your heart?”
He said, “These are precious diamonds. If you can give me peace, I will give you this bag.” But before he could even figure out what was happening, Mulla took the bag and ran away!
The rich man, for a moment, was in shock; he could not even understand what to do. And then he had to follow him. But it was Mullah’s own town – he knew every street and shortcut, and he was running. The rich man had never run in his whole life and he was so fat…. He was crying and huffing and puffing, and tears were rolling down. He said, “I have been completely cheated! This man has taken away all my life’s hard work, my earnings; everything he has taken away.”
So a crowd followed, and all were laughing. He said, “Are you all idiots? Is this town full of idiots? I have been completely ruined, and rather than catching hold of the thief you are all laughing.”
They said, “He is not a thief, he is a very sage man.”
The rich man said, “That idiot from my village got me into this trouble!” But somehow, running, perspiring, he followed Mulla. Mulla arrived back under the same tree where the horse was still standing. He sat down under the tree with the bag, and the rich man came crying and weeping. Mulla said, “You take this bag.” The rich man took the bag and put it close to his heart. Mulla said, “How does it feel? Can you feel some peace of mind?”
The rich man said, “Yes it feels very peaceful. You are a strange man, and you have strange methods.”
Mulla said, “No strange methods – simple mathematics. Whatever you have, you start taking it for granted. You just have to be given an opportunity to lose it; then immediately you will become aware of what you have lost. You have not gained anything new; it is the same bag that you have been carrying with no peace of mind. Now the same bag you are holding close to your heart and anybody can see how peaceful you are looking, a perfect sage! Just go home, and don’t bother people.”
This is the problem for the child, because he comes with innocence and he is ready to buy anything, and give his innocence. He is ready to buy any rubbish and give his courage. He is ready to buy just toys – and what else is there in this world except toys? – and lose his clarity. He will understand only when all these toys are there in his possession and he can’t feel any joy from them, can’t see any achievement, any fulfillment. Then he becomes aware of what he has lost – and he himself has lost it.
You are asking me how I managed not to lose my innocence and clarity. I have not done anything; just simply, from the very beginning…. I was a lonely child because I was brought up by my maternal grandfather and grandmother; I was not with my father and mother. Those two old people were alone and they wanted a child who would be the joy of their last days. So my father and mother agreed: I was their eldest child, the first-born; they sent me.
I don’t remember any relationship with my father’s family in the early years of my childhood. With these two old men – my grandfather and his old servant, who was really a beautiful man – and my old grandmother…these three people. And the gap was so big…I was absolutely alone. It was not a company, it could not be a company. They tried their hardest to be as friendly to me as possible but it was just not possible.
I was left to myself. I could not say things to them. I had nobody else, because in that small village my family were the richest; and it was such a small village – not more than two hundred people in all – and so poor that my grandparents would not allow me to mix with the village children. They were dirty, and of course they were almost beggars. So there was no way to have friends. That caused a great impact. In my whole life I have never been a friend, I have never known anybody to be a friend. Yes, acquaintances I had.
In those first, early years I was so lonely that I started enjoying it; and it is really a joy. So it was not a curse to me, it proved a blessing. I started enjoying it, and I started feeling self-sufficient; I was not dependent on anybody.
I have never been interested in games for the simple reason that from my very childhood there was no way to play, there was nobody to play with. I can still see myself in those earliest years, just sitting.
We had a beautiful spot where our house was, just in front of a lake. Far away for miles, the lake…and it was so beautiful and so silent. Only once in while would you see a line of white cranes flying, or making love calls, and the peace would be disturbed; otherwise, it was almost the right place for meditation. And when they would disturb the peace – a love call from a bird…after his call the peace would deepen, it would become deeper.
The lake was full of lotus flowers, and I would sit for hours so self-content, as if the world did not matter: the lotuses, the white cranes, the silence….
And my grandparents were very aware of one thing, that I enjoyed my aloneness. They had continuously been seeing that I had no desire to go to the village to meet anybody, or to talk with anybody. Even if they wanted to talk my answers were yes, or no; I was not interested in talking either. So they became aware of one thing, that I enjoyed my aloneness, and it was their sacred duty not to disturb me.
So for seven years continuously nobody tried to corrupt my innocence; there was nobody. Those three old people who lived in the house, the servant and my grandparents, were all protective in every possible way that nobody should disturb me. In fact I started feeling, as I grew up, a little embarrassed that because of me they could not talk, they could not be normal as everybody is. It was just the opposite situation….
It happens with children that you tell them, “Be silent because your father is thinking, your grandfather is resting. Be quiet, sit silently.” In my childhood it happened the opposite way. Now I cannot answer why and how; it simply happened. That’s why I said it simply happened – the credit does not go to me.
All those three old people were continuously making signs to each other: “Don’t disturb him – he is enjoying so much.” And they started loving my silence.
Silence has its vibe; it is infectious, particularly a child’s silence which is not forced, which is not because you are saying, “I will beat you if you create any nuisance or noise.” No, that is not silence. That will not create the joyous vibration that I am talking about, when a child is silent on his own, enjoying for no reason; his happiness is uncaused. That creates great ripples all around.
In a better world, every family will learn from children. You are in such a hurry to teach them. Nobody seems to learn from them, and they have much to teach you. And you have nothing to teach them.
Just because you are older and powerful you start making them just like you without ever thinking about what you are, where you have reached, what your status is in the inner world. You are a pauper; and you want the same for your child also?
But nobody thinks; otherwise people would learn from small children. Children bring so much from the other world because they are such fresh arrivals. They still carry the silence of the womb, the silence of the very existence.
So it was just a coincidence that for seven years I remained undisturbed – no Miss Judith Martin to nag me, to prepare me for the world of business, politics, diplomacy. My grandparents were more interested in leaving me as natural as possible – particularly my grandmother. She is one of the causes – these small things affect all your life patterns – she is one of the causes of my respect for the whole of womanhood.
She was a simple woman, uneducated, but immensely sensitive. She made it clear to my grandfather and the servant: “We all have lived a certain kind of life which has not led us anywhere. We are as empty as ever, and now death is coming close.” She insisted, “Let this child be uninfluenced by us. What influence can we…? We can only make him like us, and we are nothing. Give him an opportunity to be himself.”
My grandfather – I heard them discussing in the night, thinking that I was asleep – used to say to her, “You are telling me to do this, and I am doing it; but he is somebody else’s son, and sooner or later he will have to go to his parents. What will they say? – ‘You have not taught him any manners, any etiquette, he is absolutely wild.’“
She said, “Don’t be worried about that. In this whole world everybody is civilized, has manners, etiquette, but what is the gain? You are very civilized – what have you got out of it? At the most his parents will be angry at us. So what? – let them be angry. They can’t harm us, and by that time the child will be strong enough that they cannot change his life course.”
I am tremendously grateful to that old woman. My grandfather was again and again worried that sooner or later he was going to be responsible: “They will say, ‘We left our child with you and you have not taught him anything.’“
My grandmother did not even allow…because there was one man in the village who could at least teach me the beginnings of language, mathematics, a little geography. He was educated to the fourth grade – the lowest four; that is what was called primary education in India. But he was the most educated man in the town.
My grandfather tried hard: “He can come and he can teach him. At least he will know the alphabet, some mathematics, so when he goes to his parents they will not say that we just wasted seven years completely.”
But my grandmother said, “Let them do whatsoever they want to do after seven years. For seven years he has to be just his natural self, and we are not going to interfere.” And her argument was always, “You know the alphabet, so what? You know mathematics, so what? You have earned a little money; do you want him also to earn a little money and live just like you?”
That was enough to keep that old man silent. What to do? He was in a difficulty because he could not argue, and he knew that he would be held responsible, not she, because my father would ask him, “What have you done?” And actually that would have been the case, but fortunately he died before my father could ask.
But my father continuously was saying, “That old man is responsible, he has spoiled the child.” But now I was strong enough, and I made it clear to him: “Before me, never say a single word against my maternal grandfather. He has saved me from being spoiled by you – that is your real anger. But you have other children – spoil them. And at the final stage you will say who is spoiled.”
He had other children, and more and more children went on coming. I used to tease him, “You please bring one child more, make it a dozen. Eleven children? People ask, “How many children?” Eleven does not look right; one dozen is more impressive.”
And in later years I used to tell him, “You go on spoiling all your children; I am wild, and I will remain wild.”
What you see as innocence is nothing but wildness. What you see as clarity is nothing but wildness. Somehow I remained out of the grip of civilization.
And once I was strong enough…. And that’s why these people – Miss Judith Martin, and their kind – insist, “Take hold of the child as quickly as possible, don’t waste time because the earlier you take hold of the child, the easier it is. Once the child becomes strong enough, then to bend him according to your desires will be difficult.”
And life has seven-year circles. By the seventh year the child is perfectly strong; now you cannot do anything. Now he knows where to go, what to do. He is capable of arguing. He is capable of seeing what is right and what is wrong. And his clarity will be at the climax when he is seven. If you don’t disturb his earlier years, then at the seventh he is so crystal clear about everything that his whole life will be lived without any repentance.
I have lived without any repentance. I have tried to find: Have I done anything wrong, ever? Not that people have been thinking that all that I have done is right, that is not the point: I have never thought anything that I have done was wrong. The whole world may think it was wrong, but to me there is absolute certainty that it was right; it was the right thing to do.
So there is no question of repenting about the past. And when you don’t have to repent about the past you are free from it. The past keeps you entangled like an octopus because you go on feeling, “That thing I should not have done,” or, “That thing which I was supposed to do and did not do….” All those things go on pulling you backward.
I don’t see anything behind me, no past.
If I say something about my past, it is simply factual memory, it has no psychological involvement. I am telling you as if I am telling you about somebody else. It is just factual; it has nothing to do with my personal involvement. It might have occurred to somebody else, it might have happened to somebody else.
So remember, a factual memory is not enslaving. Psychological memory is, and psychological memory is made up of things that you think, or you have been conditioned to think, were wrong and you did them. Then there is a wound, a psychological wound. Things that were “right” and you have not done are another wound.
If you count your wounds you will be surprised how many things there are which you have done against the conscience that has been created in you by the society, and how many things you have not done – again which the conscience wanted you to do. And you are in a fix; between these two things you are caught. Your clarity is lost because of this psychological smoke which goes on deepening, thickening. Your clarity is lost; you become almost a blind man.
That’s why I say my kind of work is a very strange work; it is just like selling glasses in a city of blind people. First it is very difficult to convince them to purchase glasses. In the second place if they somehow – just to get rid of you – purchase glasses then they start torturing you because they say they cannot see through the glasses. They are blind, glasses won’t help them.
But what else can be said to you? If it is so difficult to convince you to wear glasses, you can understand how difficult it will be to make you agree to eye surgery – because in the first place you are not ready to believe that you are blind. Who says you are blind? But except surgery nothing can help. You have gone too far into blindness. You have lost your innocence and clarity too far back. To regain it, except for surgical methods nothing else can be of any help.
My sannyas is surgical. It cuts your very roots, which are making you blind. It cuts your relationship with tradition, convention, orthodoxy, society, civilization, culture. It makes you wild again. It brings you to the point from where your parents and your society and your culture started diverting you. My work just consists in taking away all that which has been given to you by others – with all the good intentions in the world but they were all blind people; their good intentions don’t make any sense. They were blind; with their good intentions they have made you blind.
All that has to be taken away. It will look almost like a death, because right now you think you are nothing but the combination of all that has been given to you: the education, the culture, the civilization, the religion. All that has to be completely cut off. And then you will find your small, still voice within you: the child will again speak.
To become a child again is to be a sannyasin – and then to start living. Now nobody can disturb you; you are a strong enough. If you can find your child, you can protect the child. That child is yourself. That’s what you had brought from existence. And once you have recovered it, reclaimed it, you are the blessed one. There is nothing more valuable than that.
With that rediscovery you start living a new life. I call that the life of the rebel but basically it is life – very innocent, clear, individual, independent. You will not become world famous, you will not become great conquerors, but you will become exactly what you need to become: your own being. This is religion to me; everything else is pseudo. Destroy all pseudo-ness in you.
It is risky. That’s why I say the life of a sannyasin is the most dangerous life in the world, but the most exciting too. And anything that does not lead ultimately to ecstasy is not worth calling exciting.

============================================================

Osho,
What is the right way to help a child grow without interfering in his natural potential?
Every way of helping a child is wrong. The very idea of helping is not right.
The child needs your love, not your help. The child needs nourishment, support, but not your help.
The natural potential of the child is unknown, so there is no way of correctly helping him to attain to his natural potential. You cannot help when the goal is unknown; all that you can do is not to interfere. In fact, everybody is interfering with everybody else in the name of help; and because the name is beautiful, nobody objects. Of course, the child is so small, so dependent on you, that he cannot object.
The people all around are just like you: they have also been helped by their parents, the way you have been. Neither they have attained to their natural potential, nor have you. The whole world is missing out in spite of all the help from the parents, from the family, from the relatives, from the neighbors, from the teachers, from the priests. In fact, everybody is so burdened with help that under its weight… What to say of attaining one’s natural potential – one cannot even attain unnatural potential! One cannot move; the weight on everybody’s shoulders is Himalayan.
And not interfering is one of the most difficult things. It is not the nature of the mind. Mind is basically continuously, persistently, tempted to interfere. It lives on interference. The more you can interfere, the more powerful you are.
How do you measure power? It is not something material, you cannot weigh it – but it is measured, weighed. The way to measure it is by how much you can interfere in how many people’s lives. Adolph Hitler is powerful because he can interfere in millions of people’s lives. You are not Adolph Hitler, but still you can interfere in a few people’s lives…a little, miniature Adolph Hitler.
At least the husband can interfere in the wife’s life; the wife can interfere in the husband’s life. It is a mutual game; in this way, both become powerful. The husband goes on interfering in his own way, the wife goes on interfering in her own way, without being aware why they are interfering. They were supposed to be together to enhance each other’s life but…
The husband will come home late every day – not that it is essential to come home late, but it is a question of power, ego: if he comes home on time that means he has surrendered. I know husbands who go on sitting in their office doing nothing, gossiping, knowing perfectly well that their wives will be boiling. They could reach home in time, but that’s what she wants. Just because she wants it, it is impossible for the man, against his manliness, to be on time; he will come late. And the same scene is repeated every day.
Nor is the wife ready to drop asking him why he is late, knowing perfectly well that whatsoever he says is a lie. She knows it is a lie, he knows that she knows that it is a lie – and it is a lie, but it is a good beginning to a fight, a good start, a good excuse. And then the wife goes on doing the same…

I was sitting with a husband in his car, and he was honking his horn because he was worried; he had to take me to a particular meeting and I had to be there on time. I don’t like wasting people’s time; I am not a political leader. A political leader is supposed to come late. Again, the same power – you have to wait. He is not just a nobody; he is so occupied, so busy, that he is bound to be late.
I have known political leaders who were just sitting and gossiping, and I have said to them, “We have to go to your meeting.”
They said, “You don’t understand. A politician should not arrive on time. That means he is just a small fry, not a big shot.”
I am not a politician. I am neither a big shot, nor a small fry. I am just a human being, neither anything more nor anything less. I have been particular about arriving in time.
So the husband was worried. His wife leant out of the window and said, “Stop honking your horn! I have told you one thousand times that I am coming in one minute.”
I looked at the husband and said, “This is something, ‘one thousand times’ and ‘I am coming in one minute’! Where did she get the time to say it one thousand times in one minute?”

But it is a power trip. The wife wants it to be known who the boss is. You can go on honking the horn, but without the boss coming down, the car cannot move.
I have a certain rapport with women, so whomsoever I was staying with, soon I became very close to their mothers, to their wives, sisters. And I asked, “What is the matter? Every day it happens; the poor man goes on honking.”
They would say, “Nothing is the matter. We are not busy, but he goes on coming home late every day and pays no attention to what we are saying. So whenever we have the chance… It is simple give and take.”
All the people around you have been helped, greatly helped, to be what they are. You have been helped; now you want to help your children too.
All that you can do is be loving, be nourishing, be warm, be accepting. The child brings an unknown potential and there is no way to figure out what he is going to be. So no procedure can be suggested: “This way you should help the child.” Each child is unique so there cannot be a general discipline for every child.
People like Miss Judith Martin are suggesting measures for every child, as if children are produced on an assembly line in a factory. No two children are the same. How can you suggest, how can you even have the nerve to suggest a generalized program that should be followed?
But Miss Judith Martin…. I don’t know how many times she has become “Miss.” I think certainly at least a dozen times because no husband could survive her; he will either escape or commit suicide, but he will have to do something to make her a Miss again. And she must now be very old.
Perhaps when she finally became famous and the most well-known authority on child rearing, nobody dared to marry her again, because do you think such a woman, who has no compassion on children, will have any compassion on husbands? She will train them exactly the way animals are trained in a circus. She will make them dance to her tune; and her being a world-famous authority, what can the poor husband do except dance?
This kind of person has existed down the ages around the world, everywhere. They have prescriptions, recipes, disciplines for everybody, not only for their contemporaries but for all future generations, as to what is right. They are so idiotic – although they are known as great sages who have given you religions, disciplines, moralities, ethics, codes of conduct: great lawgivers. But I say to you again, these people are idiots. Only an idiot can think in a generalized way when human beings are concerned.
There is no average human being; you will never come across the average man. And all these authorities are concerned with the average man, who does not exist! The average man is just like God – omnipresent, yet you cannot find him anywhere. God is so omnipresent that…
I have heard about a nun…

The whole nunnery became concerned about the nun: “Is she sick or something?” She was taking her bath with her clothes on! The bathroom door was closed…
And when they asked, “What is the matter? Why don’t you undress when the doors are closed and nobody is there?” she said, “Nobody? God is omnipresent. Yes, none of you, but God is there, and to undress before God does not look right.”

They must all have thought her a crackpot, but she really, literally had accepted the idea of the omnipresence of God.
The average man is exactly like the omnipresent God: he exists nowhere and is supposed to exist everywhere. All principles are addressed to the average man.
You ask me how to help the child in the right way. The right way is not to help the child at all. If you have real courage, then please don’t help the child.
Love him, nourish him. Let him do what he wants to do. Let him go where he wants to go. Your mind will be tempted again and again to interfere, and with good excuses. The mind is very clever in rationalizing: “If you don’t interfere, there may be danger; he may fall into the well if you don’t stop him.” But I say to you, it is better to let him fall into a well than to help him and destroy him.
It is very rare that a child falls into a well – and then too, it does not mean death; he can be taken out. And if you are really so concerned, the well can be covered; but don’t help the child and don’t interfere with the child. The well can be removed, but don’t interfere with the child. Your real concern should be to remove all dangers, but don’t interfere with the child; let him go his own way.
You will have to understand some significant growth patterns. Life has seven-year cycles, it moves in seven-year cycles, just as the earth makes one rotation on its center in twenty-four hours. Now, nobody knows why it is not twenty-five, why it is not twenty-three. There is no way to answer it; it is simply a fact.
The earth takes three hundred and sixty-five days to make one round of the sun. Why three hundred and sixty-five? Nobody knows, nobody needs to know. And it does not make any difference. If it were taking four hundred days, what difference would it have made to you? Or three hundred days…? The question would have remained the same: Why?
So remember one thing: any question is absurd if, with every answer, the question still remains the same. In twenty-four hours the earth makes one turn on its center. Why? Make it twenty-five, make it twenty-six, make it thirty, sixty – as much as you want – the question still stands the same: Why? Hence I call the question absurd; it will always remain the same.
So don’t ask me why life moves in seven-year cycles. I don’t know. This much I know: it moves in seven-year cycles. And if you understand those seven-year cycles, you will understand a great deal about human growth.
The first seven years are the most important because the foundation of life is being laid. That’s why all the religions are very much concerned about grabbing children as quickly as possible.
The Jews will circumcise the child. What nonsense! But they are stamping the child as a Jew; it is a primitive way of stamping. You still do it on the cattle around here; I have seen the brands. Every owner brands his cattle, otherwise they can get mixed up. It is a cruel thing. Red-hot steel has to be used to brand the cattle’s leather, skin; it burns. But then it becomes your possession; it cannot be lost, it cannot be stolen.
What is circumcision? It is branding cattle. But those cattle are Jews. Hindus have their own ways. All religions have their own ways. But it should be known whose you are, who your shepherd is – Jesus? Moses? Mohammed? You are not your own master.
Those first seven years are the years when you are conditioned, stuffed with all kinds of ideas which will go on haunting you your whole life, which will go on distracting you from your potentiality, which will corrupt you, which will never allow you to see clearly. They will always come like clouds before your eyes, they will confuse everything.
Things are clear, very clear – existence is absolutely clear – but your eyes have layers upon layers of dust. And all that dust has been arranged in the first seven years of your life, when you were so innocent, so trusting, that whatsoever you were told, you accepted as truth. Later on, it will be very difficult for you to find whatsoever has gone into your foundation: it has become almost part of your blood, bones, your very marrow. You will ask a thousand other questions, but you will never ask about the basic foundations of your belief.
The first expression of love toward the child is to leave his first seven years absolutely innocent, unconditioned, to leave him completely wild for seven years, a pagan.
He should not be converted to Hinduism, to Mohammedanism, to Christianity. Anybody who is trying to convert the child is not compassionate, he is cruel: he is contaminating the very soul of a new, fresh arrival. Before the child has even asked questions, he has been answered with ready-made philosophies, dogmas, ideologies. This is a very strange situation. The child has not asked about God, and you go on teaching him about God. Why so much impatience? Wait!
If the child someday shows interest in God and starts asking about God, then try to tell him not only your idea of God – because nobody has any monopoly. Put before him all the ideas of God that have been presented to different people by different ages, by different religions, cultures, civilizations.
Put before him all the ideas about God and tell him, “You can choose between these, whichever appeals to you. Or if nothing suits, you can invent your own. If everything seems to be flawed, and you think you can have a better idea, then invent your own. Or if you find that there is no way to invent an idea without loopholes, then drop the whole thing; there is no need. A man can live without God; there is no intrinsic necessity: Millions of people have lived without God. God is nothing that is inevitably needed by you. Yes, I have my idea; that too is in the combination of all these ideals in this collection. You can choose that, but I am not saying that my idea is the right idea. It appeals to me; it may not appeal to you.”
There is no inner necessity that a son should agree with his father. In fact, it seems far better that he should not. That’s how evolution happens. If every child agrees with his father, then there will be no evolution because the father will agree with his father… Everybody will be where God left Adam and Eve – naked, outside the gate of the Garden of Eden. Everybody will be there.
Because sons have disagreed with their fathers, forefathers, with their whole tradition, man has evolved. This whole evolution is a tremendous disagreement with the past. The more intelligent you are, the more you are going to disagree. But parents appreciate the child who agrees; they condemn the child who disagrees…

It was the practice in my family to produce me in front of anybody who came, to condemn me. Any visitor, any guest of the family and I would be called. I knew for what, but I enjoyed it. I was called to be condemned: “This boy is in disagreement with everything.” In Hindi there is a phrase for it: ulti chopri – it means upside-down skull. So that was the phrase used for me.
I said, “It is true, but the reality is, I look upside down to all these people because they are standing on their heads. They are doing yoga asanas, shirshasana – the headstand posture. I am simply standing on my feet. I am the only one here who does not believe in any kind of nonsense. They are right because to them it must appear that I am standing upside down. And they are in the majority – perhaps you also belong to them.
“But this is the usual procedure: they don’t answer my questions, they only condemn my disagreement. Now this is inhuman. If you answer my question, and I still disagree, then certainly I am stubborn. But have you answered a single question of mine? Have you satisfied me? Have you any right to condemn me because I disagree?”
In India, at the end of the monsoon there is a festival of lights, Diwali, when the whole country becomes very festive and every house has thousands of small earthen lamps decorating the walls, the balconies. The whole town becomes a fairyland; the whole country turns into a fairyland, with firecrackers and great rejoicing. On that day they worship money.
The goddess of money is Laxmi. Laxmi is the wife of the Hindu god, Narayana, and of course a god’s wife should be the goddess of wealth. In fact, one of the Indian words for god, ishwar, means “one who has all the wealth of the world.” Narayana’s wife is the goddess of wealth. And on the night of the festival of lights, they worship money.
Before paper currency came into being, they used to make a pile of silver rupees and worship them. Now they place paper money there and worship it. Before silver rupees, there were golden rupees. The word rupee simply means gold; it comes from Sanskrit. It is an Indian word… In the beginning, the coin was gold, pure gold, so the word rupia, which became in English, rupee, was meaningful.
They used to worship gold, then came silver, then came paper currency. And they continued: the question was of worshipping money. I never participated in their worship. I simply hated the whole idea and told them, “This is one of the ugliest things you can do. Money is something to be used, not worshipped. On the one hand, your religions teach that money is nothing but dust. On the one hand it is dust and on the other hand it becomes a goddess. Can’t you see your split mind?
“On the one hand, you praise a man as a sage if he renounces money; then he becomes synonymous with God because he has renounced money and everything. And on the other hand, you worship money. Can you in some way help me to understand? Is this not a clear-cut contradiction?
“If money is God’s wife, then in the first place the person who renounces God’s wife is a criminal. In the first place, why did he possess God’s wife? That seems to be absolutely illegal. He should be caught and imprisoned. In the first place, was he pretending to be God’s wife’s husband?”
My father would say, “Just keep quiet; at least let us finish our worship.”
I would say, “No, first I want my answer.”
I had a big stool in the house – they used it as a ladder for taking things up or down – so in the main hall of the house, or wherever they were worshipping, I would sit on that stool. And they would say, “Please at least come down from that stool.”
I said, “No, I want my answer. I see so much stupidity in this because I have seen you touching people’s feet who have renounced money. You tell me that the man is great, a sage: he has kicked all that is thought to be valuable and that needs courage and guts. But what are you doing? If that man is right to renounce money, then at least stop worshipping it. And you have to answer me; otherwise my disagreement continues.”
My mother would say to me, “You should be out of the house on such festival days because you don’t know… If the goddess Laxmi becomes angry, we will all starve, be hungry and die poor.”
I said, “I have been sitting on my stool year after year. I don’t see that your goddess can do anything. If she can, I challenge her – let her come because at least that will give me an answer.” When they were finished with their worship, I would go and kick their rupees, spit on the rupees and say, “Now this is what I wanted to do; now let us see who is rewarded.” They could not prevent me, although they tried hard.
I said, “You cannot prevent me. I will do what I want to do, unless you prove me wrong. You call me in front of everybody, saying that I am in disagreement about everything. I have to be in disagreement about everything, for the simple reason that you go on doing things that any intelligent person would see the contradiction in.”
For example, in India, if somebody has smallpox it is not thought to be a physical disease. Smallpox is called in India, mata; mata means “mother goddess.” And in every town there is a temple for the mother goddess: “The mother goddess is angry, that’s why poor little children are suffering from smallpox.”
People like Mahatma Gandhi were against vaccination because it was unnatural. Smallpox is natural… It destroys so many beautiful children’s faces, their eyes, and it kills many. The prophet of nonviolence was against vaccination because he was against anything scientific – and moreover it was thought the disease is not a physiological disease, that it is spiritual anger.
One of my sisters died of smallpox, and I was very angry because I loved that sister more than any of my other brothers or my sisters. I told them, “You have killed her. I told you that she needed vaccination.
“I have suffered from smallpox, but at that time I could not say anything to you. I don’t even remember it, it happened in my first year. And every child suffers. When this girl was born, I insisted that she should be vaccinated. But you are all followers of Mahatma Gandhi: ‘Vaccination is against nature and to prevent… The anger of the mother goddess will be dangerous. It will come in some other form.’”
When the girl became sick with smallpox, they were doing both things: they were taking medicine from the doctor and they were continuously going to worship the mother goddess.
I said, “Please do just one thing at least; either take the medicine, or go and worship your mother. But you are being cunning; you are even deceiving the mother goddess. I am honest, I spit on your mother goddess every day” – I used to go to the river and the temple was just on the way, so there was no difficulty: coming and going I would spit.
And I said, “Whatsoever you do… It is strange: I am spitting, so I should suffer. Why should she suffer? And I cannot understand that the mother goddess becomes angry and small children suffer. They have not committed any crime; they have just arrived, have not had time enough to do anything, nor are they capable of doing anything. Others should suffer, but are not.
“And you call her ‘mother goddess’! You should call her a witch because what kind of mother makes small children suffer? And you are being cunning. You are also not certain; otherwise don’t use the medicine. Throw away all the medicines; depend completely on your mother goddess. There too you are afraid. You are trying to ride on two horses. This is sheer stupidity. Either depend on the mother and let the girl die, or depend on the medicine and forget about that mother.”
They would say, “We can understand that there is a contradiction, but please don’t bring it to our notice because it hurts.”
I said, “Do you think it hurts only you, and it does not hurt me seeing my parents being stupid, silly? It does not hurt me? It hurts me more. There is still time, you can change; but instead, you are trying to change me and you call it help. You think that I am going to be lost without your help. Please let me be lost. At least I will have the satisfaction that nobody else is responsible for my being lost. It is my own doing. I will be proud of it.”

If a child can be left innocent, uncorrupted by the ideas of others up to seven years old, then to distract him from his potential growth becomes impossible. The child’s first seven years are the most vulnerable and they are in the hands of the parents, teachers, and priests.
How to save the children from the parents, priests, teachers, is a question of such enormous proportion that it seems almost impossible to find an answer. It is not a question of helping the child. It is a question of protecting him.
If you have a child, protect the child from yourself. Protect the child from others who can influence him; protect him at least up to the age of seven. The child is just like a small plant, weak, soft: just a strong wind can destroy the plant, any animal can eat it. Put a protective fence around it, that is not imprisoning, you are simply protecting. When the plant is bigger, the fence will be removed.
Protect the child from every kind of influence, so that he can remain himself – and it is only a question of seven years because then the first cycle will be complete. By seven years of age he will be well-grounded, centered, and strong enough.
You don’t know how strong a seven-year-old child can be because you have not seen uncorrupted children; you have seen only corrupted ones. They carry the fears, the cowardliness, of their fathers, mothers, their families. They are not themselves.
You would be surprised to meet a child who has remained uncorrupted for seven years. He would be as sharp as a sword. His eyes would be clear, his insight would be clear. And you would see a tremendous strength in him which you cannot find even in a seventy-year-old adult because the foundations are shaky. In fact, as the building goes on becoming higher and higher, the shakier and shakier it becomes. So you will see that the older a person becomes, the more afraid he is. When he is young, he may be an atheist; when he becomes old, he starts believing in God. Why is that?
When he is below thirty he is a hippie. He has the courage to go against society, to behave in his own way: to have long hair, to have a beard, to roam around the world, to take all kinds of risks. But by the time he is forty, all that has disappeared. You will see him in an office in a gray suit, clean shaven, well groomed. You will not even be able to recognize that he is an ex-hippie.
Where have all the hippies disappeared to? You had seen them with a great force; then, just like used bullet cases, empty cartridges, impotent, defeated, depressed – trying to make something out of their lives, feeling that all those years of hippiedom were a wastage… Others have gone far ahead in life: somebody has become the president, somebody has become the governor, “We were stupid; we were just playing the guitar and the whole world passed us by.” They repent.
It is really difficult to find an old hippie. I have found just one: Bapuji, Sheela’s father. He will die a hippie. At his age – he must be near about seventy – he was living with hippies in northern New York State. Some photographer took a photograph of him; he was sitting naked on a hill with snow and ice all around. Somebody took a photo of him sitting there naked and the photos have come to me. People think Bapuji is me!
It is printed now… He looks really beautiful – naked, sitting on the top of the hill. The sun is rising, and all around there is snow; he looks really beautiful. Many people who have seen that photo – it is a postcard now – send it to me saying, “Osho, it was a surprise to find you sitting there.”
I told Sheela, “Tell Bapuji, ‘Don’t do such things because nobody knows you...’” But he will die a hippie.
He brought all his children to me, which no father has done except him. It was he who brought Sheela to me – forcibly because she was not interested. But he is not a man to listen to anybody. He said, “You have to go once; I will not ask you to go twice, then it is your business. But I have to force you to go once because you don’t know what you are refusing. Forgive me for forcing you, but I have to do it once.”
By and by, he brought all his children and almost all are now sannyasins. Once Sheela came, she never left me. He asked Sheela, teased her, “Now what about going back to America?” She had come from America.
She said, “I am not going anywhere.”
“But,” Bapuji said, “I had brought you just to meet him, not to stay.”
Sheela said, “But I have to be at the place I have been searching for.”
He said, “I am happy I have brought you to the right place: now I am freed of my responsibility. Now whatsoever becomes of you will be right.”
If you are a parent, you will need enough courage not to interfere. Open doors of unknown directions to the child, so he can explore. He does not know what he has in him, nobody knows. He has to grope in the dark. Don’t make him afraid of darkness, don’t make him afraid of failure, don’t make him afraid of the unknown. Give him support. When he is going on an unknown journey, send him on with all your support, with all your love, with all your blessings.
Don’t let him be affected by your fears. You may have fears, but keep them to yourself. Don’t unload those fears on the child because that will be interfering.
After seven years, the next cycle of seven years, from seven to fourteen, is a new addition to life: the child’s first stirring of sexual energies. But they are only a kind of rehearsal.
To be a parent is a difficult job, so unless you are ready to take that difficult job, don’t become a parent. People simply go on becoming fathers and mothers, not knowing what they are doing. You are bringing a life into existence; all the care in the world will be needed.
Now, when the child starts playing his sexual rehearsals is the time when parents interfere the most. It is because they have been interfered with. All that they know is what has been done to them, so they simply go on doing that to their children.
Societies don’t allow any sexual rehearsal, at least have not allowed it up to this century – only within the last two, three decades, and that too only in very advanced countries. Now children are having co-education. But in a country like India, even now co-education starts only at the university level.
The seven-year-old boy and the seven-year-old girl cannot stay in the same place. And this is the time for them – without any risk, without the girl getting pregnant, without any problems arising for their families – this is the time when they should be allowed playfulness.
Yes, it will have a sexual color to it, but it is a rehearsal; it is not the real drama. If you don’t even allow them a rehearsal and then suddenly one day the curtain opens, and the real drama starts… Those people don’t know what is going on; even a prompter is not there to tell them what to do. You have messed up their life completely.
Those seven years, the second cycle in life, is significant as a rehearsal. They will meet, mix, play, become acquainted. And that will help humanity to drop almost ninety percent of perversions. If the children are allowed to be together from seven to fourteen; to swim together – to be naked before each other – ninety percent of perversions and ninety percent of pornography will simply disappear. Who will bother about it?
When a boy has known so many girls naked, what interest can a magazine like Playboy have for him? When a girl has seen so many boys naked, I don’t see that there is any possibility of curiosity about the other; it will simply disappear. They will grow together naturally, not as two different species of animals. Right now they grow as two different species of animals. They don’t belong to one mankind; they are kept separate. A thousand and one barriers are created between them, so they cannot have any rehearsal of the sexual life which is going to come.
Because the rehearsal is missing, foreplay is missing in the actual sex; and foreplay is so important – far more important than actual sexual contact. Actual sexual contact lasts only for seconds; it is not nourishment. It simply leaves you in limbo. You were hoping for so much, and nothing comes out of it.
In Hindi we have a proverb: “Kheela pahad nikli chuhia. You dug out the whole mountain and you found one rat.’ After all the effort – going to the movies and going to the disco and going to the restaurant, and talking all kinds of nonsense which neither you want nor the other wants to do, but both are talking – digging the mountain, and in the end, just a rat! Nothing is as frustrating as sex.
Just the other day, Vivek brought me an advertisement about a new car, the Lagonda; in the advertisement they had a beautiful sentence that I liked. It is: “It is better than sex.” I don’t care about the car – the advertisement is beautiful. Certainly if you look around you, you will find a thousand and one things better than sex. Sex is just a rat! And that too after so much huffing and puffing, so much perspiration… In the end, both feel cheated.
The reason is that you don’t know the art of sex; you know only the middle point. It is as if you see just a few seconds in the middle of a film. Naturally you can’t make any sense of it; the beginning is missing, the end is missing. Perhaps you simply saw the interval, where there was nothing!
Man feels ashamed after sex; he turns over and goes to sleep. He simply cannot face the woman. He turns on his side and goes to sleep because he feels ashamed. The woman weeps and cries because this was not what she was hoping for: “This is all? Then what is this whole drama all about?” But the reason is that the rehearsal part of your life has been canceled by society. You don’t know what foreplay is.
Foreplay is really the most satisfying part in sex. Foreplay is more loving. Sex is simply a biological climax, but the climax of what? You have missed everything that could have made it a climax. Do you think you suddenly reach the climax, missing all the rungs of the ladder? You have to move up the ladder, rung by rung, only then can you reach a climax. Everybody wants just the climax.
Now the foolish psychoanalysts and their kind have put the idea of orgasm in people’s minds. Orgasm is an even higher stage than climax; it needs much more than climax. People are missing the climax – their sexual life is nothing but a kind of relief. Yes, for a moment you feel relieved of a burden, just like a good sneeze. How good it feels afterward! But for how long? How long can you feel good after a sneeze? For how many seconds, how many minutes, can you brag: “I had such a sneeze, it was great.” As the sneeze is gone, with it goes all the joy too.
It was simply something bothering you. You are finished with the botheration and there is a little relaxation. That’s the sexual life of most people in the world. Some energy was bothering you, bothering you, making you heavy; it was turning into a headache. Sex gives you relief.
But the way children are brought up almost butchers their whole life. Those seven years of sexual rehearsal are absolutely essential. Girls and boys should be together in schools, in hostels, in swimming pools, and in beds. They should rehearse for the life which is going to come; they have to get ready for it. There is no danger, no problem, if a child is given total freedom about his growing sexual energy and is not condemned, repressed – which is being done…
You are living in a very strange world. You are born of sex, you will live for sex, your children will be born out of sex – and sex is the most condemned thing, the greatest sin. All the religions go on putting this crap in your mind: they have made you almost into brown bags.
Only in New Jersey did I come to know what brown bags are. Strange… I don’t know whether it happens all over America, or only in New Jersey, because I have not seen anywhere else, only New Jersey. When I used to go to drive in the morning in New Jersey, everybody was coming out with a brown bag full of crap, putting it by the side of the road.
I inquired, “What is the matter? Couldn’t they have found any other color? A brown bag?” But then I thought perhaps that’s exactly right. Most of the people are simply brown bags. Never open anybody.

In my childhood, India became independent…. When India was under British rule, the British government had left some Indian states. India was in two separate sections; only one was under British rule. There were small pockets of Indian states all over India, which were still ruled by Indian kings. They were under the British government – their foreign policy was ruled by the British government – but otherwise in their internal policy they were completely free.
When the British left India, they left it in a mess, in a real mess. First, they divided it into India and Pakistan; second, they left the Indian states absolutely in a limbo, without making any decisions about them. The idea was to create a chaos – and they had already created a chaos because there were so many Indian states. Now the question was, were they independent nations? Were they part of India and would their foreign policy be ruled by India, or were they part of Pakistan and their foreign policy ruled by Pakistan?
Nothing was decided, the whole question was undecided. Those Indian states constituted almost half of India. The trouble was more complicated because in some Indian states, the major population was Hindu and the king was Mohammedan; in other Indian states, the major population was Mohammedan and the king was Hindu. Kashmir was ninety percent Mohammedan, but the king was Hindu. Hyderabad was ninety percent Hindu, but the king was Mohammedan.
Just close to my town, beyond the river, was a small state, Bhopal. The king was Mohammedan, the population was Hindu, so there were riots everywhere because the population wanted the state to merge with India, and the king wanted to merge it with Pakistan because he was Mohammedan. But it was in the middle of India so it was not easy to merge with Pakistan. There was a great fight between the king’s forces and the population, and we were just on the other side of the river. From that side we could see people being killed on the other side.
We caught hold of four corpses, people who had been killed by the forces of the king; they must have somehow fallen in the river and, as they came over to our side, we caught hold of them. Naturally, I had to persuade people, “This is not good. They have been fighting for the freedom of the country; they wanted the country to merge into India – you should not leave them like that.”
They wanted to throw them back into the river and be finished: who could be bothered with them? But somehow I gathered a few young people and then a few old people felt ashamed, so they came.
But first, before we could do anything, they had to have postmortems, so we took them to the hospital. The place was almost two furlongs away, behind the hospital, in the jungle. One can understand: they were cutting up bodies, the smell and everything… So they had made the place far away outside the city. We had to carry those corpses.
That was the first time I saw a brown bag open. The doctor was the father of one of my friends so he allowed me in. He said, “You can see how man looks inside,” and he opened the bodies. It was really shocking to see how a man looks inside. And this was only the body: later on I saw the postmortem of the mind also. Compared to that, the poor body is nothing. Your mind is so rich in crap…
That day something happened that I have to tell you about, although it is not concerned with what I was going to tell you – but it must be concerned in some way, otherwise why should I remember it?
When we were carrying the bodies out after they had the postmortem… They had put them together again and covered them. One of the leaders of my town, Shri Nath Batt, had always felt as if I was his enemy, for the simple reason that I was a friend of his son and he thought I was corrupting him – in a way he was right. By chance it happened that we were carrying a corpse together; I was ahead, holding the poles at the front of the stretcher and Shri Nath Batt was behind me holding the other end of the poles.
The head of the dead man was at my end and the legs at his end. I had just read somewhere that when a man dies, of course he loses all control – control over the bladder too, so if you put his head upward and his legs downward… I thought “This is a good chance to see whether that idea is right or wrong,” so I just raised the poles. And you should have seen what happened – the corpse pissed and Shri Nath Batt ran away!
We could not persuade him to come back. He said, “I cannot. Have you ever heard of a dead man pissing? It is a ghost!”
I told him, “You are a leader.”
He said, “To hell with the leader! I don’t want to be the leader if this is the kind of work I have to do. And I’ve always known you – from the very beginning. Why did you raise the poles?”
I said, “I don’t know, it must have been the ghost. I suddenly felt like somebody was lifting up my hands; I am not at all responsible.” I had to drag that body alone, for two furlongs.
Shri Nath Batt was in the town telling everybody, “This boy is going to kill somebody someday. Today I was saved just by God’s grace. That ghost just pissed over me, on my clothes. And he persuaded me: ‘You have to come because you are the leader; otherwise what will people think? A leader missing in times of need? Then remember, at voting time I will not be of any help.’ So I went, but I never thought that he would do such a thing to me.”

People all around the world are really brown bags, full of everything rotten that you can conceive, for the simple reason that they have not been allowed to behave in a natural way. They have not been allowed to accept themselves. They have all become ghosts. They are not authentically real people, they are just shadows of someone they could have been; they are just shadows.
The second cycle of seven years is immensely important because it will prepare you for the coming seven years. If you have done the homework rightly, if you have played with your sexual energy just in the spirit of a sportsman – and at that time, that is the only spirit you will have – you will not become a pervert, a homosexual.
All kinds of strange things will not come to your mind because you are moving naturally with the other sex, the other sex is moving with you; there is no hindrance and you are not doing anything wrong against anybody. Your conscience is clear because nobody has put into your conscience ideas of what is right and what is wrong: you are simply being whatever you are.
Then from fourteen to twenty-one your sex matures. And this is significant to understand: if the rehearsal has gone well, in the seven years when your sex matures, a very strange thing happens that you may never have thought of because you have not been given the chance. I said to you that the second seven years, from seven to fourteen, give you a glimpse of foreplay. The third seven years give you a glimpse of afterplay. You are still together with girls or boys, but now a new phase starts in your being: you start falling in love.
It is still not a biological interest. You are not interested in producing children; you are not interested in becoming husbands and wives, no. These are the years of romantic play. You are more interested in beauty, in love, in poetry, in sculpture – which are all different phases of romanticism. And unless a man has some romantic quality, he will never know what afterplay is. Sex is just in the middle.
The longer the foreplay, the better is the possibility of reaching a climax; the better the possibility of reaching the climax, the better the opening for afterplay. And unless a couple knows afterplay, they will never know sex in its completion.
Now there are sexologists who are teaching foreplay. A taught foreplay is not the real thing, but they are teaching it – at least they have recognized the fact that without foreplay sex cannot reach to a climax. But they are at a loss how to teach afterplay because when a person has reached a climax he is no longer interested: he is finished, the job is done. For that it needs a romantic mind, a poetic mind, a mind that knows how to be thankful, how to be grateful.
The person, the woman or the man who has brought you to such a climax, needs some gratitude – afterplay is your gratitude. And unless there is afterplay, it simply means your sex is incomplete; and incomplete sex is the cause of all the troubles that man goes through.
Sex can become orgasmic only when afterplay and foreplay are completely balanced. The climax turns into an orgasm just in their balance. The word orgasm has to be understood. It means that your whole being – body, mind, soul, everything – becomes involved, organically involved.
Then it becomes a moment of meditation.
To me, if your sex does not become finally a moment of meditation, you have not known what sex is. You have only heard about it, you have read about it; and the people who have been writing about it know nothing about it. I have read hundreds of books on sexology by people who are thought to be great experts, and they are experts, but they know nothing about the innermost shrine where meditation blossoms.
Just as children are born by ordinary sex, meditation is born by extraordinary sex.
Animals can produce children; there is nothing special about it. It is only man who can produce the experience of meditation as the center of his orgasmic feeling. This is possible only if from fourteen to twenty-one young people are allowed to have romantic freedom.
From twenty-one to twenty-eight is the time that they can settle. They can choose a partner. And then they are capable of choosing one; through all the experience of the past two cycles, they can choose the right partner. There is nobody else who can do it for you. It is something that is more like a hunch – not arithmetic, not astrology, not palmistry, not I-Ching; nothing else is going to do.
It is a hunch: coming into contact with many, many people, suddenly something clicks which had never clicked with anybody else. And it clicks with such certainty and so absolutely that you cannot even doubt it. Even if you try to doubt it, you cannot; the certainty is so tremendous. With this click, you settle.
Somewhere between twenty-one and twenty-eight, if everything goes smoothly the way I am saying, without interference from others, then you settle. And the most pleasant period of life comes from twenty-eight to thirty-five – the most joyous, the most peaceful and harmonious because two people start melting and merging into each other.
From thirty-five to forty-two, a new step, a new door opens. If up to thirty-five you have felt deep harmony, an orgasmic feeling, and you have discovered meditation through it, then from thirty-five to forty-two you will help each other go more and more into that meditation without sex, because sex at this point starts looking childish, juvenile.
Forty-two is the right time for a person to be able to know exactly who he is. From forty-two to forty-nine he goes deeper and deeper into meditation, more and more into himself, and helps the partner in the same way. They become friends. There is no more husband and there is no more wife; that time has passed. It has given its richness to your life; now there is something higher, higher than love.
That is friendliness, a compassionate relationship to help the other to go deeper into himself, to become more independent, to become more alone – just like two tall trees standing separate but still close to each other, or two pillars in a temple supporting the same roof – standing so close, but so separate and so independent and so alone.
From forty-nine to fifty-six this aloneness becomes your focus of being. Everything in the world loses meaning. The only thing meaningful that remains is this aloneness.
From fifty-six to sixty-three you become absolutely what you are going to become: the potential blossoms.
From sixty-three to seventy you start getting ready to drop the body. Now you know you are not the body, you know you are not the mind either. The body was known as separate from you somewhere when you were thirty-five. That the mind is separate from you was known somewhere when you were forty-nine. Now, everything else drops except the witnessing self. Just the pure awareness, the flame of awareness remains with you, and this is the preparation for death.
Seventy is the natural life span for man. And if things move in this natural course, then he dies with tremendous joy, with great ecstasy, feeling immensely blessed that his life has not been meaningless, that at least he has found his home. And because of this richness, this fulfillment, he is capable of blessing the whole existence.
Just to be near such a person when he is dying is a great opportunity. You will feel, as he leaves his body, some invisible flowers falling upon you. Although you cannot see them, you can feel them.
It has always been a great moment in the lives of disciples when the master leaves the body. And it is possible because the master can know when he is going to leave the body – he can collect all those who have been his fellow travelers, searching, moving in the same way. Now that he is leaving, he would like to give you his last gift. As the master opens his wings toward the other world, you will feel the breeze which is incomparable. There is nothing in life to which it can be compared.
It is sheer joy, so pure that even to have a little taste of it is enough to transform your whole life.

============================================================

Osho,
Would you please comment on the death penalty?
The death penalty is a degrading proof of man’s inhumanity to man. It shows that man is still living in the barbarous age. Civilization still remains an idea – it has not become a reality.
The death penalty is so idiotic that you will have to look from all the aspects to understand why such an idiotic thing has continued in all the civilizations, cultures, nations. Even in a few countries where it was dropped it has been adopted again. In a few other countries where it has been dropped, it has been replaced by life imprisonment – which is worse than the death penalty itself. It is better to die in a single moment than to go on dying slowly for fifty years, sixty years.
Changing from the death penalty to a life sentence is going not toward civilization, it is going still deeper into barbarous, inhuman darkness, unconsciousness.
The first thing to remember is that the death penalty is not really a punishment. If you cannot give life as a reward, you cannot give death as a penalty. This is a simple logic, there cannot be two opinions about it. If you cannot give life to people, what right have you to take their life?
I am reminded of a true story. It happened that two criminals were in search of a treasure that was hidden in a castle. Many people had tried but had not found the way; somehow these criminals stumbled upon the treasure. The treasure was so vast that one of the two was not willing to divide it. The only way was to kill the other, but in killing the other he might get caught. There was danger, and now he could not take any risk because the whole treasure was in his hands.
He managed a very cunning way. He disappeared and spread the rumor that he had been murdered, and he left all the evidence that would prove that his friend was the murderer. The friend was caught with all the proofs: his revolver was there; two bullets were missing, and his fingerprints were on the revolver. His handkerchief with his name embroidered on it had fallen…. And only he knew the place where the friend was hiding in the jungles against the police, because they had done other crimes also, and there was a price on both of them to be caught alive or dead.
He could not prove his innocence; there was no way – everything went against him. He was given the death penalty. He knew he had not murdered his friend; he knew that this whole thing was a plot. His friend was not dead; it was just to keep the whole treasure, that the friend had removed him in a legal way, out of the way.
But he escaped from the prison before he was executed. After twelve years he came into the court, dragging the dead body of a very famous politician, a rich man of the city, and he told the court – it was the same judge – “I have murdered this man, and I dare you to punish me. But first let me tell you the whole story. I am the man who twelve years ago you had sentenced to death. I escaped from the prison because I was absolutely innocent, but I had no proof.”
In fact innocence has never any proof. Proofs are for the crime or against the crime, but innocence has no proof.
He said, “Now I have murdered the man you charged me twelve years ago for having murdered – this is the man. If your first judgment was right then you cannot punish me again for the same murder because that man was murdered twelve years ago. And if your first judgment was not right, how can you be sure that your second judgment is going to be right?”
Can you punish a man for murdering the same man twice?
It is really very difficult to decide.
He said, “The only crime I have committed is escaping from the jail, but can you call it a crime? When you punish an innocent man with death, who is the criminal – you or me?
“And this man plotted the whole thing; he managed all those proofs because he had my revolver, he had my handkerchief. He managed all those proofs, escaped from there with the treasure that we had both found, became a rich man, famous. He changed his name, his personality, shaved off his beard, changed his hair-do, and became respectable; he opened a hospital, a school, made a temple. And this is the man who managed the plot to show he had been murdered.
“In that way he was saved from the punishment for other crimes for which the police were searching for him; now he has been murdered – so that file is closed. He killed two birds by one stone: he killed me, not directly, but through a legal procedure. He used all you idiots to kill me, so that he would become the whole owner of the treasure – and he did. By the same strategy he removed all crimes against him. The file was closed, the man was dead – of course, his body was not found. The murderer had been very clever, because he was a known criminal.”
The story has many implications. The man asked, “If I was sentenced to death and I had not escaped and was executed, what would have been the case now? If it had come to be known that the man thought to be murdered is alive, would you be able to give me my life back? If you cannot give my life back, what right have you to take it away?”
It is said the judge resigned, apologized to the man and said, “Perhaps I have done many crimes in my life.”
A strange thing all over the world is that unless you are proved innocent, you are guilty. This goes against all humanitarian ideals, democracy, freedom, respect for individuality; it goes against all. The rule should be: unless you are proved guilty you are innocent. Yes, it is said in words, but in reality the case is just the opposite.
For example, this city, Rajneeshpuram, is, in the opinion of the attorney general of Oregon, illegal. It is just an opinion. He is not a judge; he has to go before the court to prove it. Unless he proves that the city is guilty of being illegal, the city is legal, we are innocent. Until guilt is proved, innocence needs no proof. But this is not the case.
Although America goes on claiming to be the greatest democracy in the world, it is sheer bullshit. The Supreme Court of America goes on declaring that unless a person is proved guilty, he is innocent. Innocence needs no proof; otherwise it would be impossible for anybody to live. If everybody has to prove his innocence; otherwise he is a guilty man and he should be thrown into jail because he cannot prove his innocence….
How do you prove your innocence? Innocence is not an act, it leaves no traces behind, no evidence. So the Supreme Court says, “This is our standpoint: Unless a man is proved guilty, he is innocent.” But this is only said, because our city is already being regarded by the state government, by the federal government, as illegal – without it having been proved before a court.
The case is still in the court. The court is theirs, but they cannot wait even for the court to decide. The federal government has stopped giving the money that was due to the city; not only that, the federal government has asked that the money that they have given for the past two years should be returned. For two years the city was legal. And what support have they given? – two hundred and sixty-five dollars!
I would like the mayor of your city to return the money with interest. Such a poor government, giving such a great support to the city, certainly needs at least bank-rate interest on the great sum of two hundred and sixty-five dollars.
These nuts think they are democratic.
The state government has stopped giving their share. The attorney general has been forcing the police authorities to declare our city’s police also illegal. This is strange. You have not proved us guilty, you cannot prove us guilty; in fact your own court has incorporated the city with all legalities fulfilled. For two years your governments – state and federal both – have been accepting the city, training the police, having its police department in the city. You arrange the elections for the mayor, for the council.
Everything proves that the city is legal. Just one man who wants to rise in political power, who wants to become the next governor, is in need of us. Without our support in Oregon nobody can become the governor. But our support is a strange kind of support: anybody who wants to win an election has to be against us. Just being against us is enough to gain the support of all the bigots, of all the Christians, of all the orthodox, conventional people, of all those who think that Oregon is their property. Just to be against us….
Without proving in a court – and even if you prove in one court that does not mean that you have proved it. We can appeal. The case will not be decided for at least twenty to thirty years – not before that. It will have to go up to the Supreme Court of the United States.
We are not going to be humiliated in any way. And when the law is in our favor, the whole democratic concept is behind us, all the values that democracy cherishes are in our support, there is no reason at all…. But they have started accepting us as illegal.
This is how man goes on saying one thing and goes on doing just its opposite. He talks about being civilized, cultured – he is not civilized, not cultured. The death penalty is a proof enough.
This is the rule of a barbarous society: An eye for an eye, and a head for a head. If somebody cuts off one of your hands, then in a barbarous society, this is a simple law: one of his hands should be cut off.
The same has been carried down the ages. The death penalty is exactly the same law: An eye for an eye. If a man is thought to have murdered somebody, then he should be murdered. But it is strange: if killing somebody is a crime, then how can you remove crime from society by committing the same crime again? There was one man murdered; now there are two men murdered. And it is not certain that this man murdered that man, because to prove a murder is not an easy thing.
If murder is wrong, then whether it is committed by the man or by the society and its court, makes no difference.
Killing certainly is a crime.
The death penalty is a crime committed by the society against a single individual, who is helpless.
I cannot call it a penalty, it is a crime.
And you can understand why it is committed: it is a revenge. Society is taking revenge because the man did not follow the rules of the society; the society is ready to kill him. But nobody bothers that when somebody murders, it shows that man is psychologically sick. Rather than sending him to imprisonment or to be executed, he should be sent into a nursing home where he can be taken care of – physically, psychologically, spiritually. He is sick. He needs all the compassion of the society; there is no question of penalty, punishment.
Yes, it is true, one man is murdered; but we cannot do anything about it. By murdering this man do you think the other will come back to life? If that were possible, I would be all in support of this man being removed – he is not worth being part of the society – and the other should be revived.
But that does not happen. The other is gone forever; there is no way to revive him. Yes, you can do one thing, you can kill this man too. You are trying to wash blood with blood, mud with mud. You are not aware of what has happened in history in many cases.
Three hundred years ago, in many cultures the madman was thought to be pretending. In many other cultures he was thought to be possessed by ghosts. In other cultures he was thought to be mad, but treatable by punishment. And these were the three ways mad people were taken care of.
They were treated by beatings – strange treatment! – and by taking their blood out. Now you give blood transfusions; they used to do just the opposite – they used to take the blood out of the man. It was thought that he had too much energy. Naturally when his blood was taken out he became weak; he started showing signs of weakness because so much blood was taken out, and it was thought they had cured him of his madness.
By beating a man, naturally once in a while it used to happen that the man came to his senses. It is almost as if a man is asleep and you start beating him and he wakes up. A madman has fallen out of his conscious mind. If you beat him too hard, once in a while it may happen that he wakes up into his consciousness again. That became a proof that beating is the right treatment. But is used to happen only once in a while; ninety-nine percent of the cases were unnecessarily beaten. But that one exception was the rule.
It was thought that he was possessed by spirits, ghosts; then too beat him, because if he is possessed by ghosts the beating will reach the ghost, not him. You are not beating him, you are really beating the ghosts who are possessing him, and because of the beating they will escape. And once in a while, but just once in a while, that is one percent, no more than that….
I have been in one place – it was very famous for mad people. Hundreds of mad people were brought to that place. It was on the bank of a river, a temple, and the priest must have been a butcher for at least a few hundred lives. He looked like a butcher and he gave a good beating. The mad people were chained, given a good beating, no food, and very strong laxatives. And I have seen that once in a while a person came to his senses.
Strong laxatives for a few days with no food cleaned his inner system. Beatings brought him back a little consciousness. No food, hunger – a hungry man cannot afford to be mad because his body is in such torture. To be mad you need a little bit of comfort in your life situation.
You can see it: the more comfortable a society, the more luxurious, affluent a culture, the more people go mad. The more poor a society – starving, hungry – the less people go mad. Madness needs, in the first place, a mind. But a hungry person has no nourishment for the mind. He is undernourished: his mind is not in a situation to go nuts. For that the mind needs more energy than ordinarily is involved in life.
Madness is a rich man’s disease. The poor man cannot afford it.
So when you keep a person hungry and give him laxatives, it cleanses his inner system, makes him so hungry that he becomes bodily-oriented. He forgets the mind, the question is the body. He is no longer interested in mind and mind games.
Madness is a mind game.
So once in a while I have seen people being cured there, but that one percent cured would spread the rumor all around, and hundreds of people were coming there. The temple became very rich. I had gone there many times to see it but only once did I meet a man who had been cured; others went back to their homes just beaten, hungry, starved, more sick, more weak. Many died through that priest’s treatment.
But in India if the treatment is being given in a temple, a sacred place, by the priest, it is not a crime if you die; in fact you are fortunate that you are dying in a sacred place. You will be born on a higher level of consciousness; so it is not a crime.
But I spoke against the man wherever I went and I said, “This is absolutely criminal. What authority has he or what medical qualifications has he? Is he a psychiatrist, physiologist? – he is only a priest.” But priests have been treating mad people for centuries, in the same way, all over the world.
Now we know that a mad person cannot be treated this way. Mad people were put into prison, in isolated cells. Still that is happening around the world because we don’t know what to do. Just to hide our ignorance we put the mad person into jail, so we can forget about him; at least we can go on ignoring that he exists.
In my town one of my friends’ uncles was mad. They were rich people. I used to go in their house often, but even I became aware only after years that one of his uncles was kept in an underground basement, chained.
I said, “Why?”
They said, “He is mad. There were only two ways: either we keep him in our own house, chained…. And of course we cannot keep him chained in the house; otherwise people will be coming and everybody will feel worried and concerned. And his children, his wife, watching their father, their husband…. And it is against our family’s reputation to send him to prison, so we found this way: we have imprisoned him underground. His food is being taken to him by a servant; otherwise nobody goes to see him, nobody goes to meet him.”
I persuaded my friend, “I would like to meet your uncle.”
He said, “But I cannot come with you – he is a dangerous man, he is mad! Although he is chained he can do anything.”
I said, “He can at the most kill me. You just remain behind me so if I am killed you escape, but I would like to go.”
Because I insisted, he managed to get the key from the servant who used to take the food. In thirty years I was the first person from the outside world, other than the servant, who had met him; and that man may have been mad – I cannot say – but now he was not mad. But nobody was ready to listen to him because all mad people say, “We are not mad.”
So when he said this to the servant, “Tell my family that I am not mad,” the servant simply laughed. He even told the family but nobody took any note of it.
When I saw the man, I sat with him, I talked with him. He was as sane as anybody else in the world – perhaps a little more, because he said one thing to me: “Being here for thirty years has been a tremendous experience. In fact I feel fortunate that I am out of your mad world. They think I am mad – let them think that, there is no harm – but in fact I am fortunate that I am out of your mad world. What do you think?” he said to me.
I said, “You are absolutely right. The world outside is far madder than when you left it thirty years before. In thirty years there has been great evolution in everything – in madness too. You stop saying to people that you are not mad; otherwise they will take you out. You are living a perfectly beautiful life. You have enough space to walk….”
He said, “That’s the only exercise I can do here – walking.”
And I started to teach him Vipassana. I said, “You are in such perfect conditions to become a buddha: no worries, no botherations, no disturbances. You are really blessed.”
And he started practicing Vipassana. I told him, “You can practice it sitting, you can practice it walking” – and he was my first disciple as far as Vipassana is concerned. And you will be surprised that he died a sannyasin – died in the basement.
But the last time I had gone to my village, I went to see him. He said, “I’m ready; now you initiate me. My days are numbered, and I would like to die as your sannyasin. I’m your disciple; for twenty years you have been my master and whatever you had promised is fulfilled.”
And you could see from his face, from his eyes, that he was not the same person – a total transformation, a mutation….
Mad people need methods of meditation so that they can come out of their madness.
The criminals need psychological help, spiritual support.
They are really deep-down sick, and you are punishing sick people. It is not their fault. If somebody murders, that means he has carried a tendency to murder in him for a long time. It is not that somewhere, out of nowhere, suddenly you murder somebody.
In one of the existential novels there is a story: a man is caught – in fact it is not right to say “caught” because he never tried to escape. He killed a stranger who was sitting on the beach. He came from behind and killed him with a dagger; the man died on the spot. The man was absolutely a stranger; the murderer had never seen his face even, because he killed him from the back. Even after the murder he had not seen his face; he had no idea whom he had murdered.
It was a very strange case – existentialism has been of great help in bringing strange cases to light. The court asked the man, “We cannot understand why you murdered the man.”
He said, “It is not a question of ‘why’ – I simply wanted to. There are people who try to find excuses to do something that they want to do. I am a simple person: why bother about an excuse? – just do it if you want to do it.”
Now he is saying a truth of tremendous importance. People try to find an excuse: for example, they are angry with you – they think they are angry with you; that is not true.
They were carrying that anger – it was boiling within them, they were sitting on a volcano. They were just waiting for somebody to give them an excuse: you gave the excuse, and they exploded. It seems you are responsible for the explosion. No, you are only an accidental excuse, you are not responsible. Somebody else would have done if you had not. It is just coincidence that you happened to pass by; otherwise, somebody else….
This murderer says to the court, “I am a simple man; I don’t bother about rationalizations and excuses – I simply wanted to kill. And it was really an exciting experience. When I forced the dagger into the back of that man whom I don’t know, who has not done any wrong to me, when the blood dashed out from his back I had the greatest, the most exciting experience in my life.
“I am perfectly happy: you can give me any punishment that you want. I am not going to say that I have not done it, I have done it. I wanted to do it for a long time, and it is good that I did it.”
Now, what do you want to do with this man? Is he a murderer, or a psychiatric case who has been prevented from having any excitement in his life? Perhaps he has never known love, because if you ask Sigmund Freud, he will say that the dagger is nothing but a symbol of the male’s sexual organ, and dashing it into the back of the man is just an effort – perverted, but an effort – to have some entry into another body. That’s what people are doing all over the world. Making love is entering another’s body.
This man is certainly not in the right shape, things are upside down, but what he is doing is simply a sexual act; it has nothing to do with murder. The murder happened; that is just a by-product.
And why does a man want to enter the body of a woman? – because every implication has its own implications. It is because the man is born out of woman’s body. He has come out of the woman’s body, and he has never been so comfortable again, and he wants to be back in the womb of the mother.
Every man is searching for his mother’s womb. These murderers are also searching for the mother’s womb – of course in a wrong way, unnatural, but they are not responsible for it: your society is responsible for it. If a murder happens then the society should be punished, then the whole society should have to pay the penalty.
Why did it happen in this society? What have you done with the man that he had to commit a murder? Why did he become destructive? – because nature gives everybody energy which is creative. It becomes destructive only when it is obstructed, when no natural flow is allowed. Whenever energy goes toward the natural it is prevented by society, it is crippled; it is directed into some other direction.
Soon the man is in a confusion. He does not know what is what. He does not know what he is doing, why he is doing it. The original reasons are left far behind. He has taken so many turns that he has become a jigsaw puzzle.
Nobody needs the death penalty, nobody deserves it. In fact, not only the death penalty, no other kind of punishment is right, because punishment never cures the person.
Every day the number of criminals goes on growing; every day you build more prisons. This is strange. It should not be so. Just the opposite should be the case, because with so many courts and so many punishments and so many prisons, crimes should be less, criminals should be less, slowly, slowly prisons should be less, courts should be less. But that is not happening.
I am reminded that in Great Britain, just one hundred years ago, corporal punishment for stealing was the common thing. And the punishment had to be given in a public square so people could see what happens when you steal – just to teach them. It would be a lesson to them, that if you steal this happens: a public humiliation. The person had to be naked and lashed till blood started oozing from his body.
But what happened – just one hundred years ago – was that the punishment had to be dropped because it was found that when the crowd was there…and thousands gathered to see – it was not a good sign. When thousands of people come to see such an ugly scene it shows something in them is wrong. Perhaps they also want to beat someone naked, but they don’t have the guts; at least they can see it being done.
That’s what you are doing everywhere. You love football: you don’t play – there are professional players – you watch. You become identified with a certain team of football players and you are so excited, as if you are participants. Just look at the crowd in a stadium: thousands of people so excited, as if their life and death is in question – shouting, screaming, throwing their caps, their hats, fighting with each other because the person by their side is giving encouragement to the party they oppose.
The football players are playing their games, and the thousands of spectators – what are they doing? They are also, in a psychological way, participants – perhaps more excited than the real players. The real players are professionals, that is their business, and these idiots are unnecessarily becoming so hot.
And this is not the whole crowd; the real crowd is sitting by their television sets, millions of them – listening to commentaries on their radios.
I had a friend in the university; he was a professor, but a fan of hockey matches – in India, football is not so hot. One day I was sitting in his room and he was listening to the commentary on his small transistor that he used to carry continuously, keeping it close to his ear so he did not miss anything.
I was sitting there and I told him, “I have come to say something to you.”
He just told me, “Keep quiet!” and went back to his commentary. And then something happened: he threw the transistor and it broke into pieces.
I said, “What happened?”
He said, “My team, they failed me! I had so much hope for them.”
“But,” I said, “if your team failed, why did you destroy the transistor?”
He said, “You won’t understand. I was in such anger that you should feel fortunate that I did not hit you with the transistor.”
“But this would have been too much! First you destroyed the transistor, and I am just sitting waiting here for you to get finished with your transistor, and you wanted to hit me with it,” I said.
“Yes, I was so angry,” he said, “I could have hit you. For a moment I was just going to and then I changed my mind.”
I said, “This is good – next time I will never be around anyone listening to the commentary on hockey matches. This is dangerous, even to be around.”
Now this man is so much involved…. The whole world has become a world of spectators.
What are you seeing in a movie? I don’t think you are seeing a movie, you become part of it, you become identified with some character in it. When he falls in love, you fall in love; when he kisses his girlfriend, you are kissing his girlfriend. This is sheer nonsense, but you cannot expect anything more from the humanity that you have got around.
So those spectators in Great Britain, what were they doing? They were so involved in watching that there were pickpockets all around, cutting their pockets. It was brought to the notice of the parliament: “What kind of lesson are you teaching, because exactly there, where the crowd has gathered to learn the lesson, there are people who are cutting others’ pockets.” And it is easy because those people are so involved they have completely forgotten themselves and their pockets. And that man is being beaten almost to death, and those pickpockets….
Your whole reasoning is wrong. You cannot teach by punishment.

That’s what your jurists, legal experts, politicians, have been saying down the ages: “If we don’t punish people, then how are we going to teach them? Then everybody will start committing crime, so we have to go on punishing so people remain afraid.”
They think that fear is the only way to teach – and fear is not the way to teach them at all. What punishment teaches is, it makes people acquainted with fear, so the original shock is no longer there. They know what can happen: “At the most you can beat me. And if one person can take it, I can also take it. And out of a hundred thieves you can catch only one or two persons.”
Now, if you are not ready even to take that much risk – ninety-eight percent success, two percent failure – then what kind of man are you?
Nobody learns from any punishment. The very person who is being punished, he also does not learn what you want him to learn. Yes, he learns something else: he learns how to become a thick-skin.
Once a person goes into prison, prison becomes his home, because there he finds people of a like mind. There he finds his real society. Outside he was a foreigner; there he is in his own world. They all understand the same language, and there are experts. You may be just an amateur, an apprentice; it may be your first term.
I have heard: one man enters a prison; in the dark cell he sees an old man, resting. The old man asks him, “For how long are you going to be here?”
He says, “For ten years.”
The old man says, “Then you can stay close to the door. Just ten years! You seem to be new. I am going to be here for fifty years. You just remain close to the door. Soon the years will be gone and you will be out.”
But when you are with experts for ten years, of course you learn all their techniques, strategies, methods, their experience. You will find your jail almost a certain kind of university where crime is taught at government expense. You will find professors of crime, deans of the crime faculty, vice-chancellors, chancellors – all kinds of people who have done every kind of crime that you can imagine; certainly the newcomer starts learning. And one thing is in the air of every prison…. I have been to many prisons.
It happened that in Madhya Pradesh when I was a professor there, one old man, Mangaldas Pakvasa, was governor of Madhya Pradesh. He was very much interested in me, so much so that although I went on telling him, “Kaka” – he was known to everybody as kaka, uncle – “I don’t believe in God,” he said, “Whether you believe it or not, just when you reach, tell God something for this Mangaldas Pakvasa, because I am an old sinner. Being in politics, you know, I have done everything that I should not have done. Now I am getting old.”
“But,” I said, “you will be dying first, Kaka. Can’t you see a simple thing: you will be reaching first. So if you want, you can help me, but I cannot help you; I am not going that early!”
“But,” he said, “I suspect that I will never be going to heaven. Governors and prime ministers and presidents – I don’t think any of them are going there. This whole company is going to hell!”
He was a very simple and good man. Because he was governor, I had immense dimensions open for me. I asked him, “You give me a general permission: if I want to visit any jail I should be allowed.”
He said, “That is no problem.” And the biggest jail was in Jabalpur itself; it was the central jail of the whole state – three thousand diehard criminals. So I used to go almost every Sunday; while he remained governor I continued to go there. And what I saw – this was the climate, and in other jails also. I went in smaller jails also but the climate was essentially the same.
The climate was that it is not crime that brings you to jail, it is being caught, so if you know right ways to do wrong things…. It is not a question of doing right things; the question is doing wrong things in a right way. And every prisoner learns the right way of doing wrong things in jail. In fact I have talked with prisoners and they said, “We are eager to get out.”
I said, “For what?”
They said, “You are a friend, and we don’t hide anything from you: we want to get out as soon as possible because we have learned so much, we want to practice. Just the practicals were missing, it was all theoretical knowledge. For practicals you need the society.”
Once a person becomes a jailbird, then nowhere will he find himself at ease; sooner or later he will be coming back to jail. And slowly, slowly jail becomes his alternative society.
It is more comfortable, he feels more at home; nobody looks down on him, nobody thinks that he is superior and you are inferior. Everybody is a criminal. Nobody is a priest and nobody is a sage and nobody is a holy man: all are poor human beings with all the weaknesses and frailties.
Outside he finds that he is rejected, abandoned.
In my town there was a permanent jail-goer. He was a very beautiful man; his name was Barkat Mian. He was a Mohammedan. Mian is a Mohammedan respectful word exactly like sir or the Indian, Hindu, ji. If you simply say, “Gandhi” it will not look respectful; you have to say “Gandhiji.” For Mohammedans mian is simply equivalent to ji or sir.
It was strange that Barkat Mian was a permanent jail-goer, almost nine months in jail, three months outside; and in those three months also, every week he had to go to report to the police station to show that everything was okay and he was here.
But I had a great friendship with that man. My family was very angry; they said, “Why do you keep company with Barkat?” My family used to say to me, “A man is known by his company.”
I said, “I understand you: that means Barkat will be known by me, and to give a man a little respectability is not anything bad.”
They said, “When will you see things in the right way?”
I said, “I am seeing it exactly the right way. Rather than Barkat degrading me, I am upgrading Barkat. You think his evil is more powerful than my goodness? You don’t trust my integrity; you trust Barkat’s integrity.” I said, “Whatever your opinion, I trust myself. Barkat cannot do any harm to me. If any harm is going to be done it will be done to Barkat by me.”
He was really a beautiful man, nice, and he used to tell me, “You should not be around me. If you want to meet me and talk to me, we can manage to meet somewhere outside the town, by the riverbank.”
He himself lived near the Mohammedan cemetery where nobody goes unless one dies: one goes only once. He was not allowed to live in the town. In the town nobody was ready to give him a house to rent. Whatsoever rent he was ready to pay, nobody was ready to take it, nobody was going to take him in.
There on the Mohammedan cemetery was a house – nothing but a shelter for the rainy season, summer. People die in all kinds of climates, not bothering about anybody – that it is raining and they could wait a little, there is no hurry. But people are people: if they can harass you, they will harass you. They will die when it is raining dogs and cats, or is it cats and dogs? But it makes no difference; when it is raining who is first and who is second does not matter.
So that shelter was just for certain times; people could sit there. But in a small place people don’t die every day, only once in a while; so Barkat used to live in that shelter. He said, “You always are welcome in my house” – that shelter he used to call his house. And of course there was no fear because nobody could steal anything from Barkat. Nobody could even dare to go in the night near Barkat Mian because he was a dangerous man.
Just by the side of my father’s store was a big shop, a kind of general store, having all kinds of things. He stole from that. One night he told me, “Tonight I am coming to Mody’s shop” – that was the name of the shop. And he came and he did a good job: he took out all the ornaments and everything, and managed to escape but finally was caught. Not that day – after two months, in another robbery he was caught, and there it was found that one watch he was wearing was from Mody’s store.
So it was worked out and he was forced to confess from where the watch had come to him. And he confessed that it was from Mody’s store because that was the only store in the town that had watches to sell. From where else could it come? Everybody’s watch came from Mody’s store!
But other things were also found in his home, in that shelter where he used to keep his suitcase and things; and a few things he had sold – so he was sentenced to six months. After six months – this I call a real gentleman – after six months, when he was released from the jail…. The jail was in a district which was nearabout sixty miles away. He came in a taxi, stopped the taxi before Mody’s store and went in.
Mody stood up, afraid that now there was going to be trouble; this man has been released. Barkat said, “Pay the taxi – I don’t have any money. And you know for six months you have kept me unemployed, so, some money for my pocket.”
I was just present there because Mody’s store was just next to my father’s shop. Mody had to pay the taxi and give Barkat a few rupees. He told Barkat, “Don’t come every day,” and Barkat said, “Till I manage something I will have to come, because six months you kept me unemployed. You are responsible.”
He continued to come every day, and I said to Mody, “Modyji, you go on giving money to Barkat.”
He said, “What to do? He can cut my throat – he is a dangerous man! You don’t see: when he comes inside the shop, he shows me a knife. Nobody sees it from the outside because of so many things in the shop. With one hand he asks for the money, with the other hand he shows me a knife, so everybody thinks I am giving the money happily. You think I am giving it happily?”
I said, “No, I know about the knife because Barkat Mian is my friend and he tells me everything.”
I asked Barkat, “How did you become a thief?”
He said, “The first time I was jailed I was absolutely innocent, but I was poor, I could not hire an advocate; and the people who wanted me to be forced into jail had some vested interest.
“My father and mother died when I was very young, fourteen or fifteen, and my other relatives wanted to capture the whole family’s possessions – house, land – and they wanted to remove me out of their way. They simply managed it. They put something into my bag in my house. And there was no way to get out of it: the thing was found in my bag, and I was sent to jail.
“When I came back, my land was gone, my house was sold, my relatives had managed to disperse everything and distribute everything. I was just on the streets.
“So, first, I was innocent when I went in, but when I came out I was not innocent, because I had come with a certain graduation. I told everybody in jail what had happened to me – I was only seventeen. They said ‘Don’t be worried, these nine months will be soon finished, but in nine months we will also give you the finishing touches. And you will be able to take revenge on everybody.’
“And I started to take revenge on all the relatives – this was simply tit for tat. They had forced me to become a thief, and I proved that, okay, now I am a thief. I destroyed this whole gang of my relatives; I stole everything that they had. But by and by I became more and more involved.
“You can have ten cases in which you are saved but in the eleventh you are caught. As you grow older and more efficient, you are caught less. But now there is no problem; in fact imprisonment proves a relaxing place, a holiday from work and worry and all kinds of things.
“A few months in jail are good for health – a disciplined life: an exact time to get up, to go to work, an exact time to go to sleep. Just enough food to keep you alive; more than that makes you sick.”
He said, “I am never sick in jail, unless I pretend and want to be in hospital to escape; otherwise I am never sick. Outside I fall sick, but never inside. And outside is a foreign world and everybody is superior and I am inferior. Only in jail I feel a freedom.”
Strange! When he said that, I said, “You say in jail you feel freedom?”
He said, “Yes, only in jail I feel freedom.”
What kind of society is this, in which people in jail feel freedom, and outside they feel imprisoned?
And this is almost the story of every criminal. A small thing in the beginning – maybe he was hungry, maybe he was cold, needed a blanket and just stole a blanket – small necessities which should be fulfilled: otherwise the society should not produce these people. Nobody asks it to produce them.
On the one hand you go on producing people more and more and more, and there are not enough things for them, neither food nor clothes nor shelter. Then what do you want? You are putting people in a situation where they are bound to become criminals.
The world population has to be cut to one third – if you want crime to disappear.
But nobody wants crime to disappear because the disappearance of crime means the disappearance of your judges, of your advocates, of your law experts, of your parliaments, of your policemen, of your jailers. It will create a big unemployment problem; nobody wants anything to change for the better.
Everybody says things should change for the better, but everybody goes on making things worse, because the worse things are, the more people are employed. The worse things are, the more chances you have to feel good. Criminals are needed for you to feel that you are such a moral, respectable person.
Sinners are needed for saints to feel that they are saints. Without sinners, who will be the saint? If the whole society consisted of good people, do you think you will remember Jesus Christ for two thousand years? For what? It is the criminal society that remembers Jesus Christ for two thousand years.
It is a simple thing to understand. Why do you remember Gautam Buddha? If there were millions of buddhas, awakened people in the world…what specialty did Gautam Buddha have? He would have been lost in the crowd. But twenty-five centuries have passed and he stands like a pillar, a mountain peak far above you and your heads.
In fact Buddha, Jesus, Mohammed, Mahavira, are not giants – you are pygmies.
And every giant has an investment in your remaining a pygmy; otherwise he won’t be a giant.
This is a great conspiracy.
I am against this whole conspiracy. I am neither a giant nor a pygmy; I have no vested interest at all.
I am just myself.
I don’t compare myself with anybody, so nobody is lower than me and nobody is higher than me. Because of this simple fact I can see directly; there is no vested interest creating diversions to my vision. And this is my immediate response to the question: the death penalty is simply a proof that man still needs to be civilized, needs to be cultured, needs to know human values.
In this world nobody is a criminal, never has been. Yes, there are people…they need compassion, not imprisonment, not punishment. All prisons should be transformed into psychological nursing homes.
There is no need to bother to prove somebody guilty or not guilty – and years of argument – there is no need, because this whole thing is needed so that the innocent person is not punished. But I tell you, still the innocent person is punished more than the real guilty one, because the real guilty one becomes an expert by and by. The innocent person knows nothing, he can be caught very easily.
In a civilized society, if somebody is suspected of doing something there is no need to take them to court, there is no need to force him into a police torture. All that is needed is to take him to loving people who can take care of him. Whether he is innocent or guilty does not matter, because even if an innocent man gets treated there is no harm.
Love them, be compassionate to them; let them be dignified, respected. This man, Barkat Mian, used to tell me that “If I am respected I can stop stealing, but they cannot respect me. If they cannot respect me, then this is my way of taking revenge. I will go on doing everything that harms the society.”
And I said, “Your logic is right.” This society is exactly the wrong society, that’s why it is so rare that a right person is born in this society. Otherwise, all are criminals – few are known, the majority are not known. Few are caught, the majority are not caught. But the whole society is sick.
So my response is, that no punishment is needed, because no disease requires punishment, no sickness needs penalties; these people need respect, love, treatment, understanding. These people need meditation.
You will be surprised, Barkat Mian started meditating with me – because I found his graveyard was a beautiful place to meditate. Almost nobody came around, because people are afraid of coming to the graveyard. They come only finally, when there is nothing left to be afraid of. And they don’t come by themselves, they have to be brought by four people. Then they come, otherwise nobody comes.
Even in the daytime people are afraid of graveyards, particularly Mohammedan graveyards – because in Christian graves bodies and ghosts are also inside but they are cemented, marbled. Mohammedan graves are very dangerous, just mud; ghosts can come out very easily. In the night they slip out without any trouble. No cement, no stones, nothing is used, just the body is put in and mud covers the body, that’s all. So people are very much afraid. Barkat used to live alone and I used to sit with him late in the night, and by and by, just the way he has learned crime with criminals, he started learning meditation with a meditator.
My experience is, that if you have something really valuable in you, then it starts flowing toward the other person – the other person is almost like a slope. Just as the water flows from up, downward, if you have something valuable it starts flowing down. And one day it happened that Barkat changed. I brought him to my father and I said, “Look at Barkat Mian, for almost two years he has not done anything wrong. Still your society is disrespectful toward him. Look at this man, I have brought him to show you that I have not become a criminal, he has became a meditator.”
Barkat Mian is still alive, is very old. The last I saw him was in 1970. He had come to give me a send off at the station. I said, “Barkat, you never come to give me a send off. I come and go so much.”
He said, “But this is special, I strongly feel that I can say I know we will never meet again. But you have given me so much, you have given me a rebirth. I was a criminal, and you had made me in the true sense a human being.”
I said, “I have not done anything, this meditation is just like an infectious disease, don’t be grateful to me. It is just infection.
He said, “Don’t try to stop me from being grateful to you. I know you don’t like anybody to be grateful to you, but I will never be seeing you again. So let me express my gratefulness,” and he touched my feet – which is very difficult for a Mohammedan, because Mohammedanism teaches not to worship any human being. Except God, never to bow down to anybody.
I said, “Barkat Mian, you are a Mohammedan, you are not supposed to touch the feet of a human being.”
He said, “Forget all about that Mohammedanism, I am just a human being and I am absolutely free to show my love, my gratitude, my thankfulness in anyway I decide. Who is Prophet Mohammed to decide for me.”
I have seen it happen again and again. I saw it happen with a madman, I saw it happen with a criminal – I have seen it happen from every nook and corner of life. For this thirty years, thousands of people have come into contact with me and I have seen it happen that if you have something authentic, they are going to catch it. It is unavoidable. You are not in anyway converting them, but the conversion happens. And when conversion happens on its own it has a beauty, a grace.

============================================================

Osho,
How come you speak about political leaders and religious leaders in the same tone – is there no difference between them?
Fundamentally there is no difference at all. Superficially of course there are differences.
The basic desire to be a leader arises in people who are suffering from an inferiority complex. It does not matter whether they move into the political world or into the religious world; the will-to-power is an absolute indication that the man feels himself inferior to others and he wants to prove to the world that it is not so.
It is not only a question of proving to the world; through the world he wants to prove it to himself too, that he is not inferior to anybody. The only way mind can manage it is to make everybody inferior to you.
Mind is not your intelligence.
It may sound strange but this is a truth, that mind is not your intelligence. Mind can be intellectual, which is a very poor substitute for intelligence. Intellectuality is mechanical. You can become a great scholar, a great professor, a great philosopher – just playing with words which are all borrowed, arranging and rearranging thoughts, none of which are your own.
The intellect is absolutely bankrupt.
It has nothing of its own, all is borrowed.
And that’s the difference between intelligence and intellect.
Intelligence has an eyesight of its own, a capacity to see into things, into problems.
Intelligence is your born quality.
It cannot be learned, it cannot be nurtured. Everybody is born with intelligence, but the society is in favor of intellect, because the intellectual person is not a real individual, he is phony. He has nothing of his own; he is a beggar, and beggars are not supposed to be emperors, are not supposed to be masters. They are destined to remain slaves.
So your so-called greatest scholars are continuously proving their slavery to the establishment. None of them is a rebel. They are hankering for the prizes and awards the establishment can bestow upon them: respectability, honor. They are all desiring to be Nobel laureates, but to get the Nobel prize you have to sell your soul. You have to accept a thousand and one things that no intelligent person can accept.
You have to support the status quo, the people who are in power, who have the money. You are just a puppet to them. Yes, it is a very mutual conspiracy: they give you the Nobel prize, they give you honorary doctorates, they make you world famous; in return you support their exploitation, their oppression, and whatever nonsense they are doing. You have to become a protecting wall.
And of course the world is going to listen to you because you are a Nobel prize winner, honored by Oxford, by Cambridge, by Harvard. The ordinary people, the common masses are bound to listen to you.
If you are supporting the society then naturally there is nothing wrong with the society; there is no need to change it. The problems are not created by the society but by the “anti-social” elements. And who are the anti-social elements? All the rebels are anti-social elements. It is these people who provoke the masses, steal their souls, make them aware that they also are human beings, not cattle. These are anti-social elements; they have to be destroyed.
Either they have to be purchased in some way…give them a Nobel prize, and purchase them; give them honorary doctorates and purchase them. If they refuse to be purchased then society has all the ways to condemn them.
Their books will not be published by the great publishers, because those great publications are owned by the vested interests. Their names will disappear from the newspapers, from the magazines, from the media. They will live almost as if they are not, as if they don’t exist.
This is a far superior way to destroy somebody than crucifying. At least when you crucify a person you give him immense publicity. Two thousand years have passed: Jesus is still hanging on the cross. He has become almost an eternal advertisement. Wherever you go you will see the cross – on the graveyard, on the churches, on the vehicles of the Red Cross Society.
Now this is free publicity for two thousand years! Isabel, you should learn something! Not a single cent has been wasted. Jesus was certainly a Jew, not only by birth but by his very spirit. He managed his own crucifixion, and created publicity which goes on increasing.
It is a very essential thing to understand, that the establishment first tries to persuade you, to bribe you. When it fails in purchasing and bribing you, then it comes into its true color: then it starts destroying you. And it has learned through the centuries that poisoning a Socrates is not good. You killed the man, but you made him immortal; you imprinted his message on the very soul of humanity. You proved foolish – it was not the right way.
Crucifying Jesus was not the way to destroy him. You have saved him.
Now the modern status quo, establishment, vested interests, are far more clever. If Jesus comes back he should not be afraid that he is going to be crucified again. No, this time it is going to be worse: he will be ignored. To be crucified does not take your dignity, but to be ignored…. Nobody bothers about you, nobody pays any attention, nobody is for or against you. This is real humiliation that is being done.
But intellectuals are not capable of resisting; they don’t have the guts, they can’t have, because all that they have is borrowed. They are easily purchasable, cheap. But they become a very significant protective wall around the establishment. People look toward them with respect. People think that if a Nobel prize winner is saying something it must be right – as if by winning the Nobel prize one attains to enlightenment, nirvana!
It is a political game. It is all politics.
Once in a while they go on giving a Nobel prize to a Russian scientist, to some scientist whom they would like to get out of Russia; his being in Russia is dangerous for them. He is close to finding something – or he has found it already – in which they are far behind.
Now you see the ways of the politicians? Give the man a Nobel prize – now you create trouble. The scientist is not capable of resisting the temptation of accepting the Nobel prize, because that is the world’s greatest honor. It does not happen to everybody; it happens once in a while to one individual in millions.
Now, a poor scientist, howsoever great a scientist he may be – as a man he is a poor man with all the desires to be famous, to be well known. Now, the politicians have put him into a dilemma: if he accepts the Nobel prize he goes against the Russian establishment because the Russian establishment knows perfectly well – politicians know each other well; nobody knows them as well as they know each other. They speak the same language, they work the same strategies.
The Russian politicians know why the Nobel prize has been given to this man. By giving the Nobel prize a rift has been created between the man and the Soviet government. The Soviet pressure will be: “Reject the Nobel prize. It comes from the capitalist world; it is not an honor, in fact it is an insult. Reject it, and if you don’t reject it then you will be in trouble.”
And it has happened with many people: either they have been imprisoned…that’s what the politicians of the other side wanted, that they should be imprisoned so their work is spoiled. They may have been coming close to something which may have made Russia the most powerful nation in the world. They have disrupted it; they have sabotaged it in a very clever way – without interfering, without saying a single world.
Or if the man has a world-wide reputation already – which scientists generally don’t have…perhaps a literary person, a poet, a novelist may have. If the person has a world-wide reputation, then from all capitalist countries all the intellectuals, their institutions, academies and societies will start a great campaign and movement against the Russian government.
Now, the Russian government has only two choices: either to release that man and stop this campaign…. But they cannot keep this man any longer in the country; he has become an enemy. And now he is in the hands of the enemies, he can become an informer. He is dangerous – he has to be expelled. That too is good for the capitalist world. Once the man is expelled he is received with great honor all over the capitalist world; he is made a hero.
If you look into the ways the politicians go on doing things you will be surprised. But they succeed only with intellectuals, because intellectuals are really not intelligent people. If they were intelligent then nobody could manipulate them, neither the communist nor the capitalist; nobody would be capable of manipulating them. It would be impossible; they would see things clearly.
Intelligence is of the soul.
Intellect is of the mind.
Mind is just garbage. Mind is that which has been given to you by others. The whole collection, the whole junkyard all kinds of people have been throwing in you – that is your mind. That mind continuously suffers from an inferiority complex, is bound to suffer: it has nothing of its own, it has no ground underneath its feet.
The mind wants power, prestige.
It can have power through politics, which is the criminal’s way. If your mind has a criminal tendency then you will follow the path of politics. Politicians and criminals are not basically different people.
Politicians are successful criminals.
Criminals are unsuccessful politicians.
Criminals are poor, pitiable. They had tried but they failed. Politicians are of the same tribe, with only one difference: they have succeeded.
And in this world success makes everything right. What you have done, how you have arrived, what method and means you have used – who bothers about it? When you are successful it is enough proof that you are a man of tremendous capacity. Your success is the proof.
And when you have failed, your failure is also a proof that you were hankering for the moon; you were just foolish. Try to walk on the earth, don’t try to fly toward the moon; otherwise you will fall and get multiple fractures. That’s what poor criminals have got – multiple fractures.
But the mind of the politician and the criminal is the same. Those who are not courageous enough will go in a way which can lead either to the world of criminals or to the world of politicians. Of course, of the hundred people who will walk on the path, ninety-nine will go to the world of criminals; ninety-nine will be in the jails. One percent will also be in jail, but of a different kind: it is called the White House.
All kinds of black deeds – naturally you have to call the house the “White House” to hide them.
I have heard: a black man, very old, hair all white, was following a woman, a young girl – must have been of the age of his grandchildren – with such lustful eyes that another old man, his friend, stopped him and said, “This does not suit you. It was okay at one time, but all your hair has become white, and you are following that girl with such dirty eyes – everybody is shocked.”
Do you know what the man said? He said, “You will never understand anything. My hair is white, but that doesn’t mean that my heart has become white: it is still black and it is going to remain black. Even if I were dead and this girl passed by my side, I would have opened my eyes and looked with the same lustful eyes. What has hair to do with it? What kind of argument are you giving to me, that ‘your hair is white’? Let my hair be white – I am not!” But white hair helps you to hide black deeds.
I have always wondered why they call this topmost criminal place in the world the White House. Perhaps unknowingly the idea came from their unconscious that everything inside is going to be black, but from the outside you have to keep a white face, everything clean.
One person reaches to the White House, ninety-nine to the black houses.
So there are people who are not courageous enough to take this risk – ninety-nine percent possibility of failing, and only one percent possibility of succeeding. They want far surer ground. Religion provides that ground: there is no failure in it.
You become religious, you become a great religious leader. If you succeed you become a great saint; if you don’t succeed, still you are a small saint, you don’t fail. The smallest saint is still a saint – the lowliest priest is still in the same line as the pope. In religion there is no failure. So, cowardly people – who are as much interested in gaining power, who are suffering as much from an inferiority complex, who are on a power trip but don’t have the guts to follow the criminal path – find the path of righteousness, asceticism, morality, prayer.
By becoming a saint they will also attain to power. Of course, this power cannot be very effective. They cannot become Alexander the Great, Adolph Hitler, Joseph Stalin; they cannot have millions of lives in their hands – and now such politicians have the whole of humanity’s life in their hands. Of course these saints can’t have that much, but in a certain way, from a different aspect, they are more powerful because the politicians will come to touch their feet, the presidents will come to bow down in respect to them.
The politician does everything according to a particular strategy. If just before the elections President Reagan goes to the Vatican to pay respects to the Catholic pope, it is not accidental, it is preplanned. When Reagan goes to the Vatican and gives his respects to the Catholic pope, all the Catholics of America are, without much effort, converted to giving him votes: this is the right man.
All the bishops, all the cardinals in America will now tell their congregations that Reagan is our man. Now, to persuade so many Catholics in America…if he had to go from home to home it would have taken eternity. And how many stupid things politicians have to do! They have to go on kissing all kinds of children – their noses are running and they are kissing them…. The politician has to do it.
This is easier, to go to the pope – just kiss his hand and millions of Catholics are on your side. And the pope blesses you: that way he feels far superior to the presidents, prime ministers, kings, queens. Of course his power is only airy-fairy, but you enjoy it. It has nothing substantial in it, it is hollow inside. But it does not matter, because when the presidents and the prime ministers come, the whole media is there, all the newspapers, all the television stations of the world, all the radio stations are talking about the pope – you can feel a certain gratification. But the gratification is of the same desire – the will-to-power.
That’s why I go on talking about the political leaders and the religious leaders without making any distinction – because there is no distinction at all, only a superficial distinction. Their psyches are functioning in the same way.
Neither the religious leader nor the politician is interested in the people whom they pretend to lead.
They are interested in being leaders – and of course the leader cannot be without the led, so it is a necessity to go on promising the people things. Politicians promise them things of this world; religious leaders promise them things of the other world. But do you see any difference in what they are doing? Both are promising so that you go on following them, afraid to get lost somewhere else, because if you lose the path then you will miss the promise.
The promise keeps you with the crowd – and promises don’t cost anything. You can promise anything. Promises are always for tomorrow, and tomorrow never comes. And you are not going to live here forever.
Just look at past history. All politicians have been promising people things which have not materialized in thousands of years. Thousands of political leaders have been promising the same things. How blind humanity must be!
The promises have not changed – that means certainly nothing has been achieved. The same promises are being given to you and you go on following, hoping.
Hope is the greatest drug that man has invented.
Strange, that religious people are against drugs; politicians are also against drugs. Politicians make laws against drugs, religious people create hell and punishment against drugs.
Why are they so afraid of drugs?
It needs a deep search, investigation. They are afraid of drugs because drugs are competitors to them. LSD can give you hallucinations of heaven. That’s the trouble. No religion can afford to allow people to use LSD. LSD is not dangerous; taken in the right proportions, under medical care, it can be tremendously helpful in religious growth.
But religions are not ready to allow it for the simple reason that if LSD can give you a beautiful experience – hallucinatory, but still it is an experience and tremendously satisfying, fulfilling – then just promises will look like dry bones without any juice in them. Only idiots perhaps may continue to chew the dry bones.
Dogs do that. They chew dry bones and enjoy very much, not knowing what is happening. When they chew dry bones those dry bones hurt their mouths and their mouths start bleeding. The more they chew, the more bleeding happens. And blood goes through their throat and they think – logically enough – that the blood is coming from the bone. Now, how to explain to a dog that, “it is your own blood; the bone is absolutely dry.”
So perhaps a few idiots may still continue to go to the churches, but intelligent people will stop. Rather, when they feel the urge to have a beautiful hallucination, whenever they want to live in another world, they will not wait for death to come: they will go to a medical clinic and have a two, three-day session with LSD, and enjoy everything that their religious leaders have been telling them that they will get after death.
Drugs are dangerous to religions for the simple reason that they are their greatest competitors. And even better drugs can be invented, but religions continuously cripple the research.
Politicians are against drugs, because if people start taking drugs then who cares about your five-year plans? Who cares about the classless society that will come in the future to your grandchildren? Who cares about the revolution, democracy, freedom of speech?
You don’t have even the freedom to hallucinate!
This is absolutely innocent because only you are doing it, nobody else is involved. No, you don’t have the freedom to hallucinate. Reduced to the basics, that’s what drug prohibition means, that you don’t have the freedom to hallucinate. The government is in control of your dreams. Drugs can give you dreams, and properly used, can help you to see many things in yourself which in psychoanalysis will take three years, four years; then too it is not certain that you will be able to see.
It is a well-known fact that scientists have discovered something like truth serum, but it is prevented from being used, because if something like truth serum is possible…. You take an injection of truth serum and then suddenly you can see all your falsities, your hypocrisies, your bogus personality…and certainly if anything can make you aware of truth, it is bound to make you aware of all that is false: that is going to happen simultaneously. The moment you see the truth you see the false too.
Now, the whole of politics depends on falsities.
Communism goes on talking about equality of people – an utter untruth.
People are not equal, people are unique.
Once you see the truth, that people are unique, how can they be equal? That does not mean that somebody is inferior to you and somebody is superior to you. You are not equal, you are not unequal either. You are simply different.
You don’t compare things that are different. You don’t say that the house and the tree are equal. If you say that, you will be thought insane, because a house is a house and a tree is a tree; they have different functions. Their individualities are different. You don’t compare them. You cannot say that the house is superior to the tree, or the tree is superior to the house. In fact, the category of comparison is inapplicable.
Each individual is so unique. When you know the truth of it you cannot be a communist.
Communism will never allow anything that makes you aware of the truth.
In the non-communist countries, there are different lies, different falsities. For example, freedom of expression: it exists nowhere; it is only written in constitutions.
Once I was in a court in Ahmedabad in India, for absolutely ungrounded complaints against me – I was talking to a big rally of at least twenty thousand people who had gathered to listen to me – for the simple reason that Morarji Desai was the chief minister of Gujarat at that time, and he wanted me to be prohibited from entering Gujarat.
He could not convince his own assembly and cabinet that by preventing a person…they said, “You will be creating trouble for yourself and for the cabinet. What reasons have you got? What has he done against Gujarat? What crime has he committed that you can prevent him from coming to Gujarat? And it goes against the constitution, because the Indian constitution declares it as one of the basic rights that in India, every citizen of India has the right of movement. Now, you are preventing him from moving into Gujarat: you have to give some solid reasons; otherwise you will be in trouble.”
And the moment I heard I said, “Let their parliament decide – I will be there already in Gujarat.” So I was addressing the people, and while addressing them I mentioned a small story.
In Mahatma Gandhi’s ashram they used to read the story of Rama, the Hindu incarnation of God, every day. Each evening Acharya Vinoba Bhave would read the story of Rama, and Gandhi and all the followers – and there were not many, just twenty, thirty people – would listen to the story.
There comes a moment when Rama’s wife, Sita, is stolen by his enemy, Ramana. She is in difficulty: How to make Rama know by what path Ramana has taken her? She must have been an intelligent woman; she tried one strategy – she started dropping her ornaments. And Indian women, and particularly a queen, have so many ornaments; they weigh much more than she herself does.
She started dropping her ornaments one by one on the path so Rama would know exactly where she
had been taken. And Rama found them but he could not recognize whether they were Sita’s ornaments or somebody else’s.
His brother, Lakshmana, was with him. Lakshmana said, “You seem to be puzzled. What is the matter?”
He said, “I cannot recognize them because I loved her so much that whenever she was with me I looked at her, I never looked at her ornaments. I cannot recognize them – perhaps you can. Just look at the ornaments: if they are hers then we are on the right path.”
Lakshmana said, “Forgive me, because I can only recognize the ornaments that she used to wear on her feet.” Indian women wear ornaments on their feet, even on their toes. He recognized them. He said, “These are her ornaments.”
At this point of the story Mahatma Gandhi said, “This is strange! I can understand Rama loved the woman so much he did not recognize her ornaments. But what about Lakshmana? – he was living with them for years. Ahead was Rama – because they had been expelled from their kingdom for fourteen years to live in the forest…. so ahead was Rama, in the middle was Sita, behind was Lakshmana, just to guard. It is strange that he could not recognize any other ornament.”
Vinoba, who was a celibate for his whole life – now he is dead – gave an explanation which appealed to Gandhi very much, so much so that just before this explanation, Vinoba was known only as Vinoba Bhave; but because of this explanation Gandhi gave him the title of acharya, a master.
The explanation was that Lakshmana never looked at any other part of Sita’s body. He was a celibate and to look at anybody’s wife is not right for a celibate. But because he used to touch her feet every morning, he had to see the ornaments on her feet, just out of necessity. What could he do? – he had to touch her feet every morning. The elder brother’s wife is just like a mother. She has to be respected, and the first thing in the morning was to touch her feet; so that’s why he could recognize the ornaments of the feet only.
This is an outlandish explanation, nowhere ever given before. The story is five thousand years old, and there have been so many commentaries on it, but nobody had even asked the question and nobody had answered it. Gandhi was immensely impressed, and said, “Vinoba is an acharya – just this simple explanation shows his insight into human psychology.”
Talking to the masses in the rally I said, “This explanation does not show anything about Lakshmana, it shows something about Vinoba Bhave. It is not Lakshmana’s explanation; obviously, it is Vinoba Bhave’s explanation, and it shows his mind. He is afraid to look at women’s faces, or the other parts of their bodies. It is his fear that he is projecting on Lakshmana.
“And if his explanation is true then Lakshmana falls in my eyes completely. If Sita was just like a mother to him, still was he afraid to look at her face? One has to be afraid of looking at one’s own mother? That means he must have been dreaming sexual dreams about Sita, fantasizing about her.
“This explanation is insulting to Lakshmana, and I reject it as an explanation. My feeling is that Sita was so beautiful – if she was so beautiful for her husband, what to say about others? If the husband himself was so hypnotized by her beauty that he never saw her ornaments, what to say of poor Lakshmana? He must have been hypnotized even more!
“A husband sooner or later gets fed up. In fact a husband stops looking at his wife’s face, her body: he looks at everything in the room except his wife. If you inquire into couples you can be convinced of what I am saying. Just ask any husband, ‘How long has it been since you looked directly into your wife’s eyes, her face?’ – and he will start scratching his head. ‘It is difficult; perhaps since the honeymoon I have not looked at her.’
“But Lakshmana…. And it is just one side, that your elder brother’s wife is equal to your mother. The other side is that the younger brother of a woman’s husband is known in Hindi as devar. Devar means her second husband. In case the husband dies he has the first right to marry her. Var means husband; devar means second husband.
“Just as there are presidents and vice-presidents – in case the president dies the vice-president becomes the acting president – devar is simply a ready-made husband in case of emergency.”
A case was put against me, that I had hurt the religious feelings of the Hindus. In the court there were many problems. The first was that I was asked to take the oath in the name of God, or in the name of the constitution of India, that I would speak only the truth.
I said, “Before I take the oath I would like to ask you: What about freedom of speech? The oath goes against freedom of speech. You are binding me. You are telling me I can speak only the truth; then why in the constitution do you talk about freedom of speech? You should have said, ‘You are free to speak only the truth.’ Freedom of speech has no boundaries to it.
“How can I go against the constitution? I can take the oath that I will follow the constitution, use freedom of speech, but I cannot say truth or untruth, because that divides freedom of speech in two parts.”
The magistrate said, “This is a little difficult. I have been a magistrate for twenty years, I have been studying the constitution in every possible way, all its aspects, but that this oath is against freedom of speech never occurred to me.”
I said, “You don’t know what freedom of speech is. But,” I said, “I don’t want to change the subject, so just to continue I will take the oath. But remember, you can believe in my oath, but you cannot believe in my other statements. On what grounds do you make the distinction? If I am a person who lies, I can lie when I am taking the oath. Who prevents me?
“You know perfectly well that everybody takes the oath here and everybody is not speaking the truth. Both the parties fighting in a case take the oath; certainly both the parties are not speaking the truth. At least one party certainly is not speaking the truth; perhaps both are not speaking the truth. But both speaking the truth is not possible; otherwise how are you going to make the judgment?
“You accept my oath – on what grounds? Do you know me, that I speak the truth? That I will take the oath and will follow it? What gives you that guarantee? I will remain the same person as I was afterward, so it makes no difference to me. I can take the oath just so that we can proceed, because there are so many problems.”
The judge said, “Problems? For you or for me?”
I said, “You have summoned me to the court” – and there were thousands of people who had come; they were in the court and outside the court. And that man who had put the case against me – a Hindu political leader, a Hindu chauvinist – became afraid seeing so many people sympathetic toward me.
I said to the judge, “Look: first, I was simply quoting a statement of Mahatma Gandhi, and an explanation of Vinoba Bhave. If anybody has hurt the feelings of Hindus, they should put cases against Mahatma Gandhi and Vinoba Bhave. I was just quoting them, without inverted commas.
“It was not my explanation. In fact I was offended by the explanation that Vinoba has given. Vinoba’s explanation means that he thinks that Lakshmana has some sexual interest in Sita. That is purely his explanation. Said in plain words, he is afraid to look at Sita’s face. Why? If he is not sexually interested he should not be afraid. Vinoba is trying to make an explanation which is insulting.
“I am saying that Sita was so beautiful – anybody would have been interested. I would have been interested. You would have been interested. Beauty is not something that one should not be interested in. It is one of the gifts of nature; it has to be adored. And my feeling is he was touching her feet every day because Sita was so beautiful; he was adoring her.
“And you know the meaning of devar – that he was the second husband. Now, if somebody is hurt, then he should put a case against the whole Hindu tradition, that this tradition is in a mess. On the one hand you say treat your brother’s wife as your mother – okay, treat her as your mother. But when the brother dies, then? – treat your mother as your wife!
“And this man who has complained against me and forced me to come from Calcutta to here, unnecessarily wasting my time – is he the only Hindu in Ahmedabad? These thousands of people are here – these are all Hindus. You ask those whose feelings are hurt to raise their hands. And if you don’t ask then I am going to ask.”
So the magistrate had to ask. Not a single hand was raised. I said, “Now you can see: nobody’s feelings are hurt. This man is a Hindu chauvinist.”
At that time the man became afraid and he told the magistrate, “I want police protection, because after the court this crowd can kill me.”
I asked the magistrate, “Do you want any more argument that nobody’s feelings are hurt? This man is afraid of Hindus, that they will kill him. They should kill me – I should ask for the protection of the court because I have hurt the feelings of Hindus, he hasn’t. Why should he be afraid?
“And why should I have been called to the court? Why is Vinoba Bhave not being called? Of course, Gandhi is dead – you cannot summon him, but he is not needed anyway. Vinoba is alive – why has he not been called to the court? Just because he belongs to the party who rules the country? Because he is a guru to all the politicians of the country, you didn’t have the guts to summon him?
“He was needed to answer whether I am quoting right or wrong. If he says that I am quoting wrong, then certainly I have to be answerable for it. And my advocate had asked you to summon Vinoba because it is most important and essential, what he says. Still you did not summon Vinoba. And still you go on saying that the courts are impartial?
“Just look at the fact: I was simply quoting him. It was the court’s duty to ask the man whether I am quoting him rightly or wrongly. You should have called him here; we could have argued in front of you and made it clear to Vinoba that he is sexually obsessed and he is projecting his sexual obsession on poor Lakshmana.
“I was protecting Lakshmana. Vinoba should put a case against me. And this man is simply an idiot: he does not understand even what I was saying. He does not know what it means. But Vinoba is not called. And,” I said, “I will not appear again in the court unless Vinoba is called.”
The judge had no guts – because the prime minister goes to Vinoba, the cabinet ministers go to Vinoba, the president goes to Vinoba. To call Vinoba to the court would incur anger from all sides. The judge dismissed the case. He could not do anything else – he simply dismissed the case.
Politics has power. Vinoba was a religious leader, but through the politicians he has power. Although that power is not very substantial, still the power is there.
The religious leader or the political leader – both are in the same boat, helping each other. The politician protects the religious leader, the religious leader protects the politician. He protects him through people’s religious feelings, and the politician protects the religious leader by his power. It is a mutual understanding. Hence I don’t make any difference between the two. To me, the political leader is more criminal-minded; hence is ready to take the risk.
The religious leader is a coward, but cunning; through cunningness he manages to rise even higher than the political leader; at least in the abstract sense he is higher than the political leader.
But the desire of both is the same: to rule, to have control over millions of people.
To me, a man who does not suffer from an inferiority complex has no need even to lead a single man, to be powerful over even a single man. Such a man, if he is a husband, will not have any power over his wife. He will be just a friend, not a husband.
The word husband is ugly. It comes from husbandry: just as the farmer sows seeds in the ground, the husband does husbandry with the wife, he sows seeds. The woman is just like the earth and the husband is the possessor of the earth, the owner. The word husband is ugly, it should be changed. The whole idea is very primitive, crude.
The wife is not taken as a human being but as earth which you can sell. And it has been the case in the past: in many cultures wives were sold, purchased. In China you could have killed your wife – it was not a crime because she was your possession. If you destroy your chair it is nobody’s business; the chair was your possession – so was your wife.
Just because I mentioned Vinoba Bhave I remember…I had met him many times. One time he was giving his daily discourse in his ashram – and what ashrams these people had! Twelve widows, that was his ashram. And those widows were listening to his great discourse.
I just happened to pass from Wardha to Nagpur and his ashram was just outside the Wardha city, by the side of a river, Pavnar; hence the name of his ashram, Paramdham Pavnar. The friend who was driving me said, “This is the time Vinoba’s discourse starts. Would you like…?”
I said, “There is no harm,” so we went and sat. He had already started and he was telling an upanishadic story. The story was about a very famous upanishadic seer. His name was Raikva, Maharishi Raikva, but he was better known as Gadiwan Raikva because he always traveled in a bullock cart. Gadiwan means one who drives the bullock cart.
But in those days to have a beautiful bullock cart was something very special, it was not ordinary. Even today in Indian villages to have a beautiful bullock cart is to have a great possession. Gadiwan Raikva went to a market where girls were being sold. It was a market to purchase slaves – men, women.
Now, in the first place what is a maharishi doing in a market where slaves are being sold? Vinoba did not bother about that. There was one very beautiful girl, and when the auction began on the girl, Maharishi Raikva started raising the price. But it was difficult because the king of the country was also present and he was also interested in the girl, and he was doubling the price. Now, Gadiwan Raikva was a rich maharishi, but not to be compared with the king. Finally the king purchased the girl at a very high price. Raikva was very angry.
After ten years…. this is the whole story that I am telling. Vinoba did not tell this part of the story, of the slave market, Raikva’s competition with the king, his defeat, the girl being purchased by the king. All this part was left out.
Vinoba began praising Raikva, his wisdom, and started the story ten years after this incident: The king was becoming old and wanted somebody to guide him in the spiritual life, so he went to Gadiwan Raikva with many chariots full of gold, money, valuable clothes. He offered everything to Raikva, touched his feet, and Raikva said – he used the word sudra for him.
Sudra is the worst you can say to a man. It is difficult to translate in English, so I will say, “You son-of-a-bitch! You think that by all this money you can purchase spiritual guidance? I spit on all your money – take it back!”
This was the main emphasis in Vinoba’s story, and he said, “These were the people who could throw all those valuable presents and say directly – even to the king – ‘You are a sudra, the worst kind of human being: untouchable. The very idea in your mind, that by money you can purchase spiritual guidance, makes you untouchable. Just take all this rubbish from here and don’t come back to me.’“
So Vinoba talked much about it, that this was the courage of the seers of India, that they could even insult a great king without being afraid. I was very puzzled, because those twelve widows were listening in great silence as if some great thing was being said.
I said, “Vinoba, you have not told the whole story. You have left out two portions, first in the middle of the story – which is very important in order to understand in what context this man Raikva was speaking – and you have left out the end part also…. Because the king went home and he asked his prime minister what to do: Raikva has refused, and he was very angry.
The prime minister said, “I knew it was going to happen. You must have forgotten: ten years before you had, in an auction, defeated Raikva; now if you want him to guide you, you take that woman rather than money. Offer the woman to the man. Touch his feet, ask his forgiveness, and he will guide you….”
He took the woman, and Raikva received him with great joy, accepted him as a disciple and guided him into spirituality.
I said, “These two parts you have dropped from the story. You are cheating these twelve widows. Now, what authority have you got to change the story? Who are you? On what grounds did you drop those two parts? – because without those two parts the story takes a totally different color. It seems as if Raikva is so high that money does not matter to him, but the reality is that it is not a question of money. The woman that was taken from his hands matters too much to him.
“And this man who carries for ten years a revengeful attitude, and for ten years is still lusting for the woman – what spiritual guidance can he give?” I asked him, “You tell me what spiritual guidance this man can give – and why you dropped these two parts from the story.”
And since that time Vinoba remained angry with me. He said, “The time is over, so if you want to discuss you will have to come to my…”
I said, “I don’t want to discuss, because there is nothing to discuss; I simply wanted to make the story complete – and I have made it complete and all the widows have understood. You have understood. What argument? I have nothing to do with all these kinds of rogues, this Gadiwan Raikva. What do I have to do with this man? I wanted simply to make the story complete, just out of a sense of appropriateness; otherwise I am not interested.”
But this kind of thing is not expected of a man of integrity. This is simply cheating.
These are “religious” people. Indira used to go for spiritual guidance to Vinoba Bhave. I told Indira Gandhi – I had told her this story – “This is spiritual guidance? You are also a widow; when you are no longer a prime minister go into his ashram.”
But Vinoba died before Indira, and then she died, so the chance never came; otherwise she would have ended up in Vinoba Bhave’s ashram of widows.
And I asked her: “What do you say? Is this a man who has some sense of being truthful? And if Raikva could not give guidance, I say to you this Vinoba also cannot give you any guidance.” Misguidance perhaps….
We have never heard what happened to the king, what spiritual growth he obtained; the Indian spiritual history remembers nothing of the king. But it is natural, because whatever advice this idiot must have given could not be called spiritual – this man was not spiritual.
But this is how religious leaders and political leaders…. They are all made of the same stuff, the same holy cow-dung. I don’t see any difference, except superficial differences about which there is no need to talk.

============================================================

Osho,
How do we, the commune, ensure that our children maintain their original face?
The original face of every child is the face of God. Of course my God is not a Christian, a Hindu, a Jew. My God is not even a person but only a presence.
It is less like a flower and more like fragrance. You can feel it but you cannot catch hold of it. You can be overwhelmed by it but you cannot possess it.
My God is not something objective, there.
My God is your very subjectivity, here.
My God can never be indicated by the word that.
He can only be indicated by the word this.
The God of my vision and experience is not to be searched for in the synagogues, temples, mosques, churches, in the Himalayas, in the monasteries. He is not there because He is always here. And you go on looking for Him there.
When I say every child’s original face is the face of God, I am saying that God is synonymous with life, existence. Whatsoever is, is divine, sacred. And there is nothing else than God.
God is not to be understood as quantity, but as quality. You cannot measure it. You cannot make a statue of it, you cannot draw a picture of it. In that sense it is absolutely impersonal. And if you look at the faces of children when they arrive, fresh from the very source of life, you will see a certain presence which cannot be named – unnamable, indefinable.
The child is alive. You cannot define its aliveness, but it is there, you can feel it. It is so much there that howsoever blind you are you cannot miss it. It is fresh. You can smell the freshness around a child. That fragrance slowly, slowly disappears. And if unfortunately the child becomes successful, a celebrity – a president, a prime minister, a pope – then the same child stinks.
He had come with a tremendous fragrance, immeasurable, indefinable, unnamable. You look into the eyes of a child – you cannot find anything deeper. The eyes of a child are abysmal, there is no bottom to them. Unfortunately, the way society will destroy him, soon his eyes will be only superficial; because of layers and layers of conditioning, that depth, that immense depth will have disappeared long before. And that was his original face.
The child has no thoughts. About what can he think? Thinking needs a past, thinking needs problems. He has no past, he has only future. He has no problems yet, he is without problems. There is no possibility of thinking for him. What can he think?
The child is conscious but without thoughts.
This is the original face of the child.
Once this was your face too, and although you have forgotten it, it is still there within you, waiting someday to be rediscovered. I am saying rediscovered because you have discovered it many times in your previous lives, and again and again you go on forgetting it.
Perhaps even in this life there have been moments when you have come very close to knowing it, to feeling it, to being it. But the world is too much with us. Its pull is great – and there are a thousand and one directions the world is pulling you. It is pulling you in so many directions that you are falling apart. It is a miracle how people go on managing to keep themselves together. Otherwise their one hand will be going to the north, another hand to the south, their head must be going toward heaven; all their parts will be flying all over the place.
It is certainly a miracle how you go on keeping yourself together. Perhaps the pressure from all sides is too much so that your hands and legs and heads cannot fly. You are pressed from everywhere.
Whenever I see…and I don’t know why people go on sending me beautiful paperweights – I don’t have any papers. What am I going to do with paperweights? Perhaps they think there are hundreds of books in my name so there must be so much paperwork around me, all over my room papers and papers. There is not a single paper.
Yes, paperweights go on coming, and whenever a paperweight comes I am immediately reminded of you. You would have been flying like papers in the strong wind, but there are so many paperweights to keep you pressed and give you an idea that you are one individual. You are not – you are many, and in the crowd of this many-ness of your existence, your original face is lost.
Even if by chance you happen to meet your original face, you will not be able to recognize it, it will be such a stranger. Perhaps you come across it once in a while, just by accident, but you don’t even say Hi! It is a stranger and perhaps deep down, a certain fear – that is always there with every stranger.
That’s why people try to become acquainted, introduced to strangers, the sooner the better. They don’t want to be left in that state of fear, that somebody is absolutely unknown to them. They don’t know what he can do, what he intends to do, what kind of person he is. Maybe he is a murderer, a thief.
I played around this theme so many times because I was continuously traveling in India, and I was always traveling in an air-conditioned coupe. So at the most two persons – that too very rarely because in India very few people can afford to travel in the air-conditioned coupe, except people like me who have nothing to lose. Just poor people like me can travel like that because we cannot be more poor than we are.
But once in a while a minister, a governor, a rich industrialist, a scientist, a vice-chancellor – people like that were my fellow travelers. And I always tried to see what happened to them if I continued to remain a stranger. And I enjoyed – it does things to people.
I was not doing anything, I was just trying be a stranger, which really I am. They would ask me, “Where are you going?” – just anything to begin with.
I would say, “Anywhere will do.”
They would say, “Anywhere will do?” – and I could see the fear arising: “Is the man mad? But no, he does not look mad.” They would then say, “Are you joking?”
Once I said, “Why should I joke with you?”
In India, it is a convention that you joke only with certain relatives. Joking is very confined, to a certain relationship. You joke only with your wife’s brother, otherwise you don’t joke; only that’s acceptable to the society. I said, “But you are not my wife’s brother, why should I joke? Or are you my wife’s brother? Perhaps you are. But I don’t remember ever seeing you before.”
The man became really more shaky and I could see the trembling arising – and he had to travel with me for at least ten hours, twelve hours, or even twenty-four hours. But still he tried: “What is your name?”
I said, “The moment you asked me, it was just on the tip of my tongue. Now I am trying hard to remember. I have a name, I certainly remember…I know it is there but you will have to give me a little time. If it comes, it comes; if it does not come what can I do? What can you do? But it doesn’t matter anyway, you can call me any name. Anyway every child is born without a name and we give him one. All names are arbitrary, so it does not matter whether you call me Ram, Rahim, Ibrahim, Moses, Jesus, Christ; anything will do.”
And I said, “You please sit down, there is no need to continue to stand. Sit down, be at ease, and I will go and close the door.”
He said, “Why are you closing the door?”
I said, “The door has to be closed. Passengers are passing by, what will they think? You are trembling, perspiring, in an air-conditioned room? No, I don’t want you to look so silly and embarrassed.” I virtually forced the person to sit down. I was forcing him to sit down, and he wanted to stand up.
He said, “Can’t I stand?”
I said, “You just first relax. Do you want to go to the bathroom or have you already done it? Anyway there is no need to worry – you just sit down.”
That man looked at me and looked all around. It was just a small cabin for two persons and he was thinking, “this type of man, he can do anything.” But he tried somehow to figure me out; anyway he wanted to be acquainted. And he said “By your face you look religious.”
I said, “Yes, when I look in the mirror I also feel that this man looks religious. But I am not religious. Never go by the appearance, appearances are not always real.”
“No,” he said, “you are still trying to befool me. You are a religious man.” Now he was trying somehow to categorize me.
I said, “If you say, and if it consoles you, helps you in some way, okay, I am a religious man.”
The man was a brahmin – I had seen his name on the door. In the air-conditioned compartment they have the passengers’ names on the door, so I had seen that he was a Bengali, a high-caste brahmin, a chattopadhyaya. So he said, “What religion?”
I said, “Religion is just religion – there is no adjective to it.”
He said, “That I cannot believe. You must be a religious Hindu sage.”
I said, “If it helps you, I am.”
And he fell at my feet, and he said, “I knew from the very beginning that you are not mad, that you are a sage. And sages and mad people look alike, behave alike. Everything that you said now makes sense.”
But I said, “One thing I have just said to console you – really I am not a Hindu, I am a Mohammedan.” And now you cannot believe what a terrible mess he fell into. He had touched the feet of a Mohammedan! A Hindu brahmin, a high-caste brahmin, is afraid even of touching the shadow of a Mohammedan. If he touches even the shadow of a Mohammedan he will have to take a bath to cleanse himself. And he had touched actual feet!
Now the situation had become much worse. The chattopadhyaya said, “But why did you lie to me?”
I said, “I was just trying to console you. I never thought that you would fall at my feet. Before I could prevent you, you had already done it. But don’t be worried, I am really a brahmin. I was just checking what happens: if some Mohammedan looks like a brahmin sage and you touch his feet, what will happen to you? I was just trying to see.”
He said, “That’s right.” And a great smile…and he relaxed in his seat and he said, “I knew from the very beginning – such a nice person could not be a Mohammedan. Those Mohammedans are all butchers.”
I said, “You are right, because I was born a Mohammedan so I know perfectly well they are all butchers.”
This way I have seen many well-educated people trying to figure out…and I told them, “Why are you bothering to figure out about me? If you take that much trouble to figure out about yourself you will become enlightened! You need not worry about me. You do your work, whatever you want to do; you simply accept me as absent, I am not here. Behave as if I am not here and do whatsoever you want to do.
“If you want me to close my eyes, I can close my eyes. If you want me to go to sleep, I will go to sleep. But please be at ease; just forget about me. But don’t try to become familiar with me – that I don’t allow. We are going to remain strangers for ten hours.”
In fact we are all strangers.
Even if we live our whole life together it makes no difference, we remain strangers; we just settle for consolations, and we start taking the other for granted. It is a make-believe that you know the other – your wife, your mother, your father, your brother, your friend – it is just a make-believe that you know them. You know nothing about the other because that is impossible – for the simple reason that you don’t know anything about yourself yet. Without knowing oneself it is impossible to know anybody else.
The trouble is you can be introduced to somebody else, but how can you be introduced to yourself? Who is going to do that?
You can be introduced to somebody else because that introduction is just arbitrary. The name, the caste, the country, the religion, the profession – these are all arbitrary and accidental.
It happened…really a great coincidence, almost inconceivable, but it happened so whether it is conceivable or not makes no difference. When I was standing at the window after my matriculation, to obtain entry into a college, there were many people who were filling in forms and I was waiting to get my form. When I was filling in my form a boy just of my age came to me, and he said, “What subjects are you taking?”
So I showed him my form and said, “These are my subjects.”
He said, “Oh, okay, I will fill in these subjects also.”
I said, “But this is strange. You have come to the college – don’t you have any idea what you want to study?”
He said, “It is all the same to me. My father wants me to study so I have come to the college. I don’t have any interest in anything, I have just come to enjoy. My father is rich. He wants me to be in college so okay, I will be in college and have fun and enjoy. Any subjects will do.”
But I said, “These subjects perhaps may be difficult for you: philosophy, logic….”
He said, “I don’t care even what they mean. I don’t know, I have never heard this word logic before.”
“Then,” I said, “It is perfectly okay.”
And he asked me, “Will you please give me your fountain pen?”
I said, “This is too much – you don’t have your own fountain pen?”
He said, “I am not a man who is interested in these things.”
He showed me a packet of cigarettes. He said, “I am interested in cigarettes, not in fountain pens; and I am not going to attend any class or anything. My father is going to send me the money and I am going to enjoy, and I am going to ask him for more and more. He has enough, and I am the only son so I am not wasting anybody else’s money. It is my own, I am going to inherit it anyway.”
I gave him my fountain pen and he filled in the form. He even had to look at my form for the spelling of the words that he was filling in. But this way we became friends. I liked the boy, he was sincere, and not a hypocrite in any way. We became friends. He needed me and I needed him, because I needed so much money for books and he had so much money that I said, “This is good.” And he was not interested in books at all.
But I was his first friend in the college. And he had everything: a car, a driver, a bungalow – I needed all these things so I said, “That’s perfectly good – you came at the right time. And whatever your need is, I will manage, you don’t be worried.” So I had to do examinations for both of us. In three hours time, half was mine and half was his. In one and a half hours I finished my paper and then I would start his paper.
But he said, “This is a great bargain.” He said, “If I can pass, my father is going to be mad with happiness. He cannot believe that I can pass, because in matric he had to give such a large bribe to push me through. And now he knows that in college it is going to be difficult.”
I said, “You don’t be worried, you will pass first class.” And he passed first class with a BA After the BA I left Jabalpur because one of the professors in Sagar University, S.S. Roy, was persistently asking me, writing me, phoning me to say, “After your BA you join this university for your post-graduation.”
From Jabalpur University to Sagar University there is not much distance – one hundred miles. But Sagar University was in many ways unique. It was a small university compared to Benares University or Aligarh University, which had ten thousand students, twelve thousand students. They are just like Oxford or Cambridge – big universities, big names. Sagar University had only one thousand students and almost three hundred professors, so for every three students, one professor. It was a rare place; perhaps nowhere in the world can you find another university where there is one professor for three students.
And the man who had founded the university was acquainted with all the best professors around the world. Sagar was his birthplace; Doctor Harisingh Gaud was his name. He was a world-famous authority on law, and earned so much money – and never gave a single pai to any beggar, to any institution, to any charity. He was known as the most miserly person in the whole of India.
And then he founded the university and gave his whole life’s earning. That was millions of dollars. He said to me, “That’s why I was a miser; otherwise there was no way – I was a poor man, I was born a poor man. If I were doing charity and giving to this hospital and to this beggar and to that orphan, this university would not have existed.” For this university…he had carried his whole life only one idea, that his birthplace should have one of the best universities in the world. And certainly he created one of the best universities in the world.
While he was alive he managed to bring professors from all over the world. He gave them double salaries, triple salaries, whatsoever they wanted – and no work, because there were only one thousand students, which even a small college has in India; one thousand students is not a large number. And he opened all the departments which only a university like Oxford can afford. Oxford has nearabout three hundred and fifty departments.

============================================================

Osho,
How do you intend to raise the consciousness of the entire planet? Do we have enough time? Do we have a chance?
I can only answer for myself. I cannot use the word we.
That word is used by political leaders and religious priests. I am neither of them. I do not represent anybody in the world except myself.
The politician represents a certain crowd; hence his use of the word we has some meaning. He is no more than the total sum of the crowd. Withdraw the crowd and the politician disappears into a vacuum, into nothingness.
The same is true about a pope, a shankaracharya, or any other religious leader. The pope is simply the sum total of all the Catholics of the world. But remember, he is not a man but only a sum total – a number in arithmetic, but not an individual.
The individual can never use the word we, he can only use the word I – and that too with a very specific condition. His I is not equivalent to the ego. His I is not to be written in capital letters, his I should be written in lower case letters. It is not something extraordinary: he is simple, an ordinary human being. I am using the word I in the same way. We is impossible for me because I don’t belong to any crowd, any mob.
My commune is not a crowd.
It is a communion of individuals.
Yes, one can misunderstand it as a crowd. From far away you see a forest, but as you come close there are only trees, no forest. Exactly that is the case with my commune. Those who never come close to it will think of it as a cult, a creed, a certain society. But those who come close will find only trees, no forest – each individual so absolutely unique, alone. The question of “we” does not arise at all.
So when I am saying that I cannot use we, I am also trying to help you understand that you cannot use we either. You will have to be very alert.
And the I that you have to be has not to be the I of the egoist. The egoist uses I in the sense that he is superior to you, that you are nothing compared to him. His I is big, and his whole effort in his whole life in only one: how to make the I bigger and bigger, higher and higher, so that it becomes an Everest; no other peak can ever come even close to it.
This is the way Muhammad Ali uses I – Muhammad Ali, the Greatest. This is the way Alexander used his I – Alexander the Great. Just Alexander won’t do, “the Great” is needed to make him stand separate from thousands of other Alexanders.
I am suggesting to you to use I just in a utilitarian way – not to impose yourself on others, not to project yourself as bigger than others, but as an absolutely human necessity. You have to use some word. There have been people who have tried not to use the word I for the simple reason that it may be misunderstood as being used in the same way as everybody uses the I. Or perhaps they were deep down afraid themselves that if they used the word I the ego would come following it; it would be standing just behind it. Perhaps that is the case.
I recall one person, one very important Hindu sage of this century, Swami Ramateertha. He has been to America; and he was an influence wherever he went; he was a man of charismatic personality. He never used the word I. But that makes no difference at all – he had to use something else. If he was feeling thirsty, instead of saying, “I am thirsty,” he would say, “Ramateertha is thirsty”…, “Ramateertha wants to go to sleep.”
New people who had no idea what he was talking about could not understand it. They looked here and there and they asked, “Were is Ramateertha who is thirsty?” And then he would have to point to himself: “This is Ramateertha who is feeling thirsty.” But this seems to be such a stupid procedure. Rather than catching your ear directly, you go around the head and make such weird gestures, and finally you catch the ear – nothing special.
I am a lazy man, I cannot do that. If I have to catch hold of my ear I will catch it directly, rather than moving my hand around my head and then catching hold of my ear – that looks ludicrous. But Ramateertha made a great impression by this. People are foolish; if you try to see what things people get impressed with you will be surprised. That will show you what kind of humanity exists on the earth. They were very much impressed by Ramateertha: “Here is a man who is egoless.”
He was not egoless. There is enough proof in his life to show that he was not egoless. When for the first time in India I said that, there was great anger among Hindus because they always believed that Ramateertha was one of the greatest souls born in this century. He was respected around the world, and nobody has said anything against him. But the problem was that the Ramateertha League – it is an international organization, its headquarters are in Lucknow, India – invited me to speak on Ramateertha.
Now, it was not my fault. I even inquired of them, “Are you sure you want me to speak on Ramateertha?” And they were not aware…because nobody had spoken about him. He was a nice man, but to be nice is not enough. I went to speak at their annual conference, a world conference, and I said, “To me Ramateertha befooled himself and nobody else” – and I gave the instances from his own biography published by the league…authoritative, approved by Ramateertha himself. I said, “I will simply be quoting, there is no need even to interpret. If you are just a little bit intelligent, you will see the point.”
Ramateertha toured all over the world and then he came back to India. Everywhere, he was received with great honor as a sage from the Himalayas. First he went to Varanasi, the center of Hinduism for thousands of years. He was shocked because, naturally, deep down he must have been expecting…. The biography says he was shocked because there was no overwhelming reception. The same way, just a few days ago the pope was shocked in a Catholic country because there was no overwhelming reception.
But unless you are expecting something, I don’t see the possibility of being shocked. Ramateertha must have been expecting an overwhelming reception, a welcome – the welcome that is given to a man who has conquered the whole world. He comes back to the citadel of Hinduism, and he has been talking about Hinduism around the world, praising Hinduism around the world, making Hinduism appear the highest religion in the world. Naturally, it is human – he must have been expecting….
But out of eight shankaracharyas, the heads of Hinduism, not a single one was present to receive him. Forget about shankaracharyas, because they are the heads, and Ramateertha was still a monk, not a head of Hinduism; but there were no other monks either to receive him. A few people had come who looked more curious than receptive or welcoming.
And instead of Ramateertha having a red-carpet welcome, a letter was handed to him from the highest Hindu committee of pundits, scholars. The letter said, “Before you speak anywhere else, first you have to face the committee, the supreme committee of the scholars of Hinduism, because the way you have been talking about Hinduism is not orthodox, it is not traditional.” More shocking!
He was almost court-marshaled. In front of the scholars he had to answer why he said this, why he said that. This he had never thought was going to be, but this is how it happened. He had to appear before the scholars – and there is the point that I wanted to make to the conference in Lucknow.
As he was just going to speak, one old Hindu scholar stood up and said, “First tell me, do you know Sanskrit?” Unfortunately Ramateertha did not know Sanskrit at all, for the simple reason that he was born near Lahore, which is now in Pakistan. In that part even Hindi was not spoken; Urdu, a Mohammedan language, was the spoken language. And those who wanted to become great scholars of course had to read Persian and Arabic. They had to go to the roots of Urdu; that is, Persian and Arabic. Sanskrit has nothing to do with Urdu.
Mohammedans or Hindus was not the question: the area where Ramateertha was born was Urdu-dominated; in schools, in colleges, in universities, Persian and Arabic were the exalted languages. So he was a scholar of Persian, Arabic and Urdu, but he had never thought that religion had anything to do with language.
You can be a Hindu without knowing Sanskrit, you can be a great Hindu sage without knowing Sanskrit; Sanskrit is not something absolutely necessary. And that was one of the questions those scholars were asking him: “While speaking around the world you were not quoting the upanishads, the vedas, the shankaracharyas. You were quoting Sufi mystics – Jalaluddin Rumi, Farid, Sarmad. You can befool in the West because people don’t know what you are quoting, but these are not Hindus, these are not our people.”
The truth is Ramateertha had quoted exactly rightly. It does not matter whom he was quoting, what matters is the meaning. He had no knowledge of Sanskrit but he understood. He had read the upanishads in Urdu, he had read the vedas in Urdu, and naturally he had the understanding of the essential message. And that message was so clearly expressed by Sufi mystics – Rumi, Al-Hillaj-Mansoor, Junnaid, Rabiya Al Adabiya; they have expressed the same thing. Of course their language was different. But here he found that he was being treated as a criminal.
Another scholar stood up and said, “Before you speak in front of us, first go and learn Sanskrit.” And he was completely shattered. Now, only an ego can be shattered.
If I was in his place, in the first place I would not have expected any overwhelming reception. If they were not throwing stones at me, that would have been enough – a great reception. If they allowed me to enter Varanasi that would have been more than one could hope. And then I would not have gone to their scholars to be examined, interrogated. I should have torn up that letter then and there, and thrown it on the platform and said to them, “Tell all of them to go to hell! What business have I got to do with your scholars? If they want to do anything, they have to come to me.
“And I have not come here to be certified that I am really a Hindu sage. I myself say that I am not a Hindu, neither am I a sage. So what is the problem? How can you shatter me? – I don’t have any claim. Can’t you even accept me as a human being? If even that is difficult for you, then that is your problem, don’t accept. But that is not going to shatter me either.”
You are shattered only when you are living in a glass house. Then anybody can throw a stone and that’s enough. But I am not living in a glass house. The ego is a glass house: it is continuously afraid of being shattered. Somebody does not say “Hello” to you on the road, and that’s enough. He has not done anything, he has not even said “Hello” – but this man used to say “Hello” every day. It pinches, it hurts: “What happened? Have I fallen in his eyes, or what?” He will disturb your sleep because he has not said “Hello” to you.
Expectations always lead to frustrations.
Expectations are the seeds, and frustration is the crop that sooner or later you will have to reap. It is your own doing.
So I asked the followers of Ramateertha, “What was shattered? If there was no ego there was nothing to be shattered. If you throw a stone into empty space, nothing will be shattered, only the stone will look silly – falling with a thud, no obstruction, no joy of destroying something, no excitement of shattering something; just falling with a thud on the ground like a fool.
“A man without an ego is like an empty house. You can throw stones from this side to that side, they will go across him without finding any obstruction. Nothing can be shattered.”
So I said, “Note this point, but this is not the whole story. Ramateertha left Varanasi and went to the Himalayas. He had a follower and a friend who was a king of Garhwal in the Himalayas, a small state. He went there and told his friend, the king of Garhwal, ‘I would like to learn Sanskrit, so please arrange for a scholar to teach me Sanskrit.’“
Now, is this the way of a sage? Who could not say to these fools in Varanasi, “Enlightenment does not come through a language. It comes when all languages are left behind. It comes when even thinking exists no more. There is no Arabic, no Hebrew, no Greek, no Sanskrit, no Latin. Only then that light shines within yourself.”
Yes, when you start communicating of course you will have to use some language. And you will use the language which you know best. In Ramateertha’s place I would have said, “I will continue to use Urdu, Persian, Arabic because those are the languages I know best, and I am not going to follow your dictation that I should start learning Sanskrit. For what? to get your recognition? to be certified by you that I am really a saint? Does sainthood need anybody’s recognition?”
Who recognized Gautam Buddha, that he is enlightened? Who has recognized anybody in the whole world, in the whole of history? In fact it is impossible. The unenlightened people cannot recognize or certify an enlightened one; he has to declare himself, there is no other way. Whether you believe it or not, that does not matter, and that does not shatter him.
Nobody may believe it, not even a single human being. Do you think that makes any difference to the status of a man of enlightenment? He remains still the same, his enlightenment not even a little bit less because you have not recognized him.
Why did Ramateertha agree to learn Sanskrit?
And the story is really strange. He started learning Sanskrit – not only that, he dropped his orange robe and started using white clothes. Asked why, he said, “Because if Hindu scholars do not recognize me then I am not yet capable of using the traditional robe of a Hindu sannyasin.”
When I decided to give my sannyasins the same robe, it was for one reason – to destroy this whole idea that anybody has a monopoly.
In India there is an organization of Hindu monks. It has been founded by one of the politicians who has been twice prime minister of India, for a few days only. His name is Guljarilal Nanda. Whenever a prime minister dies this man is put as acting prime minister. Before the second one comes, for a few days, a few weeks, he remains a prime minister. He has no support but he is a person who can be relied on not to create any trouble. And he is not even courageous enough to create any trouble – he is a weakling.
Sometimes your weakness proves of great help. When Jawaharlal died, Morarji was hoping to become immediately the acting prime minister, but he was not chosen because he is, although very mediocre, also very stubborn. If once he becomes acting prime minister then it will be difficult to recall him, to tell him to get down. He will not get down so easily once he gets up.
Some weakling has to be chosen for the interim period so you put him up like a puppet; and when you want him down, he comes down. The same man did it twice: when Jawaharlal died he became the prime minister, and when Lal Bahadur Shastri died he became the prime minister. Both times Morarji was hoping, and both times he was denied, because everybody was afraid that once he got up, he would not come down.
But this man was cowardly, weak; hence, naturally, he could not manage to be a great political force. Guljarilal Nanda turned toward religion. Many weaklings turn toward religion, many cowardly people turn toward religion, because here you don’t need much guts. He founded an organization of Hindu monks; he was the president of the organization.
When I started initiating people into sannyas, he told me, “You are creating trouble.”
I said, “What trouble?”
He said, “You are giving them the same robe. Now it is going to be a very confusing thing: who is who?”
I said, “That is what I want to do. And I am going to fill your whole organization with my sannyasins, you cannot prevent it. And soon you will see, my sannyasins will be the president, the secretaries, in your organization.”
They became freaked out so much! I was just joking – I was not interested; who bothers about these idiots and their organizations? They became so freaked out they immediately made a resolution that anybody wearing my mala should not be allowed in the organization as a member – “He is not really a Hindu sannyasin.”
I said, “That’s true, he is not. He is neither a Hindu sannyasin nor a Mohammedan sannyasin, nor a Christian sannyasin. He is just himself. The orange robe I have chosen is just to destroy this monopolistic idea.”
But Ramateertha was subdued so much by those mere intellectuals that he dropped his orange robe. These are all ways of the ego. Now he would learn Sanskrit; he would prove to himself that he was a scholar in Sanskrit too – and with grace and honor he would receive the robe from them.
These are the ways of the ego. Who are they? On what authority…? Just because they are crammed with rotten knowledge? So I said to his followers, “To me his saying that ‘Ramateertha is hungry’ rather than saying, ‘I am hungry’ does not change his ego; it simply makes it more complicated. And the greatest problem is, he may be deceived by it. If others are deceived, that is not much of a trouble; he himself may be deceived. He may himself start thinking that he has dropped the ego because now he never uses the word I.”
So the question is not of using the word. The question is of understanding how you are using it. Use it as a utility, don’t make it a psychological trip.
Now you are asking me – how are we going to raise the consciousness of the world? Why should we raise the consciousness of the world? Are you nuts or something? Can’t you let the world alone? You just raise your consciousness.
No, but this is how the world is. Nobody is interested in raising his own consciousness. Everybody is interested in raising the world’s consciousness – that seems to be easier, more fun. To raise one’s own consciousness is arduous. To raise the consciousness of the world is just fun, no problem to you. Whether it is raised or not, you are not losing anything.
Yes, by trying to raise it suddenly you become a great sage, you become a great religious leader, you become world famous. You are raising the consciousness of the world – as if consciousness is just lying down there asleep and you just have to wake it up. Just pour cold water over it and consciousness rises up and says, “What is the matter? Who is troubling me?”
It is not so easy. Consciousness is not there in any collective sense, there is no world consciousness. There are only trees, no forest. Forest is only a word – convenient, useful, but non-existential. If you go in search of a forest you will never find it. Standing in the middle of it still you will not find it. What you will find always is an individual tree, and of course an individual tree is not the forest.
This consciousness of the world, consciousness of humanity, is just a word. Don’t fall into linguistic games.
Remember one thing:
Consciousness is always individual.
There is no way for consciousness to become collective. It is always “I,” it is never “we.”
Why this concern? And this is not only your concern – millions of people around the world are concerned with raising the consciousness of the world. And not only now; as far back as you can find any records they have been concerned with raising human consciousness, humanity, making the world divine, sacred. And the same problems….
In Mesopotamia – where one of the oldest civilizations existed once and is no longer in existence, but ruins are there – a pillar has been found which is six thousand years old at least. That is the minimum, it cannot be more recent than that; it can be twelve thousand years old, but six thousand is the bottom line. With all the scientific observations they have concluded that it is at least six thousand years old, more perhaps.
What does it say? The pillar says: “Man has fallen to such a rotten state that we have to teach humanity again to become human. Sons are no longer listening to their fathers” – there is a generation gap – “wives are no longer faithful to their husbands. Husbands are doing all kinds of things, which make them disrespected and fathers are not fulfilling their duties.” The whole pillar seems as if it is in some newspaper, just today’s editorial.
In India the Rig Veda is the oldest book. According to the Hindu scholar Lokmanya Tilak, a great scholar, it is ninety thousand years old. He has immense proof and evidence, and as yet he has not been challenged. It is almost sixty years or more since he proved that it is ninety thousand years old. In these sixty years nobody has been able to disprove his evidence; it is now either forgotten or accepted.
Whatsoever the case, the Rig Veda is certainly the most ancient book in existence – but it raises the same problems that you face today, the same questions: Is it possible to change man’s nature? Is there time enough? Ninety thousand years before, they were worried: Is there time enough? And the time has not proved enough, that’s certainly true, because the problems are still the same – perhaps worse.
You are asking me the same questions but I am a different kind of man, a little bit eccentric…otherwise, if you had asked the question to any mahatma, any great religious personality, he would have answered, “Yes, we can raise humanity’s consciousness. Of course time is very short but my methods are very quick too.”
That’s what Maharishi Mahesh Yogi goes on telling people. Time is short, according to all the prophecies, all the astrologers; as this century closes there is every possibility that the earth will be finished. Time is really short. It is 1985 – only fifteen years more. Ninety thousand years have not proved enough. Fifteen years! But Maharishi Mahesh Yogi goes around the earth with jet speed. Of course he has to use the jet speed – time is short!
But he says his method is quick: just ten minutes in the morning and ten minutes in the evening you do transcendental meditation. And what is transcendental meditation? You repeat one word that is given to you. Of course you have to pay a fee for it, two hundred and fifty dollars. And what does he give? He asks you, “Are you a Christian?” You say, “Yes.”
He says, “Catholic? Protestant?” – just to figure out who you are so he can give you a mantra suitable to your religion.
If you say, “I am a Catholic,” he will say, “That’s very good. You start the mantra, ‘Ave Maria.’ Repeat continuously: Ave Maria, Ave Maria, Ave Maria, anywhere, in any posture, just for ten minutes. Between two Ave Marias don’t leave any gap, go as fast as you can.” One Ave Maria almost entering another Ave Maria, just as when sometimes there is an accident of a railway train, and compartments go over other compartments, and inside other compartments. All the buffers are broken and the train is for the first time in a real unity.
This is a very traditional method in India. It is nothing new, and it is used by everybody; in every village you can get it, very cheap…. If you are very rich then the price is eleven rupees, which is less than one dollar. If you are poor it can be reduced; for the very poor, a coconut.
And, in India, there are two types of coconuts – coconuts which people eat, and coconuts which people use religiously. They offer it to gods, to temples, to gurus. Those coconuts for centuries have the same price, their price has not changed. For one rupee you can get three – because they are the same coconuts! For centuries….
In my village, just in front of my house there was a temple of Krishna, and by the side of the temple, a coconut shop. A coconut shop is always very close. If you find a temple, you can believe without any trouble that within a five-minute radius there must be a coconut shop; mostly it is just by the side of the temple.
You go on offering to the god, and the same coconuts go on getting back to the side shop. So the price remains the same because…and they are all rotten. The coconut shell is so hard that what is inside nobody knows. These are religious coconuts. Nobody will purchase coconuts from a religious coconut shop for eating, or for anything, because inside you will find nothing. Their function is just to move from the shop to the temple, and from the back door again to the shop. In the morning they are again for sale – and this round goes on and on.
And the coconut is a strange fruit. You can work with it for centuries. Its consciousness remains the same, no change. In India it is so cheap – Maharishi Mahesh Yogi may not have been able to raise the consciousness of the people but he has raised the price of transcendental meditation from one coconut to two hundred and fifty dollars. I don’t know how many coconuts that will be…because for one rupee you can get three coconuts – religious coconuts, don’t forget that. For one rupee, three religious coconuts; for one dollar you can have at least sixty religious coconuts; for two hundred and fifty dollars…now you can work it out.
And now he is not only trying to raise the consciousness of people. He has been doing that for almost thirty years, and now people are fed up because nothing is raised. Simply their pocket becomes lighter, and nothing is raised. They are getting fed up. And how long can you cheat people?
So now these people have to go on inventing something new. His new thing is even more idiotic: now he is trying to levitate people. First he was trying to levitate their consciousness, now he is trying to levitate people. The fees have also gone higher – of course, because he is raising your body too. Now he says he has found the secret. Joined with transcendental meditation your body will rise, float in the air; your head will touch the roof. And there are fools in the world who are ready to pay for this kind of nonsense.
Maharishi Mahesh Yogi has been asked again and again, “Give a public demonstration, at least one person.” That he is not doing, because it is such a secret thing that you cannot do it in public. It can be done only in private. But strangely, if it is done only in privacy, how are the photographs appearing in his magazines? At least the photographers must be there. It is public; the person is not isolated.
The whole thing is, it is a simple photographic trick. It is not much of a thing; any person who understands a little photography can manage it. He just has to mix two negatives; in one negative you are sitting on the floor, and in the other negative it has to be managed that you are touching the roof. You can be put on a tall stool, with the same mattress on which you were sitting on the floor, in the same room. And there is no problem – you just have to arrange these two photographs together to show that this man’s body has levitated.
Time is short, and people are trying to levitate bodies. For what purpose? Even if, for argument’s sake, we accept that people can learn to levitate their bodies, and their heads start touching their roofs, how is it going to make humanity better?
If just touching the roof with your head is the thing, then simpler methods can be used. Just make a tall stool – ask Asheesh; he can make you a beautiful tall stool so your head touches the roof. A stool can be adjustable, so if you are short or tall the stool can be adjusted. You can adjust it yourself, so your head touches the roof. If that makes you a superman, then why bother about meditation and such long procedures? Time is very short.
But I am not interested either in raising people’s consciousness, or in raising their bodies. In fact for decades I have not been interested in doing anything for the world, for humanity, because to me these are bogus words. I am interested only in a few chosen people.
The whole mass of humanity – whether it lives or disappears makes no difference.
I may look hard to you, but I am simply being factual. Just look at the past. Millions of people have lived and died – what does it matter? Where does it lead? Millions of people are living today – in what way are they enriching life? Just breathing, just vegetating; is that enough?
Just today I have received a news item: in Miami, a man’s situation has become really terrible. He had a brain cancer, and to remove that cancer they had to use, for the first time, some poison without which it was not removable. That poison entered into his brain by mistake. The cancer was removed but the poison entered into his brain and killed his brain. Now the man is alive, the brain is dead. He can live for years, there is no problem; you just have to take care of him. His brain is completely dead, so everything that his brain was doing, you will have to do. And it was your mistake.
But the doctor can also not be condemned. That poison was used for the first time, so there is no way to say that he used it wrongly because there is no precedent. He tried his best – just an unlucky man.
Now, between this man, I thought as I was reading the news, and the millions of masses, is there any difference? That was the question that came to me. Their brains are not dead, but their souls are dead – which is far worse. And nobody else is responsible – they themselves are responsible.
They are living, but do you call it life?
What is the point of their living?
What have they found out about it, what have they experienced?
Where have they arrived?
If they were not born, would you have missed them?
If they were not here, would existence be poorer because of that?
All these considerations have to be looked into before you start raising the consciousness of the world.
The greater masses of the world are not interested in consciousness.
They are more interested in unconsciousness.
You will be surprised because you may not have heard them saying that they are interested in unconsciousness, but you can see them drinking alcohol – all kinds of narcotics are being used, all kinds of drugs are being used. And there are other kinds of unconsciousnesses which are not produced by chemical drugs.
For example, in a movie, for three hours, for what are you searching? You are searching for three hours of unconsciousness. For three hours you become so involved in any idiotic story. And they have been almost the same for centuries: just two men, one woman; two women, one man. There are only two stories. I tried to find a third story – I have not succeeded. If any of you succeeds, please inform me, help me, because I have found only two stories. And there is not much difference in those stories: two women, one man; or two men, one woman. It is really one story. Only three persons are needed; put them in all kinds of situations, create all different details, but the story remains the same.
But it is helpful – you get involved in it. Millions of people seeing sports, millions of people participating in political rallies, shouting slogans, screaming….
I used to know one man in Jabalpur. I liked that man, I was really impressed by him: he was something unique…. For one year I was living in a bungalow which was facing six roads, so all kinds of processions were passing by there. And it was near the high court, the collector’s office, the commissioner’s office. They were all just within a half-mile radius.
So every kind of procession – protests, either going to the chief justice, or going to the commissioner, or going to the collector…. I used to enjoy seeing them. The most exciting thing for me was one who was always in every protest, whether it was the communist party, socialist party, congress party, president’s party – any party. And in India there are all kinds of parties.
Whether it was a religious protest – Christians protesting that something was being done against their religion, or Mohammedans, Hindus, Jainas, Buddhists – he was always, inevitably there. I could not believe it. That man was something! One day I caught hold of him and I said, “You have to come inside with me.”
He said, “Right now I cannot come, I am going in the protest.”
I said, “You can go later on – I will send you, I will drive you. But for five minutes you just come in – because now it is too much, I cannot bear it any more.”
He said, “But what is the problem? What have I done to you?”
I said, “You have not done anything to me; I just want to know to which party you belong.”
He laughed. He said, “As far as parties are concerned, I am a member of all the parties.”
I said, “But…?”
He said, “You will not understand, nobody understands. I enjoy shouting, screaming. Now, who is screaming against whom, that is not material. I simply enjoy – I shout, jump, have a flag. I don’t care whose flag, I don’t have any flag of my own. And I am not interested in what they are demanding, whether they get it or not, but I enjoy it.”
Now this man has no political interest, no religious interest. What his interest is, is in finding unconsciousness in shouting, screaming, getting involved in something in which he has no ideological interest. But he has psychological involvement, he forgets himself. For the two, three hours that the protest continues, he forgets himself. Now, how can he miss if some other party is protesting? His psychological interest is the same.
He said, “It is not very costly.” In India you can become a member for one fourth of a rupee; that is a one-year membership. And that too you don’t have to pay, somebody will pay for you, you have just to vote for him.
So I asked him, “So many parties, so many religions and you must be paying so much money….”
He said, “No, they pay it. And those idiots don’t even ask, ‘Are you a member of any other party?’ I have not yet been asked, so I have not yet been forced to lie. Nobody asks me. I say, ‘I want to become a member of your party.’ They say, ‘Very good, you just become a member of the party, fill in the form.’ I have filled in all the forms of all the parties. I go to all religious prayers, religious meetings. I believe in the unity of all.”
I said, “That’s very good.”
But he was really getting juice. You try protesting, shouting, and soon you get involved in it. Your thinking disappears, your past, your present, disappear. You are suddenly herenow – but not in a conscious way – through an unconscious trick. You can do it by alcohol, you can do it by politics, you can do it by religion. You can do it in a church, you can do it in a movie house. You can do it in a thousand and one ways, and people are using all kinds of ways.
People are not interested in consciousness.
Consciousness is painful, because you will have to drop so much which you have carried your whole life thinking it very valuable.
You will have to uncover your wounds which you have covered and completely forgotten.
You will have to revive all worries and anguishes that somehow you have repressed.
You will have to face again your original face which you have lost far back. You have become somebody else. You have been somebody else so long, that now to face your original face is going to shatter you completely.
To be conscious is not a game.
To be conscious is to go through a deep surgery.
And the problem is, you are the surgeon, and you are the patient.
Just think of some surgeon doing surgery on himself. I had one surgeon friend – and it was not much of a problem…. A certain disease, a very strange disease, started happening to me every year. First, one of my fingers started being painful in the first joint – immense pain. Sleep was not possible; no sleeping medicine would help, the pain was so shooting sharp. It continued for twenty-one days.
I asked my surgeon friend about it. He said, “This is a troublesome thing, but for one year there is no problem. Next year the second finger will be affected, and for twenty-one days at the utmost. But for ten years you will have to suffer; each year one finger will be affected.”
I said, “I don’t want that kind of business for ten years. Who knows? – if I die tomorrow then my nine fingers…. No, I cannot leave them just like that. You have to do something.”
He said, “There is no medicine for it – only surgery can be done. I will have to cut the bone – which has grown a little – on the joint. That’s how this whole thing is happening.”
So I said, “There is no problem, you can cut it. But I can’t wait for ten years.”
He prepared everything, but I was so close to him that at the final time he had a nervous breakdown. He said, “I cannot do it; on you I cannot do it – I cannot cut your finger. I will call another surgeon. I have kept him ready in case, because I knew it from the very beginning – last night I could not sleep, just the idea of cutting your finger….”
I said, “What nonsense. My finger, anybody’s finger – you should be able to cut your own finger too if the time comes. If there is no surgeon available, you should be able to cut your own finger.”
He said, “I can cut my own finger, but I cannot cut your finger, because then I will repent my whole life that I did that nasty thing to you. No, I will not do it.”
He simply freaked out; the other surgeon did it. That day I understood how difficult it must be to be the patient on the table and also the surgeon by the side – the same person cutting his own deepest layers of being.
Consciousness is self-surgery.
And don’t ask me how can we raise…? Nobody can do it for somebody else; you can only do it for yourself.
This is the fundamental of spiritual surgery: you can only be successful on yourself.
Howsoever painful it is…but there is no other way. Yes, it pays tremendously if you can pass through the test.
If you can pass through the pain, if you can pass through all the misery, the suffering that you have repressed will rise again. It is like entering a house which nobody has entered for years. You will raise so much dust – and that dust is not simple dust, it covers your wounds. It has helped you to forget yourself. It has made you unconscious of yourself. It is not like taking off your clothes, it is more like peeling off your skin.
But once you succeed, then all the pain seems to be just nothing, because the bliss that descends on you is incomparable; the pain that you suffered looks so tiny and so meaningless. But that is in the end.
Gautam the Buddha used to say, “My path in the beginning is tremendous pain; in the end, tremendous blissfulness. But patience is needed.”
I told you, in this surgery you are the patient and you are the surgeon both. Remember the English word patient comes from patience. It is significant. Why is the sick person called a patient? He has to be patient, he has to wait. But when you are the patient yourself and also the surgeon, the difficulty is multiplied. But still it is nothing compared to the bliss.
All that you can do is to pass through this suffering, to pass through this dark night of the soul.
Reach to the dawn of your being.
Blossom. Let your blissfulness explode.
Perhaps somebody’s sleeping soul may be triggered. Somebody’s sleeping consciousness may have a shock and wake up.
But these are only “perhaps.” One cannot be certain in these matters. The matters are so subtle you cannot be certain.
Hope for the best.
And wait for the worst.
And time certainly is short.

============================================================

Osho,
What is agony and what is ecstasy?
The same. They are not opposites as they are understood to be. They are complementaries, intrinsic parts of one organic whole. Neither can exist without the other.
It will be a little difficult to understand because they have always been thought to be polar opposites. They are polar opposites, seen from the outside. But all polar opposites are joined together from the inside. The negative or positive poles of electricity, the body and soul – from the outside they are not only different but antagonistic. From the inside they are two aspects of one phenomenon.
Let us first try to understand their meaning.
What is agony?
It is not ordinary suffering, misery, pain.
All these are very superficial things, just like ripples on the surface of a pond. They don’t have any depth. You have known many pains, many miseries, many moments of suffering, and you know perfectly well they come and go. They don’t even leave a trace behind them, they don’t leave scars behind.
Yes, while they are there you feel that you are engulfed completely in pain. But when it is gone you know perfectly well that that was only a momentary emotional, sentimental, non-intelligent understanding of the thing. When you were in the cloud, yes, you were engulfed. But the cloud is gone with the wind and you are out of it, and now you know exactly that even in the cloud you were out of it, you were not it.
Note this difference, because that is the fundamental difference.
Agony is not separate from you, it is you.
Pain, suffering, misery, they are all separate from you; hence, momentarily they come and go. They have causes; when the causes are removed they disappear. Mostly they are your creations.
You hope for something, and then it does not materialize: great frustration comes in. You feel pain, hopelessness, as if you have been rejected by existence. Nothing of the sort has happened – it is all due to your expectation. The bigger the expectation, the bigger is going to be the frustration.
It is within your hands to be frustrated in life or not. Just your expectations should become smaller, smaller, smaller, and in the same proportion the frustration will become smaller. A day will come when there will be no expectation; then you will never come across any frustration.
You think, you imagine, some moments of pleasure – and they don’t materialize, because existence has no obligation to materialize your imaginations. It has never given you any promise that whatever you think is going to happen. You have taken it for granted without any inquiry, as if the whole existence owes you something.
You owe everything to existence.
Existence owes you nothing.
So if you are running to catch shadows, you cannot catch them – it is not in the nature of things. Then there is pain, because you were so much absorbed in running after the shadows that you were feeling a kind of fulfillment. A goal was there; although not in your hands but far away, still it was there. And it was only a question of time, a little more effort. Be a little more American: try and try and try again – and sooner or later existence is going to yield.
Existence does not care who you are, American or Russian. It never yields to anybody – it simply goes in its own way. By making an effort to fulfill your desires, to force nature, existence, to come behind you, you are creating causes of pain, suffering.
The moment you understand, you drop these causes.
And the dropping of the causes is the disappearance of all your misery.
It was your projection.
There is a Sufi story about a very cunning fox…. All foxes are cunning, but there are politician foxes too. This happened to be a politician fox, very cunning. One day she woke up, and finding herself very hungry, came out of her cave in search of some breakfast. The sun was rising, and she saw her shadow so long she could not believe it. She said, “My God! I am that big? Now where am I going to get my breakfast? I will need at least one camel; less than that won’t do. My shadow is so big, naturally I must be as big.” It is logical, perfectly Aristotelian. You cannot say she is wrong.
You also know yourself only in the mirror – there is no other way. Have you known yourself in any other way except through a shadow?
So don’t laugh at the poor fox. How can she conceive that a small thing can make such a big shadow? It is very natural to conclude that if the shadow is so big, you must be as big.
And when it comes to feeling oneself big, who wants to argue against it? When anything gives you the sense of bigness, you don’t want to go into details to find whether it is true or wrong, whether it is logically right, scientifically provable. No, your whole being is so enchanted….
The fox really felt that big. You could see – her walk changed. But where can she find a camel for her breakfast? And even if she can find a camel, it is going to be absolutely pointless; she cannot make a breakfast out of a camel. She searches, she finds many small animals which would have been enough any other day, but today is different. She does not bother about all those small creatures. They will be lost just in her teeth. She needs a camel, an elephant or something big.
But she finds nothing big. The sun goes on rising higher and higher, and she goes on becoming hungrier and hungrier. When the sun is just exactly above her head she looks again at her shadow: it has shrunken so small it is just underneath her. She says, “My God! Hunger does things to people. Just one morning I have missed breakfast and look what has happened to my poor self! In the morning I was so big; only half a day has passed and this is my situation. Now even if I can get any small creature, that may be too much, I may not be able to digest it.”
This Sufi story is significant. It is our story.
This is our agony:
We are trying to become something which is not in the nature of things. We are not allowing nature to take its course; that is our agony.
When I was leaving my parents to go to the hostel in the university, they were persistently asking, “What do you want to become?” And I was telling them, “That question is utter nonsense. How do I know what I am going to become? Only time will show.”
They could not understand me. They said, “Look at all your friends: somebody is going to become a doctor, somebody is going to become an engineer, somebody is going to be become this, somebody is going to become that. You are the only person who is going to the university without any idea of what you want to become.”
I said, “Becoming is not my number. I want to let things take their course. I would love to find what nature makes of me, but I don’t have any program of my own. To have a program of my own means suffering. That means I am trying to impose something on nature and it is going to fail.”
Man has been failing for thousands of years for the simple reason that he wants to conquer nature.
Even a man like Bertrand Russell wrote about “the conquest of nature.” Nature cannot be conquered. Just look at the foolishness of the idea. You are part of nature, such a small, tiny part of such an infinite nature. And the part is trying to conquer the whole – as if your little finger is trying to conquer you.
How can you conquer nature?
Nature is your very soul.
Who is going to conquer whom?
Where is the separation?
I told my parents, “Please let me go. I am not going to project anything for my future. I want to keep it open so if nature desires anything of me, I am available. If nothing is desired of me that too is perfectly good. Who am I to expect that something should be desired of me? One day I was not, one day I will not be. Just a few days in between – why make much fuss about it? Can’t you pass silently across this little interval between birth and death without making noise, raising flags, and shouting slogans? Can’t you simply pass?”
But they said, “This is not the way. Everybody has to have an ideal; otherwise he will be lost.”
I said, “I would love to be lost but remain true to nature, to existence, rather than achieve a great ideal against nature, against existence. In the first place, in which you say I will be lost, I will be blissfully lost. In the second place, in which you think I would have achieved something, I will be nothing but pain, suffering, and finally agony.”
Agony is the deepest in you.
And it happens only to man.
All other animals are free of agony – but they are also free of ecstasy. Agony and ecstasy happen together; otherwise they don’t happen at all.
Have you seen any animal in ecstasy or in agony? a buffalo in agony? Just to think of it seems to be absurd. A buffalo in agony? For what reason should the buffalo be in agony? The buffalo never tried to become the queen of England – why should it be in agony? It simply allowed nature to make her whatsoever was the will of existence. Yes, it will never know ecstasy either because both happen at the same depth.
Agony happens if you go on missing your self.
Ecstasy happens if you happen to find yourself.
Missing yourself or finding yourself:
Both happen at the same depth of your being.
Missing yourself means that you have been trying to become something, somebody. You have an idea, and you are trying to fulfill that idea in your life.
All idealists live in agony.
It is not only the existentialist philosophers who are in agony. Of course they have brought the word to great prominence for the simple reason that this century has come as far away from nature and existence as possible: one step more and humanity disappears. This was the longest distance possible – we have traveled it.
We have come as far away from ourselves as possible.
That’s why in this century a philosophy like existentialism became possible.
I showed one of the histories of existentialism to one of my old professors who must have studied thirty, forty, years before. At that time the word existentialism was not even coined. Sartre, Jaspers, Marcel, were yet to be. He looked at the content and he could not believe it.
He said, “Is this a book on philosophy? No chapter on God, no chapter on the proofs for God, no chapter on religion, no chapter on the soul of man, no chapter on beyond death, heaven, hell. A strange history – chapters on agony, meaninglessness, anguish, anxiety. These are philosophical subjects?”
I said, “You have missed forty years. You have completely forgotten that forty years have passed since you were in the university studying philosophy, and after that you have never bothered about what has been happening to philosophy. You are still remembering Aristotle, Kant, Hegel, Feuerbach, Shankara, Nagarjuna, Bradley. You are still remembering these people who have really faded out; they are simply no longer in. And any philosopher worth the name today is not interested in God – he is interested in man. And to be interested in man brings all these problems, agony….”
He said, “But what is agony?”
I had to use his language, something from the past history of philosophy so that he could have a little insight into agony. In the past there has been a great philosophical question down the ages. The question was: between animals, trees, rocks, and man, what is the difference? Certainly they all exist; as far as existence is concerned there is no difference. Certainly they all live – even rocks grow.
The Himalayas are growing every year, one foot higher. The place where I was born was by the side of a mountain range called Vindhyachal. It is thought to be the ancientmost mountain in the world. It is almost a proved fact that Vindhyachal and the land around it came out of the sea first, because on Vindhyachal corpses of sea animals have been found which are the most ancient. On the Himalayas also they have been found but they are not so ancient. The Himalayas are the youngest mountains in the world, and Vindhyachal is the oldest mountain in the world.
Just by the way, I am reminded of the story about Vindhyachal in the Upanishads. One great seer, Agastya, went to south India, and had to cross Vindhyachal.
Vindhyachal was so high it was difficult for the seer, so he prayed to Vindhyachal, “Be kind enough to just bend down a little and let me pass. And remain bending till I come back, because I will have to pass again.” Agastya died in the south and never came back, but Vindhyachal is still bending. If you see the mountain you can see, it is as if an old man is bending.
The story is beautiful, but it shows that Vindhyachal is really old, an old man who cannot even stand straight. Mountains grow old or young; they are as alive as you are. Trees, animals, birds – as far as life is concerned we may have different kinds of life but we all have a certain quality called living, aliveness, which is similar.
So in ancient philosophy this has been a problem: Then what is the difference? Is there no difference? There have been two schools. One said there is no difference; we are all alike, we are part of one single whole – different dimensions, different branches, but we are all rooted in one existence. These are the spiritualists who say that we are all one.
The other school is that of the materialists, who say that we are all separate, there is no organic unity anywhere; existence is not one. According to the materialists, the word universe should not be used. The word universe was invented by the spiritualists because it means uni, one. According to the materialists the right word should be multiverse – many, not one. Everything is separate, and there is no unity anywhere.
And how does this whole go on? – and in a such a tremendous harmony? This is where you will see how logic can be fallacious.
The spiritualist says there is harmony because it is ruled by one God, or one universal consciousness. One absolute being, one center, controls everything. That’s why nothing goes wrong. Everything moves in an absolute harmony. And the universe is vast, it is immense, immeasurable; still, everything goes on without any disturbance, without any discrepancy. The logic seems to be solid, but it is not so.
The same logic the materialist uses. He says it goes on in such a harmonious way because there is nobody who is controlling it. Whenever there is somebody who is controlling everything, there is a possibility of failure, mistakes, errors. Nobody is infallible.
If there were one God controlling everything for millions of years sometimes He might fall asleep, sometimes just for a change He might go for a morning walk. If it is being controlled by one being then there is every possibility of a mistake. And during such a long period can you think that a person will not commit any mistake? Just by mistake he may commit a mistake. And there are so many things to be arranged and looked after – just look….
Just the other day Vivek was saying to me – seeing a peacock with its feathers open, so colorful, she said, “God must be taking so much care to paint them.”
If God were really to paint all the peacocks of the world then you can be certain there would bound to be a thousand and one mistakes. Howsoever infallible God is He cannot manage to go on painting year by year millions and millions of peacocks. And not only peacocks, there are other birds, and every detail has to be looked into.
The materialists say that the world goes on perfectly because there is no manager, so who can commit a mistake? It is mechanical.
The same logic: the spiritualist tries to prove God, the materialist tries to prove, using the same logic – this harmony, this continuity – that there is no manager, that it is all mechanical. Only machines are not able to commit mistakes – either they work, or they fail. While the machine is working, it will be working the way it has been working forever, reproducing again and again, again and again, the same kinds of peacock feathers. It is not a work of consciousness.
A conscious mind would try to improve, would like to change a little bit – once in a while to put a little more red, a little more green, a little more blue…a little different blue, because there are so many kinds of blues and so many kinds of greens. Once in a while he would put the head of one bird on another bird. One gets bored, putting on the same kind of head again and again, the same red nose again and again; just for a change, one would change to yellow, green, blue. But nothing like that happens.
The materialist says it is mechanical, it is a vast mechanism that goes on reproducing without any mind. While it produces, it will be producing the same. Yes, one day every machine fails, but you will not be there to know it. Once the machine fails, you fail too, so there will be nobody as a witness of the failure.
I told the old professor – his name was Professor Dasgupta – “Through this argument I can help you to have some insight into agony. The existentialist says there is a difference between animals and man. For the first time a certain group of thinkers has pointed to a difference which really makes a difference. They say, two sentences will have to be understood. One is: Existence precedes essence. And the other is: Essence precedes existence.
“In animals essence precedes existence. Essence means whatsoever they are going to be; the whole program comes first, before their birth. Before they exist the blueprint is there; they bring their blueprint with themselves, it is ahead of them. Their existence follows the essence.”
Essence means the program, the blueprint of what they are going to be, how many lives they are going to live, how many children they will have, what colors they will change to according to seasons – everything. So much so that there are birds who come flying from the North Pole, three thousand miles down, because it becomes too cold there, and to exist is impossible.
They have to…they start exactly on the same date every year. They don’t have any calendar, they don’t know that the season is going to change, but on the exact date, day, time, millions of birds immediately start moving toward the south. They will stop only when they have passed the three-thousand-mile radius, because within three thousand miles they will not be able to survive, they need a little warmer place.
But the strangest thing that has puzzled the scientists is that while they are away from their arctic home, the season for reproduction comes. So they mate, they make love, they find boyfriends, girlfriends. It takes time for the girls to become pregnant and then lay the eggs. By the time they lay the eggs, the warm season is finished. Now the arctic is ready to receive them back. So they leave the eggs and fly back to the arctic exactly on the same date as their forefathers and their forefathers have always done.
Those eggs hatch in their time, and the birds come out and start flying toward the arctic; three thousand miles in the exact direction they fly back to their world. Strange, absolutely miraculous, because nobody is there to tell them where…. “Your parents have gone. You don’t have a map, and the arctic is far away – three thousand miles – and you are a little bird just out of the egg.” Such a long journey with no preparation…but they manage, they reach. And this happens year after year.
This is the meaning of essence coming first, existence following. They don’t know what they are doing. It is some inner impulse, some urge that takes those birds far away. Flying three thousand miles without fail they reach their parents who had left them in the eggs without even telling them, “We are going, so when you get out, please come back home. Don’t forget us, we will be waiting there,” or giving them any indication of direction, nothing – no message has been left. At least they could have left one old guy and said, “When all these kids come out you take them home.” Nobody is left, no message is left, no contact exists between them – but they reach.
There are fishes from the arctic that move in a certain season, and near England at a certain place they lay their eggs. Before the eggs are ripe, their journey back starts. And when the eggs give birth, the new fish start swimming against the current! The natural course would be to go with the current, but their program is fixed. Against the current they start moving toward the arctic, and they find their way back to their parents.
They will not recognize their parents. There is no need either because these fellows, if they can manage a three-thousand-mile journey against the current, don’t need any parents, any teachers, any schools, college, universities. They are self-sufficient. This is the meaning of essence preceding existence. They are born with their whole life pattern complete and they will simply go on unfolding it. They are not going to learn anything.
Learning is not for them. They need no learning. They have already got all that they need for their life, every detail about everything – what to eat, what not to eat. You just look at a buffalo eating grass and you will be surprised: she goes on leaving certain grass and goes on eating certain other grass. Strange, but if you look closely, you will find she eats only a certain grass, other grass she does not eat.
You see here so many deer. They prefer a grass called alfalfa, and just now because we have brought water and planted trees and lawns and made it a green place, and certainly because of the deer, I have told my secretary, “Take care that so much good alfalfa is grown around that the deer will come automatically, and this will become a deer park.”
And I love that word, because Gautam Buddha lived in a deer park. Where his thousands of disciples lived, hundreds of deer also lived in the same place. And our deer are growing, but a danger has started happening: they are eating too much alfalfa, getting too fat, and for deer that is dangerous because once they get too fat then they cannot run. Then they are easy prey to any animal, to any hunter. Not only that – when they become too fat…because two or three deer have died.
I inquired why they died. The reason was they became so fat they could not walk. They fell over their feet and broke their legs, the weight was too much. Their feet are thin, those feet are not meant for that big a load. So I told my secretary then to either bring more deer so the alfalfa is not too much, or start cutting down the alfalfa, because this will kill the poor deer. They don’t have a built-in program where to stop. Nature takes care. In nature, nothing goes off balance.
If there is too much alfalfa then deer will start coming more and more from all over the place; if there is less alfalfa, deer will disperse. But our deer are in a difficulty: they cannot go anywhere because they cannot find a place where human beings will not be killing them. This much in three years they have understood perfectly well.
They are far more intelligent than your attorney general; they know that these are the right people to live with. They stand on the road, they don’t bother…you may go on honking the horn – they move with their ease and grace and beauty. They don’t bother; they understand that “These are our people,” so they are not going to leave. And they don’t have a built-in program where to stop, so they go on eating.
I told that professor, “Essence is a built-in program – and that’s where man is different. Man comes as existence, and essence follows. You are not given a built-in program. You come open-ended, with no directions, with no clear-cut idea of what you are going to be. You exist first – and this is a great difference, the greatest possible difference.”
You exist first, and then you have to find who you are. The animals, the trees, the rocks, know first who they are, then they exist; hence there is no spiritual inquiry. No animal bothers asking the questions: Who am I? What is the meaning of my life? He knows it already; there is no question, there is no doubt, no inquiry.
Man is a continuous inquiry, a continuous question. To the very last breath he goes on growing. To the very last breath he can change his whole life pattern.
He can take a quantum jump.
There is no necessity for him to just go on following the path that he has followed. At the very last moment he simply can step aside. There is nobody to prevent him, it is his freedom. Man is the only animal in existence who has freedom – and out of the freedom is agony.”
Agony means: I don’t know who I am.
I don’t know where I am going and why I am going. I don’t know whether whatever I am doing I am supposed to do or not. The question continuously remains; not even for a single moment does the question leave. Whatever you do, the question is there: Are you sure? Is it the thing for you to do? Is this the place for you to be?
The question leaves not even for a single moment. And this is as deep as anything can be in you, at the very core of your being. This is the agony – that the meaning is not known, that the purpose is not known, that the goal is not known. It seems as if we are accidental, that by some accident we are born.
No other animal, no tree, no bird is accidental; they are planned. Existence has a whole program for them. Man seems to be totally different.
Existence has left man utterly free.
Once you become aware of this situation then agony arises. And it is fortunate to feel it. That’s why I say it is not ordinary pain, suffering, misery. It is very extraordinary, and it is of tremendous value to your whole life, its growth, that you should feel agony, that each fiber of your being should feel the questioning, that you should become simply a question. And naturally it is frightening. You are left in a chaos. But out of this very chaos the stars are born.
If you don’t start stuffing out of fear, if you don’t start escaping from your agony…. Everybody is trying to escape, finding ways: falling in love, doing this, doing that – somehow, somewhere engaged. One thing is not finished, and you start doing another thing because you are afraid. If there is a gap between the two and the question raises its head, and you start feeling agony, then it is better to continue, to go on running; don’t stop. People start running from their birth till they die. They don’t stop, they don’t sit by the side of the road under a tree.
To me the statues of Buddha and Mahavira in the East, sitting in a lotus posture under a tree, do not mean anything historical. They mean something far more significant.
These are the people who have stopped running. These are the people who have stepped out of the road on which the whole procession of humanity is going.
They are real dropouts, not the Californian type which within a few years drops in again. No, these are real dropouts who never drop in again.
Sitting under a tree is just representative. You will be surprised to know that after Buddha’s death, for five hundred years his statue was not made. Instead of a statue only a tree was made. For five hundred years, in the temples that were made and dedicated to Buddha, there was only a tree carved on the stone or marble, nothing else.
It was enough to remind one to step out of the road, because this has been for thousands of years the tradition, to plant trees on both the sides of Indian roads – huge trees with big branches almost meeting over the middle of the road so the road is completely covered with shadow. Even in the hottest summer you can go on the road in coolness, in the shadow.
So the tree became the symbol of dropping out of “the road.” The road is the world, where everybody is going somewhere, trying to find something, and in fact basically trying to forget himself because it hurts. To remember oneself hurts, and the only thing that everybody is doing is to get engaged, concentrated – after money, after power, after this, after that. Become a painter, become a poet, become a musician, become someone and go on becoming. Don’t stop, because if you stop you become aware of your hurt; the wound starts opening up. So don’t give it a chance. This is the road.
For five hundred years they managed simply to have the tree. It was a beautiful symbol of stepping aside. But as time passed, people started forgetting the symbol. The simple tree – they could not understand what is supposed…. They started worshipping trees. It was at that time when Alexander the Great visited India, five hundred years after Buddha. He had seen those temples with trees, and he had asked people, but nobody knew what they meant, just tree worship. And all over India, even today, trees are worshipped; it has remained.
Then the Buddhist monks who could understand started making statues of Buddha. But five hundred years had passed; there was no photography possible in those days, so they had not even any idea of how Buddha looked.
At that time Alexander visited India. Alexander looked beautiful, he was a beautiful man, so the statues of Buddha are really Alexander’s statues. That face is not Indian, that face is Greek. That’s why when you see the Buddha’s face, you cannot think that it is an Indian face. It is a Greek face, and not an ordinary Greek face – the face of one of the most beautiful Greek men. It is Alexander’s face. They got the idea from Alexander’s face. It was very fitting. It fits better with Buddha than with Alexander, so I don’t have any objection.
I see it as perfectly right. Even if while Buddha was alive their heads were changed, it would have been perfectly good. What Alexander was…what he was doing he could have done even with Buddha’s face, there was no trouble. But Buddha certainly needs a beautiful face, very symmetrical, very harmonious with his inner self. The beauty that is shown on the face, in the proportion of his body, is the beauty of his soul.
Agony is the experience that you have come into the world a clean slate, a tabula rasa; nothing is written on it. This is your original face.
Now, you can do two things. One is, being afraid of this vacuum, you can start running after something or other – earning money, power, learning, asceticism, becoming a sage, scholar, politician – somehow to give you a feeling of identity, somehow to hide your own inner chaos.
But whatever you do the chaos is there and is going to remain there. It is an intrinsic part of you. So those who understand don’t try in any way to escape from it. On the contrary, they try to enter into it.
These are the two ways: either run away from it as everybody else is doing, or run into it. Reach to its very center howsoever painful, fearful – but reach to the center, because that is you. And it is good at least one time to be at the very exact center of your being.
The moment you reach that center then the second word becomes significant: ecstasy.
Ecstasy is the flower of agony.
Agony is not against ecstasy.
Agony is the way to ecstasy.
You just have to accept it – what else can one do? It is there. You can close your eyes – that does not mean that the sun has disappeared; it is still there. And everybody is trying to close his eyes; the sun is too glaring. Close your eyes, completely close your eyes. Forget about it, don’t look at it…as if it is not there. Believe it is not there.
These pseudo-religions are trying to teach you exactly that:
Try to reach to God, try to reach heaven, follow Jesus Christ.
But none of them says don’t follow anybody and don’t look for any paradise or heaven because this is all trying to deceive yourself.
Encounter yourself, face yourself.
Have a one hundred and eighty-degree turn.
Look into the chaos that is there, into the agony that is there. And if it is your nature, then howsoever painful it is, we have to become acquainted with it. And the miracle is, it is painful to pass through it but it is just the greatest bliss when you have passed and reached the center of your being.
Agony is all around the center, and the ecstasy is just in the center. Perhaps agony is just a protective shell – ecstasy is so valuable it needs protection. And nature has created such a protective wall, what to say of others? – even you start running away from it. Who is going to enter into your agony if you yourself are running away?
The moment you think of it, agony seems to be a tremendous gift of nature. It changes its whole color, its fragrance, its meaning. It is a protective wall, so protective that even you start running away from it.
Don’t run away from yourself whatever the case may be. A man’s mettle is judged by his entering into his own inner chaos. You are worthy to call yourself human beings when you have reached to the center, and you can see from the center, around yourself. You are blissful – not only are you blissful, from the center the whole existence is blissful too.
Agony and ecstasy are two sides of your being. They both make you one organic unity, one whole.
So I am not telling you how to get rid of agony.
That’s what pseudo-religions have been telling you for centuries.
I am telling you how to befriend agony, how to be in love with the chaos.
Once you are in love with the chaos, the freedom that chaos brings, the unbounded space that chaos brings, enter into it till you reach the center.
To find oneself is to find all.
Then there is nothing missing, then there is no question left. Then for the first time you have the answer. Although you cannot convey the answer to anybody else, you can convey the way you found it.
That’s what the function of a master is.
He does not give you the answer.
He does not make you more knowledgeable.
He simply shows you the method, how he found himself. He encourages you to take a jump into your chaos, into your agony.
The master is simply a proof that you don’t need to be afraid. If this man can find his center, passing through all the agony, there is no reason why you cannot do it too. And once you know the taste of ecstasy, your whole life, for the first time, has something that can be called godliness. A new quality arises in you, a new flare, a new flame. But that is our nature, everybody’s nature.
I have never tried in my life to become anybody. I have simply allowed life to take me wherever it wanted. One thing I can say to you, I have not been a loser; it was a great joy to be taken over by nature. I have not at all interfered. I have not even been swimming, because in swimming you are at least throwing your hands about. I have been just going with the stream, floating with wherever the stream is going.
Fortunately all streams reach finally to the ocean. The small, the big, somehow or other they all find their way to the oceanic. And the oceanic feeling I call the religious feeling.
When your small drop drops into the ocean….
In one sense you are no more.
In one sense you are for the first time.
On one hand there is death, and on the other hand there is rebirth.

============================================================

Osho,
Why is it so difficult to get rid of pain, misery, suffering or anguish, while knowing perfectly well that one has just to understand and drop them?
It is difficult to get rid of pain, misery, and suffering for the simple reason that they have been your companions for your whole life. Except them, you don’t have any friends in the world.
It is easier to be in pain, misery, suffering, than to be utterly lonely, because there are ways you can have pain-killers, you can have drugs, as an escape from misery. You can get engaged in all kinds of stupidities to forget your suffering. But there is no way – no painkiller is going to help you out of your loneliness, no drug, no stupidity.
Loneliness is so deep that all these superficial methods cannot reach to it, cannot touch it. That’s why it is so difficult to get rid of these few friends that you have got. This is your world, your family.
In my professorial days in the university, I had lived for a few months in the university campus. My neighbor was a newly-married man, a professor of physics, Nityanand Mukhopadhyaya – a very sharp, intelligent teacher, with a great future ahead, because he had such a grip on physics that even older professors of physics used to come and ask him things about new physics.
He had been married not more than two or three months, but the marriage was finished. They were constantly fighting, quarreling. The wife was also educated, a postgraduate, and in a beautiful subject, in music. The walls that separated me from this couple were not very thick – so thin that it was impossible not to hear what was going on.
It was almost thirty years ago. I was only their neighbor for a few months; since then I have not seen them, but they have given me one thing to which I have become addicted: earplugs. Even today when I don’t have any neighbors for miles…and even those who live miles away don’t consider me their neighbor. In the whole of America I don’t have a neighbor. And anyway, tourists are not supposed to have neighbors.
But I cannot get rid of those earplugs. I cannot go to sleep without earplugs. I have tried. The moment I think of dropping them I start thinking of Nityanand Mukhopadhyaya. From morning till midnight they were quarreling, on every point, on every single thing. There was no agreement on anything. And almost every night it ended with them throwing things – a pillow fight. I even heard them slapping each other.
Once or twice I interfered. I just knocked on their door in the middle of the night, and they opened the door. I looked at the scene – things all over the floor – and I said, “Don’t be embarrassed, because I have been hearing the whole thing since the morning. I know every detail of it, so you do not have to be hypocrites before me.
“This is perfectly good – it is supposed to happen between every husband and wife sooner or later. You are intelligent people: it is happening sooner. But one thing I cannot understand: once in a while you both say to each other, ‘I love you, darling, I love you.’ That, I cannot understand. Everything else is understandable to me.
“I had to interfere in the middle of the night because just now, after a big pillow fight, you said, ‘I love you, I love you, my darling.’ It simply disturbs my whole sleep. Everything else I accept, but how, out of this pillow fight, and throwing things and shouting and screaming, does the conclusion come, ‘I love you, darling’?”
They looked at each other. They had no answer because…. Then the professor said, “I have never thought about it but certainly you are right. After all this, this should not be the conclusion. I can understand – you are a man of logic. I cannot understand too much logic but physics is also based on logic; I can see the contradiction.”
The wife said, “I have never thought about it, but it is true that…. Can you help us to understand why?”
I said, “That’s why I have come. This happens with husband and wife: they hate each other, and then they hate themselves for hating each other. And then to cover up the whole thing – that ‘I hate you,’ that, ‘I hate myself for hating you’ – this is the cover: ‘I love you, darling.’
“This manages both things. You are no longer hating yourself, because you love your wife. But this is only a cover, a very thin cover which cannot stand the strong winds of life. Tomorrow morning again you have forgotten. The same story begins, comes to the same conclusion. Why don’t you just separate?”
And they both were angry at my suggestion. They said, “This is not nice of you to suggest that we separate.”
I said, “Yes, I suggest it. Get a divorce.” And they were both ready to fight with me.
I said, “You need not fight with me because I don’t hate you, I don’t love you, darling; I am simply not part of it. Exclude me out, I am going back. I just dropped in the suggestion – you can think about it. Only three months have passed. After thirty years you will be still in the same situation, but then it will be too late, even divorce will not be of any help. You will have become addicted to the quarreling, to the fighting, to everything that you hate. You will become addicted to it, you will miss it.”
They were very angry; they closed the door in my face. I said, “Thank you.”
After two months the wife went to see her mother for a week – her mother was sick – and in just one week Professor Nityanand Mukhopadhyaya started coming to me and continuously saying, “I miss my wife so much. I cannot sleep – the bed seems so empty.”
I said, “And the room also seems so empty, things are not all over the place. Why don’t you throw things yourself? Shout a little, scream a little – and she is not here so you can say anything you want. Throw things, beat on the clothes, and then come to the climax: I love you, darling. And you will have a good sleep.”
He said, “You must be joking.”
I said, “Why should I be joking? You try it – what is the harm?”
And you will not believe it: not that day, but after two days, he tried it – because I heard it. He was doing really a great job, greater than he had done ever before, a greater performance. And he climaxed it: “I love you, darling.” And soon I heard him snoring.
In the morning I went to see his room; things were all over the place. The servant opened the bedroom; the professor was still asleep. I woke him up; I said, “You did such a good performance.”
He said, “Really, it works. I was just trying, knowing perfectly well that it was not going to work. How could it work? – she is not here. But it worked; slowly, slowly I got hotter and hotter. She was almost here: when I was beating the pillows I was beating her. And I have never given her such a good beating – it was such a deep contentment to the heart. I have never slept so deeply. You were right.”
But this is the situation of almost everybody. You become addicted to your pain, to your misery, to your suffering. You really don’t want to get rid of it.
You go on asking how to get rid of it, but that is also a strategy of the mind; to go on inquiring how to get rid of it.
Have you ever asked sincerely, do you want to get rid of it? Are you ready to live without all the miseries and the pains and the sufferings that you have been carrying all along? Will you be ready to be left alone without all these long-standing companions who have been with you in thick and thin, who have never left you?
When everybody was leaving you, they were still with you. They have followed you like a shadow; they have been in a certain way a consolation. This will be very shocking to you when I say they have been in a certain way a consolation to you. When I say that, I have many things implied in it.
Your suffering makes you somebody special. Without all your suffering, you are nobody. Who are you? You will not even have something to talk about with anybody. You will be at a loss – what are you going to talk about?
In England, people talk about the weather just to avoid real conversation. It is a very sophisticated way, to talk about weather. But it looks a little idiotic because you are seeing the weather, I am seeing the weather, it makes no sense to say, “What a beautiful day, how sunny!” you are seeing it, you are also in the same day. You are not tomorrow, you are not yesterday, you are here with me. And you say, “Yes, so beautiful!”
This is because of the English character; it is one of the most phony characters in the world. It does not want to raise any controversial conversation. Politics is dangerous, there is controversy; religion is dangerous, there is controversy; literature is dangerous, there is controversy. Except the weather there seems to be nothing non-controversial – something on which both can agree without any problem.
It is said that two Englishmen were traveling in a compartment for almost three hours. Then the ticket checker came in, looked at them…they were looking very sad and depressed. He asked…. One said, “Three hours sitting, not even somebody to talk to.”
He said, “Just in front of you another Englishman is sitting – you could have talked.”
The man said, “But how? – because nobody introduced us. Without an introduction it is a kind of trespass.”
I have heard another story too, that a man went to meet his wife – a four or five-hour journey. The wife had come to the station to receive him, and he was looking very tired, utterly tired. She asked, “What is the matter? Why are you looking so tired?”
He said, “It always happens when I have to sit in a position where my back is against the direction of the train. If I am sitting against the direction of the train – the train is going this way, and I am sitting facing that way – then my whole body gets very tired.”
The wife said, “But there was no problem. You could have asked the gentleman in the front seat, ‘This is my trouble; would you be kind enough to change?’“
He said, “I wanted to but there was no gentleman, the seat was empty. Whom to ask?”
These are very sophisticated people.
Just now I was reading that the most prestigious directory of the royal family’s noble blood has dropped many names out of it in the new edition because they were all AIDS victims. Now, you can see even noble people have ways which are not noble at all: noble people with ignoble lifestyles. But that is all underground. On the surface everything seems to be the way it should be. More or less it is the same all over the world; nobody wants really to drop their suffering.
You have to ask this question very sincerely:
Are you ready to be lonely?
At least your suffering, your pain, your misery, makes you somebody special. It gives you a certain character, it gives you a certain identity. Moreover it is your misery, nobody else’s. It is your possession, your prestige. If it is just taken away from you, you will be a beggar.
You ask me, why is misery so difficult to get rid of?
It is difficult because you don’t want to get rid of it.
It is also difficult because you have many misunderstandings.
You say, “pain, misery, suffering or anguish.” That shows you don’t understand. You can get rid of pain, misery, suffering, which are your own creations; you can withdraw. They cannot stand without your support, they need constant nourishment from you. They suck you, they are parasites – but you can throw them away.
Anguish you cannot get rid of.
So don’t say “suffering or anguish.”
Anguish is a totally different plane.
Anguish is something spiritual.
Anguish you are not to get rid of; anguish you have to become more acquainted with.
If you are standing with your back toward anguish, it appears like suffering.
If you turn your face toward anguish, it becomes blissfulness.
You are not to get rid of it. And it is nothing to do with you, so you cannot get rid of it. Even if you want to get rid of this blessing, then too it is not in your power. It is something intrinsic to your nature. If you are not facing yourself, you will feel anguish; if you turn toward yourself, the same anguish becomes the greatest blessing in the world.
So don’t say suffering or anguish. That shows your utter ignorance of your own inner world.
Suffering, misery, pain, are all outside.
Anguish is within.
Anguish you are born with.
Suffering, misery, pain, are your creations.
That is also one of the causes why you cannot get rid of them. You have created them, they are your children.
You just look at people when they are talking about their suffering; watch their faces, watch their eyes – and you will be surprised. Are they talking about their suffering or are they bragging about it? – because their face seems to be radiant when they talk about their suffering. And remember, you know! – because you are doing the same. You always exaggerate your pain, your suffering, your misery; you make it as big as possible. Why? If it is something to get rid of, why are you magnifying it? You are enjoying it.
One of my friends is a Catholic priest. I asked him once, “You hear people’s confessions. Have you ever wondered whether they may be exaggerating?”
He said, “What! Exaggerating? They are confessing their sins, why should they exaggerate?”
I said, “People exaggerate everything. If sinners are standing in a queue, you would like to stand first, you would like to be the greatest sinner. You would not like to be just third-class, standing at the end of the queue. And if somebody asks what kind of sin you committed – you have stolen a hen!
When there are Genghis Khan and Tamerlane, and Nadirshah, and Alexander the Great, and Ivan the Terrible – your whole life you only stole a hen? You must be an idiot! Such a long life – seventy years – you could not do anything else? And you have some nerve to stand in the line with such great people: Adolf Hitler, Benito Mussolini, and Joseph Stalin. Get lost! Don’t count yourself a sinner!
No, you will have to magnify it as much as possible.
A small boy came running into his home and, huffing and perspiring, told his mother, “A lion has been following me! But I was not afraid.”
The mother said, “Lion? In the middle of the city? I have told you a thousand times: Don’t exaggerate. Where is the lion?”
He said, “He is standing outside the door.”
The mother went to the door; a small dog was standing there.
The boy said, “Yes, this is the lion.”
The mother said, “You know perfectly this is a dog.”
He said, “I know, but when you are telling a story, and you say a small dog was following you, and you were not afraid – that does not fit. A lion is needed. And as far as exaggeration is concerned, you are telling me that you have told me one thousand times not to exaggerate. You are exaggerating yourself.”
Everybody is making himself look, in every possible way, like somebody special.
You are talking about your suffering and somebody says, “It is nothing.” You will be hurt, you will not like this response. You were telling such a great story; you were opening your wounds and that man said, “This is nothing. You should know my suffering.”
Suffering also becomes a support to your ego. A man without suffering, without pain, without any misery – how can he manage his ego? He won’t have any props for the ego.
I used to stay with one of the presidents of the Indian National Congress – which has been the ruling party since independence. His name was Uchchhangrai Dhebar, and he loved me very much. He was the only politician of that status who used to come to the camps to meditate, to participate. He was really a nice person. It is very difficult to find in politicians that quality of niceness.
He was talking about the great problems that he was facing. I listened, and I told him, “You can talk about these things to other people – don’t waste my time. If you can do something about those things then do it; otherwise what is the point of unnecessarily talking? I am not the person interested in that kind of thing.”
Just then the phone rang and he took it. The prime minister was calling, and Uchchhangrai Dhebar said, “I am very much engaged right now.” And he was not engaged at all – we were just gossiping! He said, “I am very much engaged right now; today it is not possible for me to meet you. Perhaps tomorrow I can manage. I will have to inquire from my secretary.”
As their conversation was finished I said, “I don’t see that you are engaged.”
He said, “That is not the point. When a prime minister phones – and I am the president of the party as far as organization is concerned, he is just a member of the organization…. He may be the prime minister, but when a prime minister calls me, I am always engaged. When the president of the country calls me, I am always engaged. These people understand only that language.
“If I just go and run to his house and say, ‘Yes, sir, I am here, what do you want?’ then what is the point of being the president of the party? So much struggle, so much trouble, so much conflict, quarreling, and then in the end I have been able to become the president. And you want me to say to the prime minister that I am gossiping, I am free, I have nothing to do? Now I am engaged in great problems.”
I said, “Perhaps the same is true when you are talking about your great problems to me. At least with me be sincere. I am not the prime minister or the president.”
He looked into my eyes for a moment and he said, “You are right. I was just bragging about how much puzzled I am, how much trouble my life is. To be the president of the ruling party of such a vast country is to be lying on a bed of thorns.”
He was sleeping on a Dunlop mattress. I said, “What are you talking about? I see you sleep on a Dunlop mattress!”
I cannot sleep on one of those because it is so soft that the moment you move, it moves with you. It keeps me awake; I am waking continuously the whole night.
Once Teertha brought for me a waterbed. That night I will never forget. That waterbed must be supplied in hell, because you turn and the whole water inside moves just underneath you. That much water movement – how can you sleep? I can sleep on a hard floor; it may hurt a little bit, but sooner or later you will fall asleep. But on a waterbed…and that was the latest “in thing” so Teertha brought it for me. I had to suffer many latest in things.
You cannot get rid of your miseries for the simple reason that you don’t have anything else to cling to. You will be empty – and nobody wants to be empty. People befool themselves in every possible way.
I have visited areas where people were so hungry – starving; they had no food. I inquired, “You don’t have any food, how do you manage to sleep?” – because without food you cannot sleep. In fact sleep is needed for one of the most basic reasons: to digest food. So all other activity is dropped and your whole energy goes into digestion. But when you don’t have any food in the stomach, sleep becomes difficult.
I have been fasting, so I know. Before the fasting day, the whole night you go on tossing and turning, thinking of the next day and the delicious foods. And when you are hungry anything looks delicious. But you cannot sleep. I asked, “How do you manage to sleep?”
They said, “We drink a lot of water to fill the belly, to deceive the body, and then sleep comes.” They know perfectly well they are deceiving; water is not nourishment. The body is asking for food, and they are giving water because only water is available. But at least something is in the stomach, it is not empty.
This is the situation as far as your psychological emptiness is concerned: anything will do. Nothing is not acceptable to you. And unless nothing is acceptable to you, you are not ready to get rid of your pain, misery, and suffering.
You say, “Knowing perfectly well….” You don’t know at all, and you are saying, “Knowing perfectly well.” You know nothing. “Knowing perfectly well” means that if you understand, all these sufferings and miseries will drop of their own accord.
Knowing perfectly well and still continuing to suffer, to be miserable – no, it is not possible. Either you don’t know or you cannot suffer. You cannot be allowed both together: knowing perfectly well and still suffering. And your last sentence makes it clear that that knowledge is not knowing. It may be knowledge.
You say, “Knowing perfectly well that one just has to understand and drop them.” It is a little delicate affair – to understand and drop them…as if after understanding you will have to drop them. That’s not how it happens.
In understanding is the very dropping. There is no “and to drop them.”
There is no action after understanding.
Understanding is the action itself.
It is not that you bring the light inside the room, then you throw the darkness out. You don’t say, “I will bring the lamp in and then throw the darkness out.” If you say that, anybody will know that you are blind. You don’t know what you are saying. When you bring light in you will not find darkness at all. What are you going to throw out?
Understanding is light.
The moment you understand, there is no suffering to be thrown out, to be dropped, to be got rid of.
Understanding simply cleanses you.
You may have a laugh after it, but there is no action. You may have a good laugh because you will see how stupid you have been. You have been trying to get rid of things which only need to be understood, and that very understanding becomes freedom from them.
No doing other than understanding is needed.
But perhaps you don’t have a clear-cut idea of knowing and knowledge. It is knowledge: you have heard, you have listened, you have read.
Yes, you are knowledgeable, but knowledge helps nobody.
Sigmund Freud, a man of great knowledge, was afraid of ghosts – although he said continually, “There are no ghosts, there is no evidence, no proof.” He was so much afraid of ghosts that a simple incident became the breaking point between his chief disciple, Carl Gustav Jung, and himself.
Carl Gustav Jung was going to be his successor. Freud had already declared, “Jung is going to be my successor.” And Jung was the most intelligent, scholarly, impressive, charismatic personality among all Freud’s disciples, but there were a few things which were troublesome. One was that Jung was interested in ghosts; that was a constant trouble.
One day Sigmund Freud was sitting in his office with Jung in front of him; they were talking and somehow the topic of ghosts came up. Jung said, “Whatever you say, I still suspect that something like ghosts exists.” Sigmund Freud became red with anger – and at that very time, in the cupboard behind, there was a sound almost like an explosion. Sigmund Freud fell from his seat.
Jung opened the cupboard: there was nothing. He closed it again, put the seat right, placed Freud there and said, “There is nothing. I don’t know what happened, what caused this explosion.” They started talking again, and again the ghost thing came up. Sigmund Freud said, “I don’t believe in it and you stop talking about it” – and the explosion!
This was too much: Sigmund Freud fell into unconsciousness. And that was the breaking point. He simply informed Jung, “Either you drop me, or you drop your ghosts.”
So knowledgeable, so much a pioneer, a great scientific mind…. But if you really know that there are no ghosts then there will be a different response. You will not fall unconscious, you will not fall from your seat. It is just knowledge, belief. Freud wants to believe that there are no ghosts, but deep down he is just an ordinary human being like anybody else, with all the fears.
Jung was not different either. He was interested in ghosts, but he was very much afraid of death. Now look at this strange thing. You are interested in ghosts; if you are really interested in ghosts, you should be interested in death too, because without death ghosts can’t exist. A ghost is nothing but a man who was once in the body and is no more in the body. If you are interested in ghosts, you should be logically interested in death, in the very process of death.
But Jung was so afraid, more afraid than Sigmund Freud. Sigmund Freud at least had some excuse in the explosion to fall unconscious. Jung was so afraid that even the word death was enough. Thrice in his life he became unconscious just because the word death came into the conversation.
He was very much interested in seeing in Egypt the mummies of ancient Egyptian pharaohs, queens, kings – which were very recently discovered, excavated, and were now available for the public to see. He booked at least a dozen times to go to Egypt but at the very last moment he would find some excuse not to go.
One time Jung even reached the airport in Zurich; finding no excuse not to go, he was very much in trouble. He was trying to find some excuse not to go but there was no excuse. People had even come to give him a good send-off and say, “Have a good journey.” And finally he said, “I am not going.”
“But,” they said, “why?”
He said, “I have tried to find an excuse not to go – there is none. But if I don’t want to go, who are you to force me to go? You have come with flowers, and I am dying with fear. I cannot look at a corpse.”
It is the strange mind of man. You are obsessed with things of which you are afraid. Perhaps you are obsessed only because you are afraid. Your fear and your obsession are almost always pointed to the same thing. Jung never managed in his life to reach Egypt, and this was one of his cherished desires. He was very knowledgeable, but as far as knowing was concerned – just nil.
Knowing transforms you.
Knowledge only gives you a false idea that you are wise.
It is better to be sincerely ignorant – because there is a chance of change – than to be a hypocrite insincerely believing that you know.
Ignorance has done no harm to anybody.
Knowledge has done immense harm.
The knowledgeable person goes on living with this false idea that he knows. And because he knows, there is no need to inquire any more. The ignorant man is continuously on the verge of inquiry; always a question mark is there. And this is one of the traits of human nature, that you cannot live with a question mark. Either you have to cover it with false knowledge – which becomes your answer – or you have to find the real answer so that the question disappears.
Knowledge is not the answer but only a pretension of an answer.
You say, “Knowing perfectly well”…. Drop this idea of knowledge. Please just accept your ignorance. Be courageous and capable of saying, of many things, “I do not know.”
If somebody asks you about God, do you have the courage simply to say, “I do not know”?
The atheist has no courage; he says, “I know there is no God.”
The theist has no courage; he says, “I know there is God.”
Only the agnostic is a little courageous; he says, “I do not know yet.” He leaves the question without any definite answer. He is inquiring, he is searching.
From my very childhood I have been continuously questioning knowledgeable people. My house was a guest house of many Jaina saints, Hindu monks, Sufi mystics, because my grandfather was interested in all of these people. But he was not a follower of anybody. He, rather, enjoyed me bothering these saints.
Once I asked him, “Are you really interested in these people? You invite them to stay in the house and then you tell me to harass them. In what are you really interested?”
He said, “To tell you the truth I enjoy their being harassed, because these guys go on pretending that they know – and they know nothing. But anywhere else it would be difficult to harass them because people would stop you. People would tell me, ‘Your grandson is a nuisance here – take him away.’ So I invite them, and then in our own house you can do whatever you want. And you have all my support: you can ask any questions you want.”
And I inquired of these people, just simple questions: “Be true and just simply tell me, do you know God? Is it your own experience or have you just heard? You are learned, you can quote scriptures, but I am not asking about scriptures: I am asking about you. Can you quote yourself, your experience?”
And I was surprised that not a single man had any experience of God, or of himself. And these were great saints in India, worshiped by thousands of people. They were deceiving themselves and they were deceiving thousands of others. That’s why I say that knowledge has done much harm. Ignorance has done no harm.
Ignorance is innocent. Knowledge is cunning.
Knowing is far beyond both.
Knowing has the innocence of ignorance and the knowing of knowledge, both together. It is innocent knowing.
And knowing is authentically yours.
Unless any knowledge is yours, it is better not to have such ideas of having perfect knowledge.
Do you understand, when you use words like perfect? Is there anything in life perfect?
The moment anything is perfect, it is dead.
Life is continuous imperfection.
Yes, it is moving toward perfection – but always moving and never arriving. That’s the whole stance of evolution, that it goes on evolving higher and higher but there is no point where it can say, “Now the journey is finished.” The book of life has no beginning and no end. It is a continuum; infinite continuity.
Never use words like perfect. Everything is imperfect here, has to be – except idiots like pope the Polack. These are perfect people, infallible. Only idiots can claim infallibility. The wise ones will say, “Perhaps it is so. I do not know absolutely. Yes, I have glimpses. There are moments of clarity; there are times it seems, ‘Yes! This is it!’ but there is no full stop anywhere.”
If you ask me how many times I have said, “This is it!” and the next day, something bigger…. And I think, “My God! So this is it!” But slowly, slowly when it was happening more and more, more and more, bigger and bigger, I dropped the idea of saying, “This is it!”
This is always becoming it, but there is no full stop. It is never perfect.
Knowing is a process.
Knowledge is a dead thing, with a full stop.
You don’t know, and it will be of immense help to you to know that you don’t know, because from there a true journey can start. Your question gives enough evidence of ignorance because you say, “By understanding and then dropping it.” Alas, after understanding there is nothing to drop. You will be at a loss.
Before understanding there is so much to drop, but you cannot drop it.
After understanding, when you can drop it, there is nothing to drop.
These are the mysteries of life, real mysteries of life – tremendously enjoyable.

============================================================

Osho,
Is not spiritual guidance an absolute necessity for human growth?
There are no absolutes in real life – including this statement too. Life is full of exceptions; that’s one of its most beautiful things. Exceptions mean freedom. Exceptions mean you are not in a concentration camp. The absolute is nothing but complete bondage and slavery.
In the beginning days of scientific research scientists were thinking that in science there are no exceptions. That was one of the great prides of science, because that makes it absolutely certain. If there are exceptions you cannot be certain about the rules – and science needs certainty to be the base.
For the last three hundred years science went on proving that there were no exceptions, finding absolute rules. But Albert Einstein and his theory of relativity destroyed the whole three-hundred-year-long efforts of hundreds of scientists in a single blow. The theory of relativity means that nothing is absolute, everything is relative, and there are exceptions everywhere.
It is one thing that you may not be able to find the exception; that shows your limitation. Your instruments may not be yet refined enough to catch the exception. It does not prove anything about the absoluteness of any rule – only the limitations of human mind. The finer your instruments become, the finer your approach to reality, the more you are simply mystified: there are exceptions, and exceptions to everything. Nothing is absolute. After Albert Einstein nothing is absolute.
This is something to rejoice in, because science was creating a world of dead rules, mechanical. The whole concept of pre-Einsteinian science was that the world is a vast mechanism – that it is not an organism, but a mechanism.
A mechanism functions perfectly without any exceptions. It has no mind, how can it create exceptions? It simply goes on moving in the same rut. It never gets bored. It never feels to do something just for a change, something other than it has been doing always. There is no mind in it; hence, the machine can be absolute.
But an organism, a living being, cannot be absolute. It is a free agent. If it follows a certain rule, that is its decision. It can drop out, it can just go in the opposite direction. Hence, science never said that the world is an organism, but a vast mechanism.
But the theory of relativity disturbed the whole setup, and it has disturbed it forever. Never again will science be able to have the old certainty, because it has been found through the theory of relativity that as we go deeper into the inner world of the atom, a strange phenomenon is experienced.
When we go inside the atom there are three divisions: the electron, the neutron, and the positron. It was thought that they must be following a set discipline, just as we find in every material thing. But strangely enough, they are very individualistic. Sometimes they behave in one way, sometimes they don’t behave in the same way.
And one thing that is of tremendous importance for you to remember is – it is just like when you are taking a bath, with the door closed, nude, enjoying the freedom of being alone, making faces before the mirror knowing that nobody is seeing you. But then suddenly you become aware of a noise near the door and you see two eyes looking through the keyhole. Suddenly you are no longer the same, you have changed. Now you cannot make faces before the mirror.
What has happened? An observer changed your behavior. We can understand this because you are a conscious human being and you were behaving in a certain way with the knowledge that nobody was watching. Once you see that somebody is watching, you start behaving the way you are supposed to behave.
Making faces before the mirror is very childish. There is nothing wrong about it; it is not a sin. It is your mirror, it is your face, you are not doing any harm to anybody. But certainly the observer instantly changes you. You start doing other things just to look busy, as if you are doing meaningful things. Just a moment before you were doing meaningless things, now you are doing meaningful things.
The same was discovered in the innermost core of the atom: the electrons behave differently when there is no observer. And the moment the scientist and his instruments make them aware that somebody is observing, they change their rules; a sudden transformation takes place.
This was very shocking to the scientists because electrons are supposed to be particles of electricity: that’s the meaning of electron. They are supposed to be material, but they are behaving with such great consciousness. And as the work progressed, many more things became noticeable.
You go from point A to point B – certainly you exist between point A and point B when you go from point A to point B. You must exist between the two; otherwise how can you reach point B? It was found that in the inner world of the atom this is not applicable. The electron moves from point A to point B but between the two he disappears; he is no more, he is non-existential. This is very absurd, illogical; it does not suit a good electron to do such a mischievous thing – that moving from point A to point B, in the middle you simply disappear, and no trace is found.
Because of this, science fiction became very prominent. In many languages that kind of fiction was written. And it seems possible – if electrons can disappear, why not you, because you are nothing but millions and millions of electrons, you are a crowd. And if a single electron can do such a thing, perhaps one day it will be possible…. And that is the only way that man can hope to reach some faraway star. Traveling by traditional bullock cart means won’t do, you cannot reach.
Even to reach the nearest star will take you four years traveling at the speed of light, and that too only if we can manage to create a vehicle which can move with the speed of light – which is impossible because anything moving with the speed of light becomes light. At that speed the heat is so much, the friction at that speed is such that everything becomes fire. No kind of metal exists which can resist that speed and remain itself.
The speed is very tremendous. In one second, one hundred and eighty-six thousand miles – in one second! Multiply it by sixty, that is in one minute; multiply it again by sixty, that is in one hour. This way go on multiplying to find the distance traveled in one year: that is one light year. The nearest star is four light years away! With such a speed…. First, there is a barrier: such a speed is not possible. Your vehicle, you, and everything would become light. By the time you reached that star you would be just rays of light and nothing else.
Scientists, and particularly scientific novelists, became very enchanted with the idea that the electron can disappear in the middle, between two points. That gave them a beautiful myth for the future: that we can make a machine in which the man enters and disappears – just like the electrons. We have just to find out how they manage to disappear. What is their mode of disappearance?
Once we have found their methods of disappearing from one point and then appearing again at another point, then there is no problem. Then man can disappear from the earth and can appear on the moon, on Mars, or anywhere in the whole universe. Then time is no problem. Here you disappear, and there you appear. In the middle there is nowhere that you can be found.
This looks very fictitious. Yes, as far as man is concerned, right now it looks fictitious, but the electrons have been doing it all along. They are still doing it. Their behavior destroys the whole certainty of science. It destroyed the whole Aristotelian logic and Euclidian geometry, it destroyed Bacon’s rules – it destroyed everything.
It opened a new dimension of utter freedom. And if even matter is so free, what about consciousness? Then consciousness is pure freedom.
So the first thing about your question I want to tell you is, there is nothing absolute. Everything is relative.
Absolute is a weighty word. It gives you a certain confidence. Politicians use such words to create confidence, certainty. But I cannot use such words, I am not a politician. I would prefer to use a more humble word: relative. It does not give you the feel of certainty. But certainty is needed only by people who are uncertain, certainty is the need of weaklings. People who are at ease have no need for certainty. They can very well understand the word relative and its implications.
There is a story: one day a man came to Gautam Buddha just in the morning, and asked him, “Does God exist?” Buddha looked at the man for a moment, and then said, “Yes.” The man could not believe it because he had heard that Buddha does not believe in God. Now, what to make of his yes?
Even his disciples, the closest disciples…Ananda was with him, he was shocked. Buddha had never said so certainly, without any ifs and buts, a simple yes – to God! He had, his whole life been fighting against the idea of God. But there was a settlement between Buddha and Ananda…. Ananda was Buddha’s elder cousin-brother. When he was taking sannyas, Ananda had asked beforehand, “You have to promise me a few things. Right now I am your elder brother. After taking sannyas I will be your disciple: then whatsoever you say I will have to do, but right now I can demand something and you will have to do it.”
Buddha said, “I know you. You cannot ask anything which will put your younger brother in any difficulty. You can ask.”
Ananda said, “They are not big things, just simple things. One is that every night before going to sleep, if I want to ask something, you will have to answer, you can’t say, ‘I am tired, and the whole day’s journey, and so many people and so many meetings….’ You will have to answer. Yes, I will never ask in the day, I will not disturb you the whole day, but I am a human being and I am not enlightened: certain questions may arise.”
Buddha said, “That is accepted.”
In the same way Ananda asked two more things: “One is that you will never tell me to go anywhere else; I will always be with you, to serve you till my last breath. You will not tell me, ‘Now you go and spread my message,’ just the way you send others. You cannot send me.”
Buddha said, “Okay, that’s not a problem.”
And third, Ananda said, “If I ask you to give some time to somebody, at any hour – it may be a very odd hour, in the middle of the night – you will have to meet the person. That much privilege you have to give me.”
Buddha said, “That too is okay because I know you.”
Ananda was very much puzzled by Buddha’s answer that yes, God exists, but he could not ask in the day, he had to wait for the night. In the afternoon, another man came and asked the same question: “Is there a God?” And Buddha said, “No, not at all.”
Now, things became more complicated – Ananda was almost in a state of falling apart. But this was nothing. By the evening, a third man came; and he sat by the side and he asked Buddha, “Will you say something about God?”
Buddha looked at him, closed his eyes and remained silent. The man also closed his eyes. They sat in silence for half an hour; then the man touched Buddha’s feet and said, “Thank you for your answer,” and went away.
Now, it was too much. Everybody gone – the time was passing so slowly and Ananda was boiling; and when everybody was gone, he simply jumped up. He said, “This is too much! You should take care, at least, of us poor people too. Those three persons don’t know all the three answers, they only know one answer. But we are with you, we have heard all the three answers. You should think of us too, we have been going crazy. If this is going to go on, what will happen to us?”
Buddha said, “You should remember one thing. First, those questions were not your questions, those answers were not given to you. Why should you jump into it? It is none of your business. It was something between me and those three people.”
Ananda said, “That I can understand. It is not my question, and you have not answered me. But I have ears and I can hear; I heard the question, I heard the answer. And all the three answers are contradiction upon contradiction. First you say yes, then you say no; and then you remain silent, you don’t say anything. And that great guy touched your feet and said, ‘Thank you for your answer.’ And we are sitting there and there has been no answer at all!”
Buddha said, “You think about life in terms of absolutes, that’s your trouble. Life is relative. To that man, the answer was yes; it was relative to him, related to the implications of his questions, his being, his life. That man to whom I said yes was an atheist; he does not believe in God, and I do not want to support his stupid atheism. He goes on proclaiming there is no God. Even if a small space is left unexplored…perhaps in that space God exists. You can say with absoluteness there is no God when you have explored all existence. That is possible only in ultimate samadhi.
“And that man was simply believing that there was no God – he had no existential experience of there being no God. I had to shatter him, I had to bring him down to earth. I had to hit him hard on the head. My yes was relative to that person, to his whole personality. His question was not just words. The same question from somebody else may have received another answer.
And that’s what happened when I said to the other person, no. The question was the same, the words were the same – but the man behind those words was different. So the relationship between the words and the implications had changed. It is relative. The second man was as much an idiot as was the first, but on the opposite pole: he believed there is God. And he had come to get my support for his belief. I don’t support anybody’s belief because belief as such is the barrier. It does not matter what belief it is, true or false. No belief is true, no belief is false; all beliefs are simply idiotic. I had to say to that man, no.
“And the third man had come with no belief. He had not asked me, ‘Is there a God?’ No, he had come with an open heart, with no mind, no belief, no ideology. He was really a sane man, intelligent. He asked me, ‘Would you say something about God?’ He was not in search of somebody’s support for his belief system, he was not in search of a faith, he was not asking with a prejudiced mind. And he was asking about my experience: ‘Would you say something about God?’
“I could see that this man has no belief, this way or that; he is innocent. With such an innocent person, language is meaningless. I cannot say yes, I cannot say no; only silence is the answer. So I closed my eyes and remained silent.
“And my feeling about the man proved to be true. He closed his eyes – seeing me close my eyes, he closed his eyes. He understood my answer: Be silent, go in. He remained in silence for half an hour with me and he received the answer – that God is not a theory, a belief, that you have to be for or against.
“That’s why he thanked me for the answer, and you are puzzled for what answer he thanked me. He received the answer that silence is divine, and to be silent is to be godly; there is no other god than silence. And he went tremendously fulfilled, contented. He has found the answer.
“I have not given him the answer, he has found the answer. I have simply allowed him to have a taste of my presence.”
I am telling this story for two reasons; one, to illustrate that nothing is absolute. You are asking me, is it absolutely necessary to have spiritual guidance? It all depends, nothing is absolute.
For the first man, there was no need for any guidance. He had not come for any guidance. So was the case with the second man; although he was opposite to the first, he had not come for any guidance. He wanted a ready-made answer. Those two were not seekers. They wanted somebody else to take their responsibility. They were parasites, suckers. They wanted to throw their burdens onto somebody else’s shoulders.
“But the third man was a seeker. He had not asked for guidance, but he received it. I had not given it to him.”
It is not necessarily so, that you can receive only that which is given to you. There are so many ways to receive it. You can steal it, you can borrow it, you can simply find it on the street – it may have fallen from somebody’s pocket.
Gurdjieff actually used to say to his disciples that unless you are ready to steal the truth from the master he is not going to give it to you. He will only give it to you when he sees that now you have come to the limit of your tolerance; now if he is not going to give it to you, you are going to kill him. Only then will he give it; only then are you capable of receiving it.
But Buddha is saying a different, totally different thing. He is saying, “I have not given it to him but he has received it. I was simply present, available – just like a river flows, and if you are thirsty you drink. The river does not give the water to you, does not invite you. You have to bend down and make a cup with your hands to take the water. The river is available. If you are an idiot you can go on standing on the bank of the river for your whole life – thirsty, cursing the river, “It goes on flowing with so much water, and I am thirsty and standing here, and nobody takes care of me!”
You will have to allow the presence of the master to flow into you. You will have to be open, vulnerable. That man in his silence was vulnerable. He left all his windows and doors open to let the breeze blow. And when you are so close to a master like Gautam Buddha, you will be filled by his presence, his waves will go on shattering on your shores. Nothing is being given, but much has been taken in.
You ask me: Is it not absolutely necessary to have spiritual guidance? It raises so many questions. Let us try to understand the implication of different words in it. Spiritual guidance…what spiritual guidance? stand on your head? fast every alternate day? go on changing a mantra?…What is spiritual guidance?
Guidance is possible, guides exist. When you go to visit an historical place, ruins, then there are guides who tell you what used to be a palace and is now a ruin. I used to go to many places, just traveling around India, talking to people, finding my people. On the way there were so many ruins – India is such an old and ancient country, there are so many places.
Sarnath is near Varanasi, where Buddha gave his first sermon. I was staying with a doctor friend who was very insistent that I should go. “Sarnath is so close, just a half-hour ride.” He was willing to take me, and he knew the best guide, so he would make every arrangement. And he could take me around the ruins of the temples – the places where Buddha lived, where he sat, where he spoke for the first time.
And now many new temples have arisen because of Buddha. All the countries of the East have made their temples and their guest houses, because people from Japan, people from China, people from Tibet, people from Burma, people from Ceylon, from all over Asia, continuously go on coming on a pilgrimage – and Sarnath is one of the places where they are bound to come. All these countries have made big places, big temples, so Sarnath is not just ruins. On one hand it is the ruins of twenty-five centuries, and in these twenty-five centuries, many Buddhist kings have made temples and they have gone into ruins. Now new countries go on making temples.
So I said, “If you insist I will go.”
The best guide happened to be one of the Buddhist monks, Jagdish Kashyap. He is a learned man, and finally became the head of the Buddhist research institute. But at that time he was the guide for the kings from Buddhist countries, queens, ambassadors, big shots. He took me around, and he started saying things that he must have been saying every day to people who were coming. He said, “This is the place where Buddha sat and gave his first sermon.”
I asked him, “Do you have any inner certainty about it?”
He said, “Inner certainty? It is an historical fact.”
I said, “I am not concerned about history. I am asking you, do you have any inner certainty? Have you sat in this place and felt that a man like Buddha may have sat in this place? Have you felt any vibe?”
He said, “My God, these…I am a guide!”
But I said, “Otherwise, what historical proof can you give? For centuries it has been said King Ashoka has made a pillar and written that this is the place. But he himself lived five hundred years after Buddha. Gossips change with five minutes…five hundred years! This pillar is not an historical fact; it was made five hundred years after. You give me something solid.”
He said, “You are a difficult person. Come with me to my house and have a cup of tea.”
I said, “That seems far better than your historical proofs.”
Sitting in his house was such a difficulty. Just to drink one cup of tea was difficult – so many mosquitoes, and so big I have never seen. In India there are great places where there are really giant mosquitoes, but nothing compared to Sarnath. Just drinking tea, I told him, “You say Buddha gave his first sermon here.”
He said, “Yes.”
And I said, “You told me on the way that in another city in Vasali, he gave forty sermons.”
I said, “Why didn’t he come to Sarnath again?”
He said, “How can I answer why he…that was up to him, whether he wanted to come back or not. You ask strange questions.”
I said, “No, because I have the answer.”
He said, “You have the answer…why he didn’t come twice?”
I said, “Because of the mosquitoes. I am also not going to come twice. Finished! And I call this proof; there is no need for any historical proof. These mosquitoes are enough to prove that any intelligent person would not come here again. And you must be an idiot that you go on living here.”
Guides are good in ruins, historical places; but you are not an historical place, you are not a ruin. You are a living being. You are not a ruin. You are a living being. You are here, now, present. You don’t need guidance – you need presence. And try to understand the difference.
In guidance you are given certain rules: Do this, don’t do that – ten commandments. But you can follow those rules, you can follow those commandments; you will be just an imitator and nothing else. You may become very disciplined but inside you will remain as hollow as ever.
I had a friend who was a homeopathic doctor. Now homeopathic doctors are almost starving, nobody goes to them. Or sometimes people go to them when they have tried everywhere else and are just on the last hope, ready to die, knowing perfectly well…. This homeopathic doctor used to live next door to me, and whenever I saw a patient coming to him, I said, “This man is dying. If he is not, why is he going to the homeopathic doctor?”
I used to keep a record, and I found that anybody who came to him died within a few weeks. And I showed him the record. I said, “I have been keeping a record for you. You are some great doctor! Anybody who comes to you, you don’t let him live more than four weeks. That is the longest span you give.”
He said, “You mean I killed him?”
I said, “No, I don’t mean that, I mean they come here only when they are dying. Before that nobody thinks of homeopathy as a pathy or any scientific treatment. People just laugh at it. The moment I introduce you to somebody and say, ‘He is a homeopathic doctor,’ they start smiling.”
He was a poor man – because if patients are not coming, and those who come, die, it becomes notorious all around: “Don’t go to that doctor. Once a man goes to that doctor, then his fate is sealed.” And he said, “The trouble is that not only do they die, they don’t give me the fees! Before giving me the fees they are gone.”
He showed me one day, his post office account: one hundred and thirty-six rupees. He said, “Once these one hundred and thirty-six rupees are finished, what do you think I should do?”
I said, “Why wait for your one hundred and thirty-six rupees to be finished? Take them out, enjoy, and become a sannyasin.”
First he thought that I was joking, but then he said, “The idea is right. Why should I wait? At least once in my life I can enjoy for two, three days whatever I want and then become a sannyasin. This is a good idea.” So he became a sannyasin.
After ten or twelve years passed…I had no news about him, what had happened to him, where he went – just one day, when I was passing near Gwalior somebody told me that one sannyasin lives in the nearby forest. I asked the name, and I said, “Are you certain?”
He said, “I am absolutely certain – I go there. He is a very nice man, and he is a great homeopathic doctor. I am almost a disciple to him.”
I said, “I must go and see” – so I went. He was living in a small house. The window was open because he was in the forest, and he was naked, walking inside the room. I saw him from the outside, walking inside the room. I saw him from the outside, walking naked. I knocked on the door. He came with a towel wrapped around. I said, “Why did you do this?”
He said, “Did you see me walking naked, from outside?”
I said, “I have seen you, you can put aside your towel. There is no need.”
“No,” he said, “not now – slowly slowly.”
I said, “What do you mean?”
He said, “I am disciplining myself. That is my goal, to become a nude monk.” That is the highest goal, to become a nude monk; and he was practicing for it by walking nude, then going into the city with just the towel on. Then one day, just by chance, the towel slips…slowly, slowly.
I said, “I can understand. You are following a right methodology – but this will not make you a real sannyasin, this will make you only a practiced circus man.”

What can you practice? Can you practice love? Yes, you can do all the actions of love; you can hug somebody, but it does not mean that it is love. It may be just a wolf’s hug. Yes, in love, people hug, but that does not apply vice-versa, that when you hug you are in love. Yes, when people love they have certain expressions for each other. That does not mean that by repeating those expressions you are in love.
This is something very essential to understand: when a person like Mahavira became nude, it was not practice; he had not practiced it. He was a king. He distributed all his property, land, money; whatsoever he had, he distributed it all to the masses, to the people. With just a shawl around he left town. But when he was just leaving the town, he met a beggar who was crippled, who was trying to come to the town because he had heard that Mahavira was distributing things. But he was crippled, so he was just dragging himself, without legs. And he was late, so he met Mahavira when Mahavira was getting out of the city.
He said, “I was coming, but I am without legs so I could not reach in time. You are leaving, and the poorest man of your kingdom has not received anything.”
Now Mahavira said, “I have not got anything else except this shawl, but it is very precious studded with diamonds.” So he tore half and gave half to the beggar. He said, “This will be enough for your whole life and I will manage with the other half.” So now it remained just like a towel wrapped around him.
As Mahavira was entering the forest, a rosebush caught hold of the half that was his shawl. He suddenly found himself naked. He thought to take the shawl back from the rosebush, but then he thought, “What is the point? Sooner or later I am going to lose this shawl. It is so precious that even while I am asleep I will have to take care of it. It is better the rosebush has taken its share and freed me completely. Now I have nothing to fear – nothing can be stolen. And I am left exactly as I was born.”
This is not practice, this is simple
understanding.
Now this man was practicing for twelve years, slowly, slowly reducing his clothes: four, three, two one. Now he had come to a towel; and in the house he was naked, outside the house, he wore the towel. And the villagers all around knew him as naked. He was really making them see, that’s why he kept the windows open. This was his practice.
He would become a nude sannyasin one day and would be very famous and people would worship him because he had renounced everything.
And it happened that I was in Patiala, in Punjab, eight years after meeting him in the towel, in the forest. He had become very famous, thousands of people used to gather to listen to him. The king of Patiala, who was my host, told me that a great saint had come. I said, “I know the saint, and I know that he is great.”
The king said, “No, it is…I am not talking non-seriously, he is really a great saint. He has renounced everything.”
I said, “I know how much he has renounced: one hundred and thirty-six rupees.”
He said, “How do you know the exact amount?”
I said, “You can ask him: one hundred and thirty-six rupees was in his post office account.”
He invited the great saint. I was in another room, and I said, “First you ask him; if he refuses to say then I will come in.”
So first the king asked, “How much did you renounce?”
And the man, in a saintly way, said, “Who cares? Who remembers how much it was? But I renounced it all. It is all useless, it is just a burden. I will suggest that you too, renounce this kingdom, this Patiala kingdom. It is so peaceful and so silent when you renounce the worldly things.”
Then I came in, and he…it was worth seeing! he suddenly stood up, and he said, “From where have you come?”
I said, “I was here and was listening to your great spiritual things. What about one hundred and thirty-six rupees? Have your forgotten? Could you not be true and say to the king, ‘I have renounced one hundred and thirty-six rupees’?”
The king said to the man, “You are known as a great saint.”
I said, “He is a great homeopathic doctor too. And he had to renounce the world, it is not that he wanted to renounce it. And he renounced it on my advice. He had to renounce because every patient coming to him was dying. He had become so notorious, there was no other way. The world had rejected him. I suggested to him that it is better to renounce the world than to be rejected by the world; why miss such an opportunity?”
There were tears in the man’s eyes and he said, “I am very sorry that I was not telling the truth, but the truth is that I am also living a complete lie: I am not a saint at all – it is all practiced.”
And I told him, “I have told you that practice will not make you a saint. Saintliness comes out of understanding, not out of practice. It is the flowering of your intelligence, not a certain discipline.”
So what kind of guidance can you get? No real master gives guidance. Those who give guidance simply show that they are not masters at all. And there are millions around the world who are guiding people. In every religion, rabbis, priests, monks, are guiding people, helping people to grow spiritually. Nobody even bothers to ask himself: Has any real master ever given guidance?
Bayazid, a Sufi mystic, remained with his master, Junnaid, for twelve years. When he came, Junnaid told him to sit down. Every day he would come and Junnaid would say, “Sit down.” Many would come and talk, and this and that, but Junnaid never asked anything about him. In the evening, when Junnaid withdrew into his silent room, Bayazid would get up and leave. It continued for twelve years. Every day Bayazid would come and immediately Junnaid would say, “Sit down.”
After twelve years Junnaid looked at him and said, “Those fools have been wasting their time and my time. What about you?”
Bayazid said, “I am immensely happy just with your saying, ‘Sit down.’ And slowly, slowly, slowly, slowly everything in me has settled. It is not only me just physically sitting. Spiritually inside me everything has settled. There is no turmoil, no question. You have given me so much. I cannot, in any way, repay it.”
But Junnaid said, “I have not done anything – I was simply saying, ‘Sit down.’ Do you think that is something for which you have to be grateful to me? Anybody in your place would have killed me! Twelve years! and nothing but, ‘Sit down’ every day! The whole day sitting there, and again the next day, the same story.”
But Bayazid said, “That is not the question. I am not saying anything about your giving, or not giving. Just sitting by your side I was getting it. I don’t know whether you were giving it or not, but just sitting by your side I was getting it. It was simply flowing in me.”
Spiritual guidance is nonsense.
Spiritual presence is the way of a real master. And it does not need you to sit down for twelve years. That happened in the case of Bayazid – all cases are different. It may happen just by a look into your eyes. It may happen just by a touch on your head. So there is no fixed pattern of guidance with a real master. And I am talking about pseudo-teachers.
With a real master anything can become a transfer of energy.
All that is needed is your availability.
All that is needed is your indefensibility.
Ordinarily everybody is defending himself. That’s how you have been brought up in the world: be defensive, be alert, because the whole world is your enemy. And if you are not defensive, you will be crushed. In fact, people like Machiavelli say that the best way to defend is to attack. If you really want to defend yourself, before anybody attacks you, you attack. That’s the best way of defense. And certainly it is.
If you are in search of defense then don’t wait for somebody to attack you; it is better you attack. Make the other person defensive and you will be one step ahead. That is better for your defense. Machiavelli is the real teacher of all your spiritual guides. They are not helping you to drop your defenses.
Now this Junnaid saying to Bayazid, “Sit down” – and then not even looking at him for the whole day…. It must have been difficult in the beginning, almost unbearable. When Bayazid was leaving after twelve years, paying his tributes, gratitudes, touching his master’s feet, who has never said anything other than “Sit down,” he asked Junnaid, “Will you tell me something about your master, just as a parting message?”
Junnaid said, “It was not much different from what has happened between me and you. It was a little more difficult. For six years he would not allow me in his room; I had to stand outside. Anybody…. What do you say? – Harry, Tom, Dick? or Dick, Tom, Harry? These three names are so difficult. I can never manage to remember who is first, who is second, who is third. Tom…Dick and Harry…Okay, I will try to remember that Harry is last: Tom, Dick, Harry. So all Toms, all Dicks, and all Harrys were allowed in. Just Junnaid was not; for six years he remained outside.
“After six years the master himself came outside, took my hand in his own hand, and said, ‘Please come in.’ Then for six years again, there was silence. I was allowed in, and I used to come and sit, and wait for any guidance. After six years he looked at me and smiled; and then for six years again he forgot about me completely.
“It took eighteen years. After eighteen years, he called me close, and hugged me, and kissed me on my forehead; and that very moment something happened. I don’t know how and what it was, but something in me died, and I was completely renewed – a renewal. I looked all around; I had the same eyes, but everything looked new, fresh, alive – the whole existence became a beauty. And just the way you are feeling grateful to me, although I have not done anything, I also had felt grateful to him. He said, ‘I have not done anything. Your patience for six years standing outside earned my coming out and taking you in. You deserved it, you were ready for it, to come in.
“‘For six years I did not pay any attention to you,’ he said, ‘but I never felt a single moment of depression in you, hopelessness in you, anger in you, or hostility toward me, that a man who was keeping you sitting for twelve years, wasting your life…. That’s why I smiled. I smiled to give you a sign that you were coming closer, just to give you a little encouragement.’“
Six years of standing outside, and he calls it a little encouragement! Six years of sitting and he calls it a little encouragement – a smile. But with a true master these small things are not small. Remember, everything is relative. Its meaning, its depth, changes with the person.
When a master smiles it is not just an ordinary smile.
And it was understood. Then another six years passed, and Junnaid’s master said, “I have not called you on my own, I had to call you close to me. It was something irresistible. You have managed such an openness, such a great trust that I am grateful to you. You need not be grateful to me; I had to call you. In fact I have been too hard on you and I simply kissed you so that you could forgive me all those eighteen years of hardship.”
A true master looks at things in a totally different way. But that kiss transformed Junnaid….
In the human being’s growth, the presence of the master is needed, but not any spiritual guidance.
All guidance is bogus. It is exploitation.
The real thing never comes through practice, through discipline.
The real thing only happens between two living flames.
All that is needed is that those two living flames should come closer.
Now, coming closer is not a discipline.
It is a love affair, it is not a practice.
That’s why I say that religion is a love affair, a love affair with existence itself.
Be silent, be available, trust – because you have nothing to lose.
And then one day – of course it is unpredictable when, one never knows because things are so relative. It may happen in this moment, it may take years, but it doesn’t matter.
Once you have detected a real master, once you have had a little glimpse of an authentic man, then it does not matter when it happens. It does not matter even whether it happens or not.
In finding the master it has happened already.
Now it is only a question of when you realize it, when you recognize it. You may take a little time, you may take a long time – but it is immaterial.
I repeat: In finding the master it has happened.
Now take your time, and whenever you want to recognize – recognize this life, next life…time is immaterial.