---
title: From the False to the Truth 01
series: From the False to the Truth 01-34
talk_number: 1
url: https://oshoworld.com/from-the-false-to-the-truth-01
language: English
duration: 01:39:46
author: TALKS IN AMERICA
scraped_at: 2026-01-03T09:15:07.357452+00:00
---
Osho,
Is it possible for you to be my master if I do not wish to take sannyas?
I think you do not understand the meaning of discipleship. You are asking something impossible. It is almost as if I ask you: Can you be my sannyasin if I don’t want to be your master? You can see the absurdity of it. But why such a question arises in the first place has to be understood. It has to do with the whole past of humanity.
People are Christians without being Christians; people are Hindus without being Hindus. Only formally do Christians accept Jesus as their master. It is not an intimate, sincere, total relationship. It is just by birth – it is an accidental relationship. They have not chosen to be Christians. They are born in a Christian home, or in a Jewish home, and they have been conditioned to believe that Jesus is your master, Moses is your master – poor Moses knows nothing about you, neither has Jesus any idea who you are. And this is true all over the world.
Religion has nothing to do with your birth. By birth one cannot be Christian, Hindu, Mohammedan; but that’s how it has been happening. Religion has been joined with birth to deceive you. The best way to deceive a person is to give him the idea that what people are seeking, he has already got. This is the most refined way of cheating.
A Christian never thinks of searching to find out what religion is, what it means to be a disciple, what it means to accept someone as your master. He has been deceived from birth to believe that he already has religion. Ready-made it has been given to him. No effort on his part has been made, no search, no seeking, no enquiry. He has a master in Jesus Christ, he has a holy book in the Bible; everything is supplied by tradition, family, society.
They don’t leave any chance for you to inquire on your own; and the problem is, unless you inquire on your own you will never find what life is all about, what truth is, what these tremendous moments are, like when one becomes a disciple, when one finds a master…. You will never know those moments of ultimate rejoicing. You will never run in the street naked, shouting, “Eureka! I have found it!”
Archimedes was not mad. He was one of the most important scientists of his time and of all times. And if he, finding a simple thing, a scientific fact, forgets all about clothing because he was in his bathtub when he found a certain principle for which he had been looking….
When you are looking continuously in all directions, knocking on all doors, you never know which door is the right door. Archimedes was puzzled for months because the king had told him, “If you are really a scientist you should find out one thing. Somebody, another king, has presented me with a crown of gold. I want to know whether it is pure gold, or if there is some mixture in it. Is any other metal mixed in with it? And I don’t want the crown to be cut. I don’t want you even to touch it. You have to find the answer without spoiling the beautiful present.”
For months Archimedes was troubled: how to find out? If he were allowed to cut a little piece of the crown it would have been possible to find out whether other metals were mixed in or not. When a question remains continuously with you for twenty-four hours, it takes you, by and by, close to the answer. The answer comes in a moment of relaxation. The question is a tension, but you can get the answer in relaxation only if the tension has been to its uttermost climax.
It had been so for months, and the king was asking every day. Archimedes was starting to feel embarrassed: a well known scientist cannot find such a small thing? People had started laughing at him. He could not sleep, he could not do anything – only one question…. That day, relaxing in his bathtub – which was full of water, completely full – as he sat in the tub, naturally some water flowed out to make a space for him. And something clicked in his mind. He weighed the water that had flowed out, and he found the principle. If pure gold is put in water, then a certain amount of water will come out. If some other metal is mixed in it, then a different amount of water will come out, because that certain metal will not have the same effect on water as the gold if it is pure.
Now the crown need not be destroyed; it has just to be put in water, and another piece of pure gold of the same volume can be put in water and you can see how much water comes out from both. If it is exactly the same then the crown is of pure gold; if it is not, then there is a mixture. The finding was not something great. He had not found a master, or truth; he had not realized himself. He had not entered into nirvana. But such a small finding…. The question is not of small or great; the question is of finding yourself. The joy comes from finding, not what you find.
Archimedes jumped out of his bathtub, ran out of his bathroom, and rushed into the street shouting, “Eureka!” A crowd followed him. They thought, “We were always thinking this man is crazy, now he has gone completely crazy; naked, he is going toward the palace!”
He reached the court naked, shouting “Eureka, I have found it!”
The king said, “It seems you must have found it. But where are your clothes?” That moment Archimedes became aware that he was naked.
The king said, “Your coming naked shows that you must have found it, because when someone finds something it is such a joy. Who cares about clothes? Who remembers about manners? You need not say anything to me; just your coming in this way has given me proof that you must have found it.”
But you have not found Christianity. You have never shouted, “Eureka!” You have not found Hinduism; you have not found anything that could have driven you into the street naked, shouting. This is why such a question arises.
You have been living on borrowed things. You can borrow things but you cannot borrow experiences. You can borrow money from someone, but you cannot borrow his love experience. You cannot say, “Just give me your love experience for two days, and I will return it with interest.” Love experience is not a commodity.
You are asking me, “Can you still be my master if I don’t wish to be a sannyasin?” There must be many misconceptions in your mind. As if it is something that the master has to do! So if the master accepts, that’s enough, you need not be a disciple, you need not be a sannyasin, you need not do anything.
That too is given by your idiotic tradition to you: Jesus is the savior, all that you need is to accept him as your savior, and that’s all. The whole responsibility is his. On your part only one thing is needed: to accept him as your savior. Nothing else is needed, no transformation in you.
The reality is just the opposite: the master does nothing. It is in your becoming a disciple that the whole mystery lies. It is in your surrender of the ego that the whole search comes to an authentic point. It is in putting your mind aside.
That is what sannyas is: an authentic discipleship. It means putting your mind aside. You have lived according to your mind up to now. If that is fulfilling, then there is no need for anybody to become a sannyasin.
If you feel you are blissful with your mind, then why bother about a master? Why carry an unnecessary load? Why become tethered? It is certain that as your mind is, it is nothing but anguish; it is suffering, misery, despair. But you are not ready to become a sannyasin. That means you are not ready to put your mind aside.
Translated into reality, you are not wishing to change even a little bit – not even your clothes, what to say about your mind? You are not ready even to hang a mala with my picture around your neck, how are you going to allow me to enter into your heart?
You want me to be your master and you are keeping yourself closed in every possible way. You are saying, “Would you like to come into my house?” and you are closing the doors in my face. On the one hand you are inviting me, on the other hand you are closing your doors and windows, so I cannot enter in any way.
The relationship between a master and a disciple is one of the greatest mysteries of existence.
The master does nothing – remember it always. He is only a presence. All that is done is done by the disciple. The presence of the master is helpful, just the presence. It is immensely nourishing. His presence gives you the guarantee that what has happened to him can happen to you; otherwise where are you going to find the evidence that things like that happen? The master’s only function is to give you tangible evidence.
You cannot make Jesus your master because he has been dead for two thousand years. The relationship between a master and a disciple is a living relationship.
You don’t get married to women who died two thousand years ago; otherwise, I think everybody would be marrying Cleopatra, Amrapali. Who will bother about ordinary women when you can marry Cleopatra? And Cleopatra cannot say no; she has been dead for a long time. But you are doing the same thing when you relate yourself to Jesus, Buddha, Mohammed.
You don’t understand a simple thing, that relating to a master is a bigger, far bigger love relationship; it is a far more crazy love affair. It cannot happen between somebody who is living and somebody who has been dead for thousands of years; the distance is too much. But people prefer to make Jesus, Mohammed, Lao Tzu, Zarathustra, their master, for the simple reason that the master is not present, he cannot say no. He cannot tell you, “First you have to go through a transformation.” It is a one-way affair; the other party is absent.
But I am not absent, I am present. You cannot ask such a stupid question to me.
If you don’t wish to become a sannyasin – am I mad, that I should become a master to you? Why should I become a master to you? For what? You are not even wishing to be a sannyasin. You don’t want to give anything, and you want to get everything. Becoming your master I will be taking on your total responsibility. And you are not even wishing to be a sannyasin – which is nothing. At least my sannyas is the simplest that has ever existed on the earth.
What is required of you? Even this seems to be too much. Then just don’t be bothered with the greater things of life. Go back to your hell. You are not meant to have eyes; perhaps to remain blind is your destiny. Remain blind.
Asking such a question implies that a master is to do everything, the only thing needed is to be accepted by him, then your work is finished. Now you can go on doing all the nonsense that you have been doing. You can do it now even more without any guilt, without any fear, without any worry about the consequences, because now somebody has taken your responsibility.
Omar Khayyam, one of the great poets of Persia, said, “Don’t stop me from enjoying women and wine. Don’t stop me – because God is forgiving; if I do not commit sin, then what will happen to God’s forgiveness? I have to commit sins just to keep God qualified, compassionate, forgiving. No sin is bigger than God’s compassion. Let me commit the worst: he is there.”
You see the logic of the man? It is perfectly clear. If God’s very quality is to forgive, then what is the fear of sin? And how much sin can you commit? God’s compassion is infinite. All your sins combined will still be finite, they cannot be infinite. If you can commit infinite sins you have become almost a God because you can do infinite things. Then there is no difference between you and God. You have infinity in your hands as much as God has.
Omar Khayyam’s statement is significant because that’s what all religious people are doing: they put the responsibility on somebody, and then they go on doing their thing, hoping, believing that everything will be all right in the end. They have a great savior who will stand for them before God.
Your question seems to be just throwing responsibility on me. And I am a very irresponsible person. I have never lived responsibly. From my very childhood everybody has been telling me, “Be responsible.” But I have always said, “I enjoy being irresponsible so much that I don’t see the point, why I should be responsible. You enjoy being responsible – be responsible. I never say to you, ‘Be irresponsible.’ Why do you bother about me? If my irresponsibilities are going to lead me to hell I am perfectly willing to go there, because anyway I don’t want to live with your saints.
“I have lived with saints and I have lived with sinners, and I have seen that to be with sinners is far more colorful, far more pleasant, far more human. There is some song in it, some dance in it; there is laughter, there is life. To live with a saint is to live with a dead man, a corpse.”
Have you ever been in a room alone with a corpse? Can you sleep? Can you eat? Can you drink? Can you laugh? The corpse will not interfere in any way, but just the presence of the corpse in the room is enough to prevent you from living. Do you see the great principles involved there? The corpse is not doing anything, and yet you cannot eat – you will feel like throwing up. You cannot sing. The corpse is not preventing you, the corpse is not going to hear it, but just the idea of singing when the corpse is there….
Saints are dead people. The more dead they are, the more they are thought to be saintly. To live with them is simply sickening. It is nauseating. They are so inhuman about everything. They themselves live mechanically, robot-like, and they won’t allow anybody else to live differently. They will make you feel guilty for everything.
In Mahatma Gandhi’s ashram – and he was a great saint, mahatma means great saint – you could not smoke. I know smoking is silly, but what is wrong in being silly? And if one enjoys it, once in a while to be silly is perfectly human. It should be acceptable. You can tell the person, “It will harm your health, your life will be reduced by five years.” But if you don’t want to live that long, it is perfectly good – because what are you going to do with five years more? You will smoke more!
And it is not a healthy habit; but people who don’t smoke, they fall sick – and I have seen people who have been smoking continuously, chain-smokers, never falling sick. So all this is just guesswork. All that the smoker is doing is enjoying taking the smoke in and throwing it out. The smoke is warm, just like the mother’s milk, and the cigarette is exactly the mother’s nipple; he is again enjoying being a child.
A cigarette is just a way of enjoying one’s childhood again; that’s why a cigarette is so relaxing. When you are worried, tense, you start looking for a cigarette. It helps; it is human. It will look really odd to go to your mother now, and say, “ I am so tense and worried….” I think cigarettes are a good substitute. Don’t disturb these people; otherwise they will disturb women. Your mother may be dead – then you have to go to your wife, and she may be just mad at the idea that you have come with. She will think you are going nuts.
Cigarettes are such a simple substitute; don’t disturb people. When I see you smoking I feel sorry for you, not because you are smoking but because you have to smoke. I think about your worries, not about your smoking; that is nothing to be bothered about. I think about your anguish, your tension. I think that there must be something eating at your heart; otherwise why should you burn yourself with smoking? I never judge your smoking, that you are doing some wrong act. I see deeper. I see why you are smoking.
But no saint bothers about why you are smoking. For them smoking is a sin. In Mahatma Gandhi’s ashram if somebody was found to be smoking he was immediately turned out in disgrace; he had fallen. And the poor fellow was simply trying to relax. In fact his smoking was an indication that the ashram was not relaxing, that it was not a place where people could relax. Instead, it was a place where people became more tense. In fact, all the ashrams make you more tense.
It is a strange dilemma: they make you more tense, more worried. This world is not enough for them; they bring in hell and heaven and all kinds of consequences that you will have to suffer. Rather than helping you to get out of your tense mind, they make your mind more tense – and then you cannot smoke, then you cannot drink even tea or coffee; these are all prohibited because they are all relaxing.
A relaxed person may not need to smoke unless playfully, once in a while, sitting with friends, when everybody is smoking and he does not want to play the saint. I used to go to parties when I was in the university. It was a problem because the host was worried that everybody would be drinking and I might feel left out. Knowing it from many other previous experiences, I had to go to the host and say, “Don’t be worried about me. You just give me Coca Cola as if I am also drinking with everybody.”
But he would say, “They will think you are also drinking alcohol.”
I said, “Let them think that, it is no problem. What is the problem? It simply shows I am also human. I want to participate with them, I don’t want to be holier-than-thou. To me that attitude is ugly, that attitude is simply egoistic.
“I cannot drink alcohol, because I don’t know what I will do after drinking. There is no problem – as far as I am concerned there is no problem, I can drink, because I don’t think that even though alcohol is called spirits, it can be spiritual, or it can enter into my spirit. It will just go through my kidneys and sooner or later pass out of the body. So there is not much of a problem. I am thinking of you, because I may do something, and that may create trouble for you! So just give me Coca Cola.”
Drinking Coca Cola with people – they almost all glared at me! They all said, “You are also drinking? We were worried that you would be here not drinking, and we would look like sinners.”
I said, “No, I am a drunkard. You go on, you cannot compete with me” – because I could go on drinking Coca Cola as much as I wanted. But I felt happy that they were not feeling guilty. I felt that I had done something appropriate; I had been human.
Your saints are not human. Gandhi was very particular about cleanliness. He followed the same idea: cleanliness is next to God. Now for me it is a trouble – there is no God, so only cleanliness remains. Not even next to God, just the first – there is no next. But I don’t come to look into your room, and into your bathroom. That seems to me evil. But Gandhi used to do that.
He would go into your room to see that everything is as it should be. He would have a look in your bathroom to see whether it was clean or not. But this is interfering in your privacy. I can talk about cleanliness, I can praise cleanliness. I can tell you the beauty of it; but then at least I should trust you, your intelligence, your privacy, and ultimately your responsibility to yourself. I am not responsible for you.
But this is not the way of the saints up to now. They have been after their disciples almost like detectives, making the disciple feel as guilty as possible. There is some arithmetic behind it.
The more guilty they make people feel, the bigger saints they are thought to be. Their height goes on becoming higher and higher as you go on sinking lower and lower. Their whole saintliness depends on your guiltiness. And to make you feel guilty is very simple: start condemning everything that is human, that is natural.
On my path the master is only a light. You can see in that light and go wherever you want to go. The master is not somebody who is continuously following you, forcing you. He is simply a presence. In his presence you become aware of your ultimate potential. You become aware of what you can be, and what you are not. You become aware of your hypocrisy.
Sannyas is nothing but dropping your hypocrisy.
And you say to me, “I don’t wish to be a sannyasin.” You insist on remaining a hypocrite, a split person. Making me your master, you will be more split. You will become more guilty because you have made somebody a master and you are not a disciple to him.
It will look unkind to you that I refuse. But it is a refusal out of compassion, not out of unkindness. I refuse to be a master of anyone who is not wishing to be a disciple.
The meaning of the word disciple is beautiful. It means one who is ready to learn. And there is much to be learned. Almost everything has to be learned, because whatsoever you know is not learning, it is knowledge, completely rotten knowledge. You have taken it from others; you have not searched for it, looked for it, inquired about it. It is not your own, you cannot say “Eureka!” Not for a single thing can you say “Eureka!” And a man who is ready to learn, a disciple, finds every moment like Archimedes – life goes on revealing new secrets every moment.
How can I become a master to you? You are not ready to be vulnerable to me. You are not ready to be open to me, you are not ready to listen to me, you are not ready to come along with me. You want to remain as you are, what you are, yet you want one more guarantee: you want me to become responsible so that you feel less guilty – at least you have a master. But that is not going to help.
You can have all the masters of the world – and that’s the beauty of dead masters, they cannot say no. You can accept all the masters of the world, be a disciple of all the masters of the world. There are people who are following Zen, who are following Sufism, who are following Tao, anything. Neither Lao Tzu can prevent them, nor Bodhidharma can prevent them, nor Jalaluddin Rumi can prevent them. Those people are gone, just words echoing are left.
But I am yet in the flesh.
I am yet not only a word.
My word is still living.
If you want to have any contact with me, you will have to be ready to travel with me. It is a long journey. Much of the load that you are carrying will have to be dropped. Much of the mind which you are thinking is very valuable will prove just junk. Much of your character that you valued so much will prove nothing but forced discipline.
Discipline can be forced so much that it becomes unconscious. People are behaving in the right manner – are not stealing, are not harming others, not hurting others – but it is not their conscious choice.
I have heard about a retired military general…it was a case after the first world war. The general had lived his whole life in the army – and not only his life; his father was a general, his father’s father was a general. As far back as he could remember their family had been in the army. It was in his blood. From the very beginning he was disciplined in the manners of the army.
He was retired now, the war was over. One day he was carrying a bucket full of eggs, and a man just played a joke on him; the man shouted, “Attention!” and the general stood to attention, dropping the bucket and all the eggs on the road. He was very angry; his eggs were all finished. And he said, “What kind of a joke is this?”
The man said, “But can’t I say ‘Attention!’? It has nothing to do with you. You could have carried your bucket. I was not telling you to drop it.”
The general said, “You don’t understand, it has gone into my blood, into my bones. Even in the night, if somebody says, ‘Attention!’ I will jump out of the bed and be at attention. Only then will I realize that it is a joke – but first I will be in position.”
This is discipline. Your morality, your character, are nothing but forced disciplines. They have become unconscious, and anything that is unconscious is of no value at all. Coming along with me you will have to understand that your morality is just imposed. You are an impostor pretending to be moral, not knowing even the ABC of morality. Your character is nothing.
When I applied for a professorship, they asked me for a character certificate. I said, “I cannot produce one.”
The education minister said, “But why not?”
I said, “For the simple reason that I haven’t found a man of character from whom I would like to have a character certificate.”
He said, “You are something. You can’t find a man of character?”
I said, “No, I can’t find a man of character. And how can I have a character certificate from somebody to whom I cannot give a character certificate?”
I knew my vice-chancellor and I told him, “I cannot take a character certificate from you because I cannot give a character certificate to you. I know you perfectly well.”
I knew my head of department, who was a very loving man, who loved me. But he himself said, “I cannot give you a character certificate because I don’t have any character and you know it perfectly well.”
I said to the education minister, “You give me a character certificate, and I will expose you – I will just call a press conference today. You give me a character certificate and I will tell the press conference what kind of character you have.”
He started perspiring. He said, “You just take your appointment later.”
But I said, “What about the character certificate? – because it has to be attached to the application.”
He said, “Don’t be worried.”
I said, “No, it is a question of principle. If everybody needs a character certificate then I will write a character certificate for myself. That’s the only man I know perfectly well who has character. About anybody else it is at the most guesswork.”
He said, “Do whatsoever you want, just please leave me alone. You take your order.” So I wrote a character certificate for myself. He said, “But please don’t sign it in your own name because I will be in trouble.”
Then I said, “Whose name have I to sign?”
He said, “Anybody’s name but not your own name.”
So I signed it in the name of one of my professors. He said, “But you are signing with somebody else’s name. I know this man, S.S. Roy; he is your professor. What are you going to tell him?”
I said, “You don’t be worried. This a copy of the original, the original I will take from him.” I said, “This is done everyday; the original is taken, then copies are made. This is just the reverse: the copy is given to you, the original I will make.”
I went to S.S. Roy. I told him that this had happened and, “This is the character certificate I have written. You give me the original.”
He looked at the certificate. He said, “You should have come to me, because you have not written anything good. I would have given you a beautiful character certificate.”
I said, “It was something spontaneous. That man was in a difficulty and I could not write more than this about myself. What more can I write?”
He said, “But this is not a character certificate at all, because you are saying that you are a human being – this is very ordinary. You ask me to sign it, and it says that you have all the weaknesses of human beings, that one cannot trust you, you are not reliable. Now I have to sign it,” he said, “and you will show it to people.”
I said, “No, I will not show it. The original I will give to you. The original you can keep in case it is needed.”
He said, “Then it is okay because I don’t want people to see that I have written this character certificate about you. I love you and I know you. These are not your qualities.”
I said, “But when I have to write about myself, do you think I should write, ‘He is the only begotten son of God’? Do you want me to be crucified? Once was enough.”
Coming along with me you will have to drop almost the whole of you. Only the essential will remain, only that which you cannot drop. Even if you want to drop it you cannot. Only that will remain.
It is a great surgery in which all the cancerous growth that surrounds you has to be cut out completely. It is painful, it is hard. Just because it is so painful and so hard, I make it as light as possible, as joyous as possible. I try to make it a joke for the simple reason that the task is hard, and it is good to pass the dark night of the soul with laughter, with gossiping, with joking, with dancing, with singing. It is good to pass the dark night of the soul with joy.
What is the point of crying and weeping and mourning and wearing the black habits of the Christian priests? The night is dark enough, why make it darker? To transform yourself, to change, is painful enough; why make it more miserable?
Once I was operated on, a little operation. I continued to joke with the doctor. He said, “You please wait. Don’t make me laugh because I may do something wrong. Leave me alone. I was saying from the very beginning that you need chloroform; otherwise you will go on talking and you will disturb me. But you said local anesthesia will do. So we have given” – he was doing the operation on my finger – “so we have given you local anesthesia. But it was wrong – you don’t leave us alone, you just go on joking!”
I said, “Lying down on a surgical table, is it not the right place to joke? And will it not be helpful to you to be laughing and enjoying and doing your work? Just the way a painter paints, a surgeon should do his work. Why make it sad and…. It is already painful; make it light, don’t make it heavier.”
Hence, my sannyas is a rejoicing. You say you are not wishing to rejoice with me. You say you are not going to laugh with me. You say you are not going to dance with me, sing with me. Then for what are you wanting me to be your master? To make you more sad? Are you not sad enough? To make you more guilty? Have not the Christian priests done enough? Do you want me to make a heavier cross? Is not Jesus’ cross weighty enough for you? For what do you want me to be your master?
And to be your master or not, that has to be left to me; you are not to be concerned about it. Your whole concern should be, can you be a disciple? “How can I be a disciple?” should be your question. You are not going to be a master so why bother about the master? That is my business. And I know my business perfectly well. You just leave it to me – you do your part. And if you succeed in doing your part you will not go empty-handed from my door. But first things first. You should be ready to do your part.
Becoming a sannyasin is not just changing the robe and changing the name; those are just playful things. I could have chosen any color. Blue is good, the color of the ocean. Green is good, the color of the whole of nature. I could have chosen any color.
I have chosen red for two reasons. One, because red in the East has been the color of sannyasins for centuries. I have not chosen it because it has been the color of the sannyasins, so that my sannyasins should also be part of that tradition. No, I have chosen it to sabotage that tradition, because all those sannyasins were serious people: heavy, dull, mediocre.
I wanted to bring a new breeze into the world of sannyas, and to disturb the definition of the sannyasin, which had become completely ossified. I created confusion. Now in India it is very difficult to know who is who. My sannyasins are laughing, enjoying, dancing, and the people cannot understand what is the matter because sannyasins have never done such things.
And secondly, I chose red because red has become associated with communism. I wanted to sabotage that idea too, that red is anybody’s monopoly. Just to disturb these two I chose red. But this is just playful.
You will have to think about sannyas in its deepest meanings. It means that you have found someone whose eyes can see farther than your eyes can see, whose reach of the hand goes higher than the reach of your hand. You have found someone that you feel jealous of. You would like to have this serenity, this peace, this silence, this song. Then be prepared on your part.
I am ready, I have been long ready.
And don’t miss the opportunity, because I will not be here forever. Today I am here, tomorrow I may not be here. So if you want in some way to use my insight, my vision, my experience, if you want to become a part of my universe, then don’t miss a single moment, because nothing can be said about the next moment. I may not be here, and then your getting ready will be pointless. Now I am here, and you are not ready.
That has been happening again and again in the past. It is said the day Gautam Buddha died a man came running. Buddha had told his disciples, “This is my last meeting with you in the body. I am going to leave the body. Before I leave, if you have any more questions left” – he had been answering for forty-two years – “if anything is still left in anybody’s mind, ask it, because I won’t be here anymore.”
The disciples were crying, weeping. What can you ask? For forty-two years Buddha had been answering even those questions which you had not asked. He had been answering questions which you had wrongly asked. But he had answered rightly. He was not only answering you, he was also creating questions for you. In forty-two years he had done everything that was possible. Now, what to ask at the last moment?
They said, “No, we are just grateful.”
Buddha closed his eyes, he moved the first step inward – that is, he moved away from the body to the mind. The second step: he moved from the mind to the heart. The third step he was just going to take, from the heart to the feeling of am-ness, asmita. It cannot be called “I” – it is far more refined – just am-ness. And then…the last jump into nothingness. While he was just moving in, the man came running.
He said, “But I have a question.”
The disciples said, “Now don’t disturb him. Where have you been? He has passed through your village at least thirty times.”
He said, “I know, but sometimes there was such a crowd of customers in my shop. Sometimes I was engaged in my son’s marriage; sometimes my wife was sick – and so on and so forth. I always thought, next time when he comes I will go to him. Just now I heard that he is leaving the world. What about my question?”
The people said, “You seem to be an idiot. Thirty times he passed, and thirty times you missed. And now, when he has just taken leave of us…now it cannot be done.”
But Buddha came back. He opened his eyes, he said, “No, let him ask. Let him be answered because I don’t want it to be known in history, for the coming generations, that a buddha was alive and yet somebody returned from his door empty-handed. Let me do my part. If he is ready – and I can see he is ready; my death has been a shock to him and has made him ready. I am happy that even my death has helped somebody to be ready, to listen.”
He answered his question. The question was not philosophical, theological, intellectual. The question was really authentic, sincerely spiritual. But that man had been missing for so many years, just because of the idea, “Tomorrow, the day after tomorrow, any time Buddha comes and goes, I can go and meet him and ask.”
He asked – this was the last question to Buddha – “How can I be in a position so that whether you are in the body or not, your presence will remain available to me? What can I do?”
He had asked a real religious question. He was asking, “What can I do so that your presence remains available to me? This time I have missed – when you were in the body. But I don’t want to miss forever.”
Buddha gave him the instructions for meditation, vipassana; how to be aware of your breathing; how to be aware, silently watchful of the breath going out, coming in, going out, coming in…”so slowly, slowly you can be separate from your breathing. The moment you are separate from your breathing my presence will be available, because you are separate from your body just as I am separate from my body.”
If a disciple is ready, even a dead master can be alive. If the disciple is not ready, then even a living master cannot do anything. It all depends on the disciple.

============================================================

Osho,
Is worshipping in the commune related to meditation? Why don't we have any meditation time separate from worshipping?
It has been one of the most dangerous ideas down the centuries that life can be divided into separate parts. Life is indivisible, it is an organic whole. The moment you divide it you kill it. This is one of the most fundamental things in my approach toward life: I take it as a whole.
And remember, the whole is more than the sum total of its parts. In the world of machines, the whole is exactly the sum total of its parts; there is nothing more in it. A clock is nothing more than all its parts put in a particular arrangement; it functions. Take the parts apart, and the functioning disappears. But you can put the parts together again, and the functioning starts again. The functioning of the mechanism is not something separate.
Life is totally different from a machine. If you cut a man into different parts, life will disappear. Now you cannot put those parts together. And even if you manage somehow to put those parts together, life is not going to appear again. It categorically proves one thing, that life is not the sum total of its parts – it is something more, it is something plus. And that “plus” is the real essence of your being.
But down the ages all the religions have been committing a crime: the crime of dividing the indivisible. But it was favorable to them. A divided man is a dead man, and to control the dead is the easiest thing in the world.
An undivided man is an individual. That’s exactly the meaning of the word individual – indivisible. The individual is dangerous, he is alive. You cannot enslave him, you cannot oppress him, you cannot exploit him. You cannot do anything against his wish. His individuality gives him freedom to think, to express, to be.
Divisions can be made in very subtle ways. For example, “Religion should be separate from the state.” What kind of stupidity is this? If religion is something real, something that vibrates in your being, something that you breathe, live, then wherever you are – in the church, in the office, in the marketplace, it does not matter – religion is your very breathing. It is going to be with you. Then it is going to decide every step that you take, every word that you utter, every gesture that you make.
How can you divide religion from art? A religious man painting is not in any way separate from his religious being. While painting he is going to paint religion; whatever he paints is going to be colored by his religion. The way he lives, the way he loves, the way he dances – all is going to be in his painting. The painting of a religious man, whatsoever the subject matter of the painting, will have some fragrance of religion in it; it is inevitable, there is no way to avoid it.
Sometimes you may not be able to see this, because things are very subtle. A man of meditation, silence, serenity, is going to have a different kind of dance from a man who is in anguish, tension, worry, despair. A man who is living his life totally, intensely, moment to moment, and a man who is thinking of committing suicide – both can dance, but their dances will have different qualities. The person who is thinking of committing suicide, his dance will have the shadow of death in it. It will stink of death, of a dead body. His movements will not be movements of life.
The other man, who loves and lives totally and has a silent space within himself – that’s what I call meditation – his dance will also have a silence surrounding it. His movements, his gestures will have a grace, a beauty, a fragrance of their own.
You cannot divide man into parts.
Your question is, “Here in our commune, there is no separate time for meditation….” It is our basic approach. We cannot have a separate time for meditation. Meditation should be spread all over your life: eating, sleeping, taking a bath, or just having a walk, or just sitting doing nothing. Meditation should be in all these actions, inactions, activities, non activities. The thread of meditation should continue underground, whatever you are working at.
A great master, Nan In, was chopping wood. The king of the country had come to see him. He had heard so much about Nan In that finally he could not resist the temptation to go and see the man. Just as he entered the monastery, near the gate was a man perspiring in the hot sun, chopping wood.
Naturally the king thought, “This man must be able to direct me to where I can find the master” – because it was a vast monastery with five hundred monks living in it. So he asked the man, who was Nan In himself, “Please forgive me for interrupting you; you are so absorbed in chopping wood, you have not even seen that I have been standing here for a few minutes, waiting. But then I thought it is better to interrupt you because you are not going to see me of your own accord.”
The man said, “I am sorry, but this is how my life is. Whatever I am doing I am doing it totally. Nothing of me remains to do anything else. Chopping wood, I am simply chopping wood. There is nobody else other than the chopper of wood. So, no need to be embarrassed. What do you want?”
He said, “I want to see the master, Nan In.”
Nan In said, “You go directly into that hut and wait. The master will be coming soon.”
The king went and waited there. Nan In took a shower, put on his master’s robe, and came in from the back door. But the king was very puzzled, because both men looked so alike. He thought, “It is almost an impossibility. There are not two men alike in the whole world, and just in this monastery, within a few hundred yards I have seen a man exactly like this man.”
Nan In said, “You wanted to see Master Nan In – Master Nan In is now here.”
The king said, “That I will inquire about later on. First I want to know who was chopping wood at the gate.”
Nan In laughed. He said, “At that time I was a chopper of wood. Now I am going to chop your head; now I am a master. We live each moment, moment to moment, but we are indivisible. The chopper was also Master Nan In. If you had eyes you could have seen my involvement with the movement, my totality of action, my intensity of being.
“If you had eyes you could have seen him there; you would not have asked about Master Nan In. You had already met him, but you didn’t know. Now I am a chopper of heads. That’s the function of a master: to make you so egoless, to make you so thoughtless that you are almost without a head, just the heart pulsating with love, with compassion. Have you come only to ask some questions? Are you really a seeker? Are you ready to lose something?”
The king was just confused, shocked, even afraid of the man. He had never been afraid of anybody, but this man was simply crazy – he was talking of chopping his head!
The king said, “You have confused me too much and I am almost falling apart. Please forgive me this time. I will come another time, because I have forgotten for what I came.”
Nan In said, “You need not come again. I am going to come to you, and I will follow you wherever you go. Now you cannot escape, because I can see something really authentic in you. Yes, it is unconscious; you are not aware of it, much garbage is hiding it. You think you are a king. Even sitting before me you are still thinking you are a king. This is garbage – you are just a beggar. And the beggar that I am is really a king.”
The king said, “I don’t understand all these puzzles. Please talk to me without puzzling me.”
Nan In said, “There is no puzzle in it, it is simple. I am a king because I don’t need anything in the world. You are a beggar; although you have a big empire, your desires are unending. You are desiring more and more and more. The mind that goes on desiring more is the mind of a beggar. And the consciousness that is content with itself as it is, utterly content, is the consciousness of an emperor.
“Strange,” he said. “You think you are a king, and you look on me as a beggar. The reality is just the opposite. Go back – and I will be coming to visit you.” And Nan In followed the king continuously till he made him aware of his innermost treasure.
It is dangerous to go to a master, because then escape is almost impossible. Wherever you go – even if you go to Santa Fe – I am there. Nothing can save you. Once a master has seen within you a heart that can grow, that can expand, that can become universal, he is not going to leave you.
I don’t need to go to Santa Fe. I have my own ways, far more subtle than Nan In’s. I am continually there; they are talking only about me, they cannot talk about anything else. Whom are they befooling? Whether you talk for me or against me does not matter, just go on continuously talking about me. That’s enough; that is going to change you.
Here, in the commune, whatever you are doing…. Here we call work, worship, for the simple reason that work is not just work, it is meditation also. That’s why we call it worship. Other than this we don’t have any God to worship. We have only this existence around us. So you can worship it as a gardener, you can worship it as a farmer, you can worship it as a road maker, you can worship any way you choose to. But whatever you are doing, you are doing with existence.
So the question is, if you are doing it lovingly, if you are doing it meditatively, and if, while you are doing it, you are nowhere else, you are just there with all of your being, nothing is missing – then work becomes worship. Work becomes worship because meditation has entered into it.
But I can understand your question, because all the religions have preached that there should be a separate time for meditation. That is just idiotic. It is as if somebody is saying there should be a separate time for breathing, that one hour in the morning you breathe and then forget about it, and for twenty-three hours you do other things. You need not be disturbed by having to breathe; you can do other things, breathing continues.
A thousand and one things continue in your body: the blood goes on circulating, the pulse goes on functioning, the heart goes on beating…. Scientists say the body of man is perhaps the greatest miracle in existence because so much is going on in it. Almost seven million living cells are continuously working within you. You are the biggest city in the world.
Seven million living beings are living in you, and they are doing all kinds of work and doing it perfectly, without any guidance and without any education, without anybody being the overseer – I mean no God as overseer. You may go on doing anything, your organic processes continue.
To me meditation is an organic process. To other religions it was not; hence, all those religions have failed. They were bound to fail. It is not an accident, it was destined; their very base was wrong. What they called meditation was nothing but some kind of thinking. The Christian was thinking of Christ, praying to God with folded hands, kneeling down. He knows neither whether God exists or not, nor whether Jesus Christ is really a messiah or just a charlatan. He knows nothing, but out of fear, out of misery, out of anguish, he is praying; and this, Christianity calls meditation.
And what is he asking God? He is asking for all those things which he is missing here in this life, which he cannot manage to create here for himself. He is asking God, “At least in the other life, give them to me; I have suffered enough.” He is asking – in fact, deep down it is a complaint.
All prayers are complaints; otherwise, what have you got to pray for if there is no complaint? Every prayer simply means you are condemning God. You are saying, “You are doing it wrong. Please do it this way.”
Even Jesus on the cross condemns God when he says, “Have you forsaken me?” What does he mean? One thing is certain, he means that he knows better than God. He knows that somewhere God has gone wrong. He is angry, he is complaining. He wants God to do a miracle, to prove to the world that he is his only begotten son, that he has been sent by him. He is his messenger and he has sent him for the whole world’s salvation.
But from the skies no voice comes. On the clouds no angels appear with their harps, playing “Alleluia” – no sign of God anywhere. In anger Jesus shouts, “Have you forsaken me?” He is saying, “Have you betrayed me? Have you gone against your word? You have left me in this helpless situation. And I believed in you!” This is the moment to prove that God is love. This is the moment to prove that God comes to save those who trust in him. But nobody comes.
All prayers are complaints. All prayers are saying to God, “We know better than you do.”
One man came to me – his wife was dying. He was a very religious man. Every day from three o’clock in the morning up to seven – for four hours – he was doing all kinds of crazy things. He had so many gods. In India they are not so miserly about gods. About everything else they are poor, but about gods they are the richest people in the world: thirty-three million gods. So everybody who is really religious has a whole roomful.
Thirty-three million of course you cannot…but a few representatives, the topmost, the bigshots, you can keep around. This man had at least sixty. Now, sixty gods, and only four hours – you can see, it was not much time. He was in such a hurry, doing a prayer to this god and rushing to another, then rushing to another, and looking at his watch continuously because in four hours he has to finish. And the fear that if he leaves any god, and the god becomes angry….
Such a religious man – and his wife was dying, and the doctors were not able to do anything. They simply said, “She has lost the will to live. Deep down she does not want to live; hence, no medicine is effective.” Unless you have a will to live you lose resistance; you really want to die. Just medicines cannot do much unless a great support from your will is there.
So he came to me one day and said, “What should I do? I have done four hours of prayers each day my whole life, and still my wife is dying, and out of those sixty gods not a single one is helping. And I cry and weep.”
I said, “Please answer me one question. Do you think yourself more intelligent than God?”
He said, “No. How can I think myself more intelligent than God?”
Then I said, “If God wants your wife to be freed from the body you should be happy, you should be thankful. But your prayer is against God’s will. Those sixty gods that you have cannot help you in any way. You are not a religious man at all.”
But he said, “I have done prayer four hours every day for years.”
I said, “You can pray twenty-four hours, that too will not make any change, because your whole attitude is wrong. You are demanding from existence, you are not surrendering to existence.”
Meditation is a surrender, it is not a demand. It is not forcing existence your way, it is relaxing into the way existence wants you to be. It is a let-go.
But all the religions have been doing prayers in the name of meditation. And what kind of stupid prayers! In fact any prayer that a man can do is going to be stupid. “Don’t let my wife die” – do you think that is something very intelligent? If that dodo was a little bit intelligent – God was making him free, and he is praying against his own freedom.
But if you look in the scriptures you will be surprised what kind of prayers are there. In the Vedas, the most holy scriptures of the Hindus, the great seers…. I cannot even conceive how for centuries those people have been called great seers. They should be called the great blind men! Seers! – they were praying to God: “Please increase the milk of my cow, decrease the milk of the cow of my enemy, my neighbor. This time let rains fall only on my field.” Great seers, great saints and sages – and these are their prayers. But what else can you ask?
The Christian asks, “Give me my daily bread.” Don’t you have anything else to ask? Can’t you produce even your daily bread? Even that has to be provided by God? So what are you doing here? Even your daily bread is not to be created by you. Just by providing daily bread to all these millions of Christians for centuries, God must have gone bankrupt!
Nobody ever thinks of God. Just seeing his misery and anguish I declared, “There is no God!” In just a single blow I finished all his misery, all his trouble, all his anguish – past, present, future, everything; I made it completely clean. Now, let everybody produce his own daily bread and, if you have some intelligence, a little butter will also do – but don’t torture God anymore. He is not there; he has never been there.
Why should you keep a separate time for meditation? It is based on the idea of the separation of the sacred and profane. But in life there is no separation of the sacred and the profane. Life is one, so totally one that you can call something sacred if you want, you can call it profane if you want.
Christians call sex sin, and Tantra, a great Eastern philosophy, calls sex sacred, the most significant life energy – because all transformation is going to happen through that energy. Don’t condemn it. There are people who are condemning sex continuously in every possible way.
You can take anything…there are Zen people in the East who say that even sipping a cup of tea in the morning can be something sacred. And they have made it sacred. If you have seen, in a Zen monastery they have a small temple for tea ceremonies, and when anybody goes to the tea ceremony he enters into a sacred space.
He leaves his shoes outside; there are special wooden sandals provided inside. Everybody is silent, because the samovar is boiling the tea and a beautiful music is coming out of it. It has to be listened to. People sit on their knees, just the way they sit in the temple, around the samovar. They all listen silently to the boiling noise of the tea, and they smell the fresh and rejuvenating fragrance of the tea. And absolute silence falls on them.
Then the server, who is usually a woman, comes; and in a very sacred manner she provides cups and saucers, which are all handmade. In a Zen monastery they don’t use cups and saucers purchased in the market; those are produced inhumanly, mechanically, for nobody particular. They are just for the market.
In the Zen monastery they make their own cups, their own saucers, with love, with meditation. Something of their love and meditation certainly enters into their cups and saucers and pots. And the way the woman places them before you – she places them as if she is serving a god. Christians don’t even know how to move Jesus’ statue from one place to another.
Then she pours the tea; just the sound of the tea being poured is listened to – no talk at all. And then people start sipping tea, enjoying it, forgetting the whole world. Just sipping tea has become sacred. It depends on you.
There is nothing profane in the world, nothing sacred in the world. The world is neutral. Now it depends on you what you want to make of it. Meditation makes it sacred; then every act becomes meditative.
I am reminded of a butcher in Japan who was considered to be a great master – and he was a butcher! The whole day he was cutting animals and selling meat; that was his business. One Buddhist scholar could not believe that this man was thought to be a saint. He was simply a scholar. He went to the butcher and said, “This is something absolutely mad. Who are the people who think that you are a saint? How can a butcher be a saint?”
The butcher laughed. He answered, “Just by mixing meditation in the butchery. When I am cutting up an animal I am not angry, I am not hateful. I am full of love, I am full of compassion. I have great hope that next time he will be born in a human form; perhaps he will become a buddha. With all my blessings I am sending him on a new journey, releasing him from this prison.
“And moreover, my father was a butcher, my forefathers were butchers, and I am a poor butcher. I have never told anybody that I am a saint. If people think so, that’s their business. You should go and argue with them.
“As far as I am concerned, I am absolutely content with my profession because whatever you do, the question is not what you are doing but how you are doing it. The question is not the act; the question is the consciousness with which the act is being performed. Yes, I am killing animals, but I know that they will be killed anyway. If I am not killing them, somebody else will kill them. And he will not kill them with such love, with such compassion. How can I leave this profession?
“These animals are going to be killed. If I don’t kill them somebody else will kill them and he is not going to kill them with such meditation, with such love. So I would be leaving these poor animals in the hands of some butcher. I cannot do that. If I am going to be thrown into hell for being a butcher, that is acceptable. But I cannot leave these poor innocent animals in the hands of somebody who knows nothing of love.”
Can you see the point of this butcher? It is very subtle. He is ready to suffer in hell if that is going to be the consequence of his actions. But he cannot leave these poor animals in the hands of somebody who will simply kill them and not even bother about what he is doing.
He said, “I am so concerned with these animals and I love them so much – I cannot leave them in somebody else’s hands. Whatsoever happens to me, that I am ready to face.”
I can see why the people who could understand called him a master, a saint. He never gave a sermon, he never preached anything. He was illiterate, he knew nothing of the scriptures, but he lived religion in a very irreligious situation; that’s something tremendously important. He lived religion in something which is very irreligious. And yet he managed to live religiously. He must have been a great alchemist who transformed the whole act, gave it a new quality; something utterly profane and ugly became so beautiful, so graceful.
It is said that his fame spread far and wide and people started coming to see him while he was cutting up animals. Even the emperor of Japan came to see him while he was cutting because he had heard that the way he cuts, nobody has ever cut – such grace, such love, tears flowing from his eyes. And the miracle was that although human beings were not able to understand, perhaps the animals were able to understand.
Ordinarily when you want to kill an animal he tries to escape, but from this butcher no animal tried to escape. He hugged the animal. The animal was not bound by anything, tied with anything. He was completely free. It was as if deep down he wanted to die by this man’s hand.
And the emperor asked one thing, about the knife that he used to kill the animals. The knife looked so shiny, as if it had just been sharpened. The emperor asked, “Do you sharpen your knife every day?”
He said, “No, this is the knife my father used, and his father used, and it has never been sharpened. But we know exactly the points where it has to cut the animal so there is a minimum of pain possible – through the joints where two bones meet. The knife has to go through the joint, and those two bones that meet there go on sharpening the knife. And that is the point where the animal is going to feel the minimum pain.
“For three generations we have not sharpened the knife. A butcher sharpening a knife simply means he does not know his art” – he used the word art – “He does not know the art and he does not know how to do it lovingly.”
My commune is in meditation twenty-four hours a day; whatever you are doing, or not doing, is immaterial. Just be loving, be alert, do it with joy. Whatever you are doing, do it as if this is the greatest thing in the world at this juncture of time. It may be just cutting the grass, watering the road; it may be anything. Washing the floor, do it as if the whole existence depends on what you are doing, it is indispensable; without it, the whole universe will collapse.
When you do anything with such intensity, with such love, with such respect, as if without it the whole universe will collapse, then there is no need to have a separate time for meditation. And those who are doing meditations as separate from life are simply deceiving themselves and nobody else.
Maharishi Mahesh Yogi teaches his people, “Do transcendental meditation ten minutes in the morning, ten minutes in the evening, and that’s enough.” And what is his transcendental meditation? Just repeat any stupid name…go on repeating “Rama, Rama, Rama” – that is a Hindu name – or, “Ave Maria, Ave Maria, Ave Maria.” Any name, in fact your own name will do – just go on repeating it. Repeat it as fast as possible because that’s the whole secret of the technique.
If for ten minutes you go on repeating a single word fast enough continuously, you autohypnotize yourself. After just four or five minutes you start falling into a deliberate kind of sleep which is called hypnosis. Yes, after ten minutes you will feel good, you will feel fresh, you will feel relaxed. So nothing is wrong with it – but it is not meditation. It is just a way of resting, having a good nap.
You can do it, but remember, it has nothing to do with meditation. It is perfectly good, healthy, psychologically and physically relaxing, but that’s all it is. It has nothing to do with transcendence; it is not transcendental at all. It is not going to take you into your innermost being, it is not going to take you into some higher state of consciousness; it is not going to take you anywhere. After ten minutes you will be back where you were. You will remain the same person. You will not be transformed by it.
And unless something transforms you it is not meditation: something that makes you a new being, a new man, a new consciousness; which knows no fear, which knows no greed, which knows no hate; which knows nothing of those dark emotions, sentiments – ugly, sick, nauseating.…a new consciousness, which knows only that which uplifts you, that which goes on uplifting you – there is no end to it.
Meditation brings you to a state where you are above the stars, bigger than the whole universe. That experience is what I call transformation, illumination, enlightenment.
So don’t be worried that there are not separate times for you to meditate. It is not an oversight, it is done with full consideration. I don’t want to give you the impression that meditation can be done separately from your life and its work.

============================================================

Osho,
Now that God is dead how can we quickly dispose of his remains?
God is not dead now, he has been dead always, so the question of disposing of his remains does not arise. God has never existed and cannot exist, for the simple reason that the whole existence is godliness. To divide God and existence, the creator and the creation, is a stupid duality.
One has to see the implications of it: God creating a world – from where? Something must have existed as a building material before God created the world. And if he can create the world like a magician then he is an idiotic magician. One can see the world as a proof. Is this the world a wise man will create? – to say nothing of a wise God.
This world shows absolutely that there is nobody behind it consciously creating it; otherwise all the nonsense that exists here should not be. God created the world at a certain time, at a certain date – according to Christians, who are the most foolish of all the religions, he created the world four thousand and four years before Jesus was born. It must have been Monday, the first of January, or perhaps the first of April – that seems to be more appropriate.
And what did he create? In three thousand years, five thousand wars have been fought – and this is the creation of God. His highest creation is man, and the whole of humanity is on the verge of committing a global suicide. This God must be some kind of a sadist. It is better that we simply forget all about God.
In the courts, the Bible is presented to take oaths on. It is full of lies. In these two thousand years since Jesus, almost everything in the Bible has become a lie. What about Charles Darwin? What about Albert Einstein?
Sometimes I wonder: have we lost all intelligence? It would be better to provide Albert Einstein’s book to take an oath on. the Bible is so full of obscenity, it is an insult to every court to have a Bible inside it. It is a contempt of court. And wonder of wonders, you have to take an oath that you will speak only the truth!
Jesus is born out of a virgin girl – I cannot take any oath on such rubbish. If a virgin girl can give birth to Jesus then everything is right; then there is no lie anywhere in the world, all is truth, you cannot lie – but this is impossible in the very nature of things.
The Old Testament says that God created the world. He created two daughters and made love to both of them. Now, the father making love to his own daughters – and this is a religious book! And this is your God! Hang him if you can find him.
And this is not only so about Christianity, it is more or less the same with all religions. No sane person can believe in God; only insane, retarded, utterly mediocre people can believe in God.
I have not found a single reason or argument given by thousands of priests of all the religions which has any validity. Still God continues to be worshipped. You have made him out of your foolishness, and you are worshipping him, praying to him. This is not the way to change the world, or man, or his consciousness.
So please don’t say, “Now that God is dead.” He has never been in the first place, so he cannot be dead.
I agree on many points with that madman Friedrich Nietzsche, but I don’t agree on this point – that God is dead. Not that God is not dead – he has never been anywhere. Only existence is. Yes, there is a possibility of consciousness evolving, higher and higher. The moment consciousness comes to its highest peak it does not find any God there. It finds immense beauty, immense silence, absolute nothingness.
This I am saying on my own authority and through my own experience. You cannot go beyond absolute peace, silence, ecstasy. It goes on growing, but you never can go beyond it.
Hence, my religion is a godless religion.
There is no question of, no problem of disposing of the remains – there are none.

Osho,
Being with you I feel so blissful and liberated, and there seems to be no end to it. You must have tricked me. What is your secret?
I am a simple man without any secret. I am just an open book, and a book in which nothing is written. If you like to call it a secret it is your choice, but it is a very open secret.
If you want to be, learn the art of being: not to be.
Let me repeat it, because I know you are deaf. If you want really to be, the only way is to learn not to be. Disappear. Just as God disappears from existence, you have to disappear from your life. Let life flow of its own accord.
It is the simplest art in the world, to be silent. It is not a doing, it is a non-doing. How can it be difficult?
I am showing you the way of enlightenment through laziness. Nothing has to be done to attain it, because it is your nature. You have already got it. You are just so busy with outer business that you cannot see your own nature.
Deep within you is exactly the same as outside you: the beauty, the silence, the ecstasy, the blissfulness. But please, sometimes be kind to yourself: just sit down and don’t do anything, either physically or mentally. Relax, not in an American way…because I have seen so many American books titled How To Relax. The very title says that the man knows nothing about relaxation. There is no “how.”
Yes, it is okay – “How to Repair a Car”; you will have to do something. But there is no doing as such as far as relaxation is concerned. Just don’t do anything. I know you will find it a little difficult in the beginning. That is not because relaxation is difficult, it is because you have become addicted to doing something. That addiction will take a little time to disappear.
Just be, and watch. Being is not doing, and watching is also not doing. You sit silently doing nothing, witnessing whatsoever is happening. Thoughts will be moving in your mind; your body may be feeling some tension somewhere, you may have a migraine. Just be a witness. Don’t be identified with it. Watch, be a watcher on the hills, and everything else is happening in the valley. It is a knack, not an art.
Meditation is not a science. It is not an art, it is a knack – just that way. All that you need is a little patience.
The old habits will continue; the thoughts will go on rushing. And your mind is always in a rush hour, the traffic is always jammed. Your body is not accustomed to sitting silently – you will be tossing and turning. Nothing to be worried about. Just watch that the body is tossing and turning, that the mind is whirling, is full of thoughts – consistent, inconsistent, useless – fantasies, dreams. You remain in the center, just watching.
All the religions of the world have taught people to do something: stop the process of thought, force the body into a still posture. That’s what yoga is – a long practice of forcing the body to be still. But a forced body is not still. And all the prayers, concentrations, contemplations of all the religions do the same with the mind: they force it, they don’t allow the thoughts to move. Yes, you have the capacity to do it. And if you persist you may be able to stop the thought process. But this is not the real thing, it is absolutely fake.
When stillness comes on its own, when silence descends without your effort, when you watch thoughts and a moment comes when thoughts start disappearing and silence starts happening, that is beautiful. The thoughts stop of their own accord if you don’t identify, if you remain a witness and you don’t say, “This is my thought.”
You don’t say, “This is bad, this is good,” “This should be there….” and “This should not be there….” Then you are not a watcher; you have prejudices, you have certain attitudes. A watcher has no prejudice, he has no judgment. He simply sees like a mirror.
When you bring something in front of a mirror it reflects, simply reflects. There is no judgment that the man is ugly, that the man is beautiful, that, “Aha! What a good nose you have got.” The mirror has nothing to say. Its nature is to mirror; it mirrors. This is what I call meditation: you simply mirror everything within or without.
And I guarantee you…. I can guarantee because it has happened to me and to many of my people; just watching patiently – maybe a few days will pass, maybe a few months, maybe a few years. There is no way of saying because each individual has a different collection.
You must have seen people collecting antiques, postal stamps. Everybody has a different collection; the quantity may be different, hence the time it takes will be different – but go on remaining a witness as much as you can. And this meditation needs no special time. You can wash the floor and remain silently watching yourself washing the floor.
I can move my hand unconsciously, without watching, or I can move it with full awareness. And there is a qualitative difference. When you move it unconsciously it is mechanical. When you move it with consciousness there is grace. Even in the hand, which is part of your body, you will feel silence, coolness – what to say about the mind?
With your watching and watching, slowly the rush of thoughts starts getting less and less. Moments of silence start appearing; a thought comes, and then there is silence before another thought appears. These gaps will give you the first glimpse of meditation and the first joy that you are arriving home.
Soon the gaps will be bigger, and finally the gap is always with you. You may be doing something, the silence is there. You may not be doing anything, the silence is there. Even in sleep the silence is there.
For a meditator there are no dreams; dreams and thoughts are cousin-brothers, there is not much difference. If thoughts disappear, dreams disappear. And if for twenty-four hours a day you are surrounded by silence you will come to know what my secret is.
If you go near a lake, you start feeling cool. There is no secret in it – it is the milieu. You go to the forest and you feel the difference in the atmosphere. You are the same but the atmosphere around you is different.
When you come closer to me…and to come closer to me you are not to walk and sit by my side. To come closer to me is to be not a Christian, not a Hindu, not a Mohammedan, not a Buddhist, not a communist. To come close to me means that you don’t cling to any ideology, you don’t go on holding onto the past. To come close to me means you start living moment to moment.
Neither the past means anything to you, nor are you worried about the future. This very moment becomes the only reality. In fact it is the only reality. And if you can be in this moment, you can be on a faraway star but you will be close to me and you will feel a serenity, a silence, a lovingness such as you have never known.
I am not doing anything, remember, so don’t be grateful to me. I am a non-doer – I am just being available. That is not much of a doing. I am available, like the trees in the forest and the lakes and the ocean, and the sun and the moon. I am available. Now it is up to you to come close to me, or go away from me.
If you can come close to me you will start feeling things that have been unknown to you, and soon you will realize that what you are feeling close to me you can feel yourself wherever you are. That is the greatest moment of happiness for a master, when his disciple can be on his own.
You must know the meaning of being a disciple, people have forgotten; it comes from “discipline.” And all the religions have corrupted the meaning of discipline; its root meaning is learning.
Coming close is learning.
What I have got, you have got.
I am aware of it, you are not aware of it.
Coming close to me you will learn, “My God! This has always been with me, and I have been searching all over the world, looking into the books, scriptures, seeking the teachers, becoming a member of rotten cults like Christianity, Hinduism, Mohammedanism – all dead.”
Yes, when Buddha was there what is happening to you was happening to his people. But when Buddha is gone what is left behind is mere words, containers; the content is not there. You can go on decorating the containers, but that will not help. You know perfectly well that your statues in the temples, your scriptures in the churches, are just dust of the past. It is better to be finished with them.
But why are you seeking? You are seeking because you are not aware that you have got it already. I cannot give it to you. I can only make you aware, and for that nothing is needed but availability on my part, availability on your part. If these two availabilities are there, two opennesses, without any conditions, it clicks. Suddenly you become a mirror, and the moment you become a mirror you become a master. The same will start happening around you.
So I don’t want you always to remain disciples. That will be a shame.
In the past all the religions have tried just the opposite of what I am doing. That’s why they cannot believe that this is a religion. I am changing the very definition and the foundations. Those old religions were saying that Jesus Christ is the only begotten son of God, you are not. He is special, you are ordinary. He comes with a message from God, from above. He has a speciality, he is extra-ordinary.
At the most you can be Christians, but you cannot be a Christ. Have you thought about it, that in two thousand years nobody has been a Christ again? What kind of religion is this? Just Christians! The first and the last Christ was crucified two thousand years ago; since then nothing has happened, because unless you become a Christ your Christianity is just a hypocrisy. The same is true about other religions.
Once it happened in Baghdad – Caliph Omar was the sovereign. A man was brought to him who was claiming that he had been sent by God and that he brought the latest word of God, the latest message, because Mohammed’s message was thirteen hundred years old, and in thirteen hundred years a new message – better, more polished, more sophisticated – was needed. He had been sent by God.
Now, Mohammedans cannot accept anybody as a prophet after Mohammed. No religion accepts anybody else as a prophet. Christians cannot accept anybody as a Christ. Buddhists cannot accept another as a Buddha. Why? Why this similarity? There is some arithmetic behind it. A new prophet will disturb the gullible, the old believers, because he will say something new. He may say something against the Koran, the Bible, the Gita; he is bound to.
I cannot agree with Krishna, the Gita that he had spoken five thousand years ago. Five thousand years have not gone just as a waste; man’s consciousness has risen, intelligence has become more solid. And what Krishna teaches is violence. If Krishna is right, then the third world war is perfectly okay.
I cannot give that okay to the third world war. Krishna says, “It is God’s will. If he wants the war, all your pacifists can go on parading in the capitals of the world with posters against war – it will not change anything. If God wants the war then the war is going to happen.” That is the message of the Gita. Arjuna, Krishna’s chief disciple and friend, tried hard to argue.
But those arguments are all ordinary. If I had been in his place, just a single sentence from me would have been enough – there would have been no need to make such a big book. I would have said to Krishna, “This is God’s will, that I am going to the Himalayas. Who are you to interpret God’s will? And how can I accept it, that your interpretation is right? You say that God wants the war – I say no.”
And in fact the no seems to be more rational, more loving, more meaningful, more humane. Rather than arguing with that man, Arjuna had just to say: “I have accepted your idea that whatsoever happens, happens according to God” – and then should have left for the Himalayas.
He wanted to be a sannyasin, a meditator in the Himalayas. Krishna would not have been able to stop him – just because of his own argument. Arjuna could have said, “If war is to happen, God will bring me back – but you keep quiet.”
Hence Hindus would not like anybody else to be accepted as a prophet of God.
Mohammed married nine women. Now, I cannot support that, because in the world men and women are almost in equal proportions. If one man marries nine women then what about the eight men who will be left without women? Then California will be all over the world. That catastrophe I cannot allow. I would rather that California went down into the ocean with all its homosexuals, with all its perverts. It would be better, far more beneficial, and a blessing to humanity.
But Mohammed marries nine women – of course; he is a messenger of God. Mohammedans he allows to marry four women – naturally; he has to keep himself higher. Mohammedans are still marrying four women. Anyone with any intelligence can see the point: these are the people who create prostitution. They have created prostitutes, because what about the three men whose women they have married?
And can you understand a simple, biological thing? You cannot even satisfy a single woman sexually, what about four or nine? – because recent research shows that a woman is capable of multiple orgasms. A man is not capable of that. If he is young, below thirty-five, he may be able to have one orgasm. And I am saying maybe. It is not certain, because man is in such a hurry that before the orgasm can happen he is finished.
Orgasm needs a certain patience, to move with the woman, with the same pace. The woman moves slowly. By the time she comes close to her orgasm, the man has gone to sleep and is snoring. Eighty percent of women in the world have not known what orgasm is. And in a country like India, ninety-nine percent of women know nothing about orgasm.
Biologically, a man cannot satisfy four women. Then those women are going to look around the neighborhood. These religions have created all kinds of perversions: prostitution, obscenity. And if these men cannot find women, at least they can look at Playboy – just pictures of naked women! One feels the world has lived in an insane way. Will your hunger be satisfied by seeing beautiful dishes in a picture? Can you eat them? But that is what is happening to man’s sexuality.
He looks into magazines – vulgar, obscene – of naked women. For what? – when there are equal numbers of women available, living, alive, not just photographs.
Four women to one man! But this is nothing, four or nine; Krishna had sixteen thousand women to himself! I sometimes start wondering…sixteen thousand women. Even to remember their names is difficult.
I know, because I have more than half a million sannyasins around the world; I cannot remember their names. And Krishna lived only ninety years. In ninety years how did he manage to make love to sixteen thousand women? Perhaps to one woman once in her life…and then she was abandoned. This is ugly.
That’s why new prophets are not allowed by any religion – because they will look, scrutinize, see that these things are ugly.
In Baghdad this man declared, “I am the prophet of God, the latest, and I bring a more sophisticated message than Mohammed.” Mohammedans could not tolerate it. Omar himself was a very cultured man…. Now you may be cultured, but your Mohammedanism is there; it goes on poisoning you. Omar sent the man to the prison, told the guards, “Don’t give him food. Bind him to a pole, beat him continuously, and don’t let him sleep. After seven days I will come to ask what he thinks.”
After seven days he came. The man was almost dying, without food, without sleep, continuously beaten for twenty-four hours a day. Omar laughed and said, “Now have you changed your mind, or do you still think you are the last messenger of God?”
The man laughed more loudly than Omar and said, “This torture for seven days proves that I am the prophet of God, because when I was leaving him to take my voyage to the earth, I asked him, ‘They have not behaved well with prophets in the past – what is going to happen to me?’ He said, ‘You will be tortured.’ You have proved that I am really the prophet of God. Before this torture sometimes I used to doubt, to think that perhaps I am imagining, but now there is no question of doubt.”
At that very moment, from another pole, another naked man who had been there for one month continuously being tortured, shouted, “Omar, don’t listen to that idiot! I have not sent him. After Mohammed I have not sent anybody else.” One month before this man had been caught declaring himself God!
These religions are just dead history. They cannot give you anything. Only a living master is capable of creating an atmosphere I call the buddhafield, the field for awakening.
And I have chosen Oregon because I could not find so many sleepy people anywhere else in the world; otherwise, who has heard of any prophet in Oregon? I thought, “Even a small place like Judea can claim Jesus, Jerusalem can claim Moses, small places like Mecca and Medina can claim Mohammed. Oregon is absolutely impotent.” I thought it would be good; hence I am here.
But to wake up a sleepy man is always a difficult job. The sleepy man does not want to wake up. Sleep helps him to forget all the worries of life, the troubles of life. Sleep is a narcotic. It is a drug naturally provided by biology; otherwise you would all go mad. Six, eight hours of sleep help you to keep on dragging your life toward the grave.
Naturally Oregonians are disturbed: we are celebrating here. And what are they doing? They are collecting National Guard vehicles in Madras – as if this is an army and we are going to attack and start the third world war. We believe in love, we believe in silence. We believe that man can live in coexistence with nature, with other people.
This is the only city which has no crime, but it has been declared by the attorney general of Oregon to be illegal. This is how sleepy people behave. In their sleep the only legal city looks illegal to them! We have no crime, no prostitutes, no stealing, no drugs. this is our fault. For us to be peaceful, to be silent, just to be happy, they cannot tolerate. They cannot believe it, because it has never happened in their life – poor people! I really feel sorry for them.
This place is creating a New Man.
But naturally the old mind will create every difficulty, will use every means so that the New Man is not born. Why? – it hurts. Seeing a man dancing, singing, enjoying, peaceful with himself and existence hurts those people who have become accustomed to living in misery, who have become accustomed to living a life which is not living at all. They cannot tolerate you.
I have heard about a woman who was ugly, really ugly. She used to break mirrors; wherever she found a mirror she would break it immediately.
People asked, “Are you mad? Why do you break mirrors?”
She said, “These mirrors make me ugly.”
Now you will be becoming mirrors among sleepy people. You will disturb their sleep. They are going to destroy you. And remember, you are very few – they are many.
But one thing is positively in your favor: you have something – you have a contentment. They are empty. Just kick the empty boxes as hard as you can! Perhaps they may wake up and thank you for it.

Osho,
Why are only intelligent people able to realize true religion? Does the mediocre mind make it impossible to come to know oneself?
Religion is the highest luxury in the world. The idiot cannot realize it while remaining an idiot. The mediocre cannot even conceive its possibility while remaining mediocre. Only the highest intelligence can reach to that point where religion flowers.
Religion needs courage, intelligence, daring, because you are going higher and higher in the world of consciousness. The mediocre has no idea that there is anything higher than himself. The only possibility for the mediocre is that he can drop his mediocrity.
Nobody is born mediocre. People are made mediocre by the politicians, by the priests, by the education system. You think you go to the school to be made more intelligent – you are wrong. You go to the college, you to go the university, you have a masters degree, you can have a PhD, you can become a DLitt. A DLitt means that now the society has recognized that the doors for the evolution of your consciousness are completely closed. Now for you there is no way.
The whole educational system is arranged in such a way that it teaches you, trains you for memory, not for intelligence – and these two things are totally different. A very intelligent man may not have a very good memory. In fact to have a good memory means you are mediocre. A good memory simply proves you are only a computer, not even a man, so what has been fed into you you can repeat.
You can see it very easily: the people who top the universities, come first in the class, receive golden medals – where do they all disappear in the world? Their gold medals don’t shine in the world. In the world you will not be able to recognize them. Educational systems train you for a good memory, so you can repeat absolutely useless things.
When was Genghis Khan born? Now what purpose does that serve? If he had not been born it would have been better. At least we can do one thing, we can remove him from our memory; he was a nightmare. When did the second world war begin? This is history, you have to memorize it. And when you memorize history – Genghis Khan, Nadir Shah, Alexander the Great, Napoleon Bonaparte, Joseph Stalin, Adolf Hitler, and other idiots who may be in the history, or who are right now making history, who soon will be part of the history….
It is better to forget these people. It would have been better if there had been no second world war. That is the only way to prevent the third world war. Forget all this nonsense that man has been doing to man.
But the whole educational system is to make you memorize. And man’s mind is capable of memorizing without any limit. It has been found that that is possible because in a man’s small skull there are millions of cells which memorize. It is just like tape recording. All the books in all the libraries of the world can be memorized by a single person – that much capacity your memory has. But then you get lost in your memory, you forget what intelligence is. Intelligence is totally different.
Intelligence is the capacity to be silent, to be awake, to be able to see the truth.
But nobody is interested in truth; in fact they are all against it, because what will happen to all these politicians around the world who are constantly lying? If truth is known they will go down the drain. You are fed with lies and you are distracted from intelligence toward memory. Memory is part of your brain, and you live your whole life in your brain. That’s why I say only intelligent people can be religious.
Just by being a Christian, going every Sunday to the church, listening to the same boring sermon…. And there is never any argument, because argument brings intelligence in.
Every religion expects you to believe; the unbeliever is condemned. And without doubt you cannot increase your intelligence. This is the trouble. All the religions are helping you to remain mediocre, stupid, by emphasizing belief: belief in God, belief in the virgin birth of Jesus Christ…. Believe, because those who believe will attain to paradise. All the religions are giving you good awards – just believe.
Just the other day I came to know that in New York the anti-abortionists were having a conference: abortion should be no longer legal, it should become a crime. All the religions of the world agree on such points. It is very strange: they don’t agree on any theological points, but on this point Hindus agree, Mohammedans agree, Christians agree, Jews agree, everybody agrees – abortion is a sin.
Mother Teresa was in the conference, speaking against abortion, and she said, “There is violence in the world because of abortion.”
I could not believe it. If someone had said, “The violence in the world is because of overpopulation,” that would have sounded more true. But this old woman is given a Nobel prize – for what? Everything she does is against humanity. What arguments did she place before the conference? Why does abortion create violence in the world? Because abortion means you are killing a living body, you are making people killers of their own children, that opens the door to violence. The argument looks good, but it only looks good.
At what point is the child alive? If abortion creates violence, then at what point is the child alive? At the time when the male and female living cells meet – is that the point of life? It has to be, because otherwise from where will life come? But if it is life, that means that when the living cells were male and female, when the female eggs were in a woman’s body and the male cells were in a man’s body – were they alive or not?
Celibacy kills more than anything else, because if a nun, a celibate nun, who is not going to produce a child at all…then all those living cells that she brings from her mother’s womb…. In a woman’s body cells don’t grow, she brings them from birth. All those eggs waiting to be alive, waiting to be Ronald Reagan – they die without any chance.
And do you know…a man, a single man, produces in his whole life, from age fourteen up to fifty, so many living cells that that single man can populate the whole world. What to say about a celibate monk? Every single monk is killing millions of people!
From where does the violence begin? If anybody is responsible then it is Mother Teresa, the pope, their God. Why does he go on and on producing eggs and living sperms? It is time to stop. Already the world is four times more populated than it should be. If the world population can be reduced to one-fourth there will be no poverty, no violence; thousands of problems will disappear.
But Mother Teresa is given a Nobel prize because she helps orphans, opens orphanages around the world. She is creating problems; these orphans will create children. And she is against abortion, because if abortion is legal from where is she going to get the orphans? And what about the Nobel prize? This senile woman is driving people crazy.
Absolute birth control is needed at least for two decades. Absolute, I say! Not that you have to stop after two children or three children – no, that will not help.
Half the world is dying of starvation, and you will be surprised to know that the poor countries, the starving countries, produce more children, for the simple reason that they don’t have any other means of passing their time. To go to the movies, money is needed; to go to a disco, money is needed. Sex is the only free entertainment.
Absolute birth control is needed.
This is the only city where no child has been born in four years.
Unless we cut the world population there is no way to avoid violence. People are hungry, people are starving, dying. When somebody is hungry he is going to steal. When somebody is dying, what does he care if he kills somebody else and gets money to survive? – because lust for life is the basis of all biological growth. A man can do anything to survive.
And secondly, if abortion becomes illegal…the pope would like to make all birth control methods illegal. If abortion is illegal, if birth control methods are illegal, can you think what will happen to this world? Everybody will be at everybody else’s neck just to survive.
And it has to be remembered that birth control and abortion have given women equality, the same status as men; otherwise the woman can never be equal to man. In poor countries she is continually giving birth, a child every year. She is always pregnant. She cannot work, she cannot be financially independent. She cannot get as educated as man, she cannot be in politics; she has to take care of the children.
Birth control methods, abortion – these have made possibilities for women to be equal to men; otherwise all talk about equality is bogus, false, pseudo.
But strange…Mother Teresa is a woman, and she has there two or three dozen nuns – who are all women. She has an order of nuns, and they don’t even see that not a single woman has been accepted as pope in these two thousand years. Not a single woman has been accepted as a Christ, a buddha, a prophet – no. If a woman manages somehow to get into religious matters she is called a witch.
The word is not bad, but Christians have given it a bad connotation. Literally the word witch means a wise woman. But when you call a woman a witch you do not mean that she is wise. These popes have been declaring women witches – not only declaring, they have been burning women alive, thousands of women. During the whole Middle Ages they were burning witches.
Who were these witches? What were they doing? They were interfering in religious matters, and man would not like any woman to enter into the hierarchy of religion; otherwise, she may become a prophet, she may become a pope, she may declare herself a Christ.
In Hinduism women are not allowed to read the scriptures. In fact there is no time for them – taking care of the house, taking care of the children…and they are continuously pregnant. This is what Mother Teresa wants. This is what your popes, your bishops want. They will create a mediocre world. They want a mediocre world, just on the survival level.
Remember one simple scientific truth, that if a plant does not get enough water, enough food, enough air, then the first thing to disappear will be the flowers. They are the most delicate. The higher a thing is, the more delicate it is, the more fragile it is. Then the leaves will start disappearing, then the branches will start disappearing. At the end there will be only roots, underground.
The same is the situation in every dimension: if you don’t allow man comfort, luxury, time, he will never reach to higher peaks. He is, on the contrary, prevented from reaching toward religion.
The first thing religions say is: Believe. That is against true religion. I say to you, doubt everything, unless you discover something which you cannot doubt. I don’t say to believe. I say, find out something which, even if you want to, you cannot doubt: it is there, a reality, a truth.
Go on doubting. Doubt is the method of a true religion – just as it is a method of a true science. By doubting you eliminate all that is wrong, and finally only that which is true remains in your hand. Try to doubt it too. But you cannot – it is there. And when truth is known – lived, not believed – only then do you understand what religion is.
All these religions are anti-religious. The religions that exist in the world are anti-religious. My effort is to create the first religion in the world. All these people have been preventing religion from happening; hence, they are all against me.
You will be surprised…it has never happened before – all religions are against me. They have never been against anybody all together; on this point they are in agreement. And, even more surprising, atheists are against me. They too agree with the theists on this point. Communists are against me. They don’t believe in God, they don’t believe in the soul, they don’t believe in meditation, but they are also in agreement with people who believe in God, who believe in the soul, who believe in all kinds of things. On only one point, one single point, are they all agreed.
This has never happened; it is happening now for the simple reason that I am clearly giving you the indication.
My fingers are pointing toward the truth.
Belief is not needed, scriptures are not needed, prophets are not needed, God is not needed. A tremendous courage to doubt everything is needed. It is your doubting capacity which will sharpen your intelligence, destroy your mediocrity. But remember, with your mediocrity many other things will be destroyed which depend on mediocrity. So beware, I am a dangerous man.
If you want to be intelligent you cannot be in politics. Politics needs idiots, people who can lie, people who can go on lying, people who have double faces, people who can change their personality any moment. They don’t have any individuality. If you want to be intelligent you cannot be in any politics.
If you want to be really religious you cannot be a member of any religious cult. You have to be free. You have to be individual, you have to be on your own. It will be fearful in the beginning because you have always lived in the crowd. The crowd gives you a certain coziness, warmth. You will be in the cold, alone.
If you are ready to be alone and in the cold, and ready to go in darkness in search of light, religion is yours.

============================================================

Osho,
Rajneeshism is purely a religion of celebration, so why are so many people around the world against it?
That’s why! All the religions of the world have been religions of sadomasochism. They have created a miserable world. Their whole strategy is to make you convinced that this life is a life of sin. You have been made to feel guilty for just being alive.
The biblical story will help you to understand. Adam and Eve are expelled from paradise because of a simple enquiry. And the enquiry was also initiated by the so-called God – or Godot. He told Adam and Eve not to eat the fruit of two trees: one, the tree of knowledge; the other, the tree of eternal life. One can see what kind of God this must have been.
To deprive man of wisdom, to prohibit him from tasting the beauties of eternal life, is simply ugly, inhuman – I will not call it even devilish, but it is really the devil that you have been told is God. If He were really a creator of the universe and consciousness, He would have been the first person to tell Adam and Eve to taste wisdom and to taste eternal life. He was not religious at all. You cannot find a more irreligious person than the Christian God.
Religion is nothing but a science to attain wisdom, understanding, to know what life is, and to live it in utter celebration.
And you can live life in celebration only if you know there is no death. If you know that it is going to be eternal, that there is no beginning and no end, only then can you live without misery. God prohibited man from both. Without wisdom you cannot attain to religious ecstasy, and without the feeling of eternal life you cannot sing and you cannot dance.
When death is there every moment, and any moment you can be taken away…. They say, “Never ask for whom the bell tolls; it tolls for thee.” You cannot be certain about the next moment. How can you enjoy, when death is so close and follows you like a shadow?
This idiot, God, prohibits man from only two trees. And they lived in the Garden of Eden where millions of trees must have existed. He is not even as intelligent as Sigmund Freud, who is not very intelligent either. Just average intelligence is needed to know that to prohibit anything is dangerous; it gives a challenge to the mind. It is not the serpent who convinced Eve to eat the fruit of knowledge, it is God himself.
By pointing out these two trees, God makes it certain that these people sooner or later will be attracted toward them. If He had not mentioned them, I don’t think even up to now we would have been able to find those two trees in the immense garden of paradise. And if it was the serpent who convinced Eve, he is the first revolutionary, the first man who feels and who knows what has to be done. He is the most intelligent being in your whole Bible – the serpent – because he was showing the way of understanding.
Most of your misery is caused by your misunderstanding, your ignorance, your unintelligence. Most of the misery is caused because you are continuously afraid of death – and it is there walking by your side. If these two things can be removed, celebration will come on its own.
If you could be aware that there is no death, wouldn’t you love to sing like birds in the morning? Wouldn’t you love to dance like the peacocks of my garden? If you start understanding human problems, you cannot be miserable. I have not been miserable for so long that I cannot conceive how you go on maintaining misery, you go on nourishing it. You are really strange people. What are the causes of your misery?
You look at a beautiful woman. Naturally you are attracted, but your wife is by your side continuously watching you. She is miserable, because how can she enjoy life when she is continuously suspicious of you? You are miserable because this wretched wife is always there. You cannot even have a glimpse of a beautiful woman, you have to avoid seeing her. But a little understanding will dispel the whole thing.
It is natural, anything beautiful has to be appreciated. You have to show your wife, “Look! What a beautiful woman.” And if there is understanding, the woman will understand it; there will be no jealousy, there will be no quarrel. It is human to taste different joys of life. You cannot eat the same food every day. How can you enjoy the same man or woman every day? It is asking for the impossible. Misery is bound to happen. You will become a hypocrite.
It is perfectly human once in a while to have a different dish. And if people are understanding…your wife will understand if once in a while you go with another woman; her love will be great enough to allow you that freedom.
Love always allows freedom.
Understanding means freedom.
And if your wife goes to some man one day, just for the weekend, you will not feel offended. After the weekend you will both be enriched. You will find your wife again, your wife will find you again. Those first days of love, those days of honeymoon will be back. And when you see that the other gives you so much freedom and so much understanding, you respect them, you feel grateful.
But all the religions have been prohibiting you from everything natural; obviously, they have made you miserable.
Your whole education system tries to create ambition in you – not understanding. Your education pushes you to become the governor, the premier, the president, whatsoever the cost. The politician cannot be happy – in spite of Jimmy Carter’s phony smile. Have you seen him smiling after he was no longer president? When he was president I think he did nothing other than show his teeth to the whole world. I have heard that his wife used to close his mouth every night.
All lies – everything phony and American…all plastic. You know the phrase, “the white lie.” Perhaps that’s why you call your president’s house the White House. It is a very suitable name, because only white lies exist there.
Man is living unnaturally. If he lives naturally then he feels guilty, because his religion, his education, his culture go on and on conditioning him: “You have to go above nature.” Who can go above nature? Nature is all! – there is nothing above it. You have to be natural.
That’s what my basic teaching is: be natural. Don’t try to go beyond nature. That is the beginning of misery, pain. And when you are miserable, when you are in pain, you cannot tolerate anybody who is celebrating. It hurts, it humiliates you.
My people are humiliating all the religions of the world. Naturally they are against me and against you. It is your celebration that is creating the trouble. Have long, British faces. Tears are accepted, not smiles.
Have you seen Jesus Christ, in any picture, smiling? And Christianity has chosen as its symbol, the cross. Now, the people who are carrying the cross, can they celebrate? A cross is hanging on your neck – it may be a golden cross, but a cross is a cross. All Christians worshipping the cross are managing to remain miserable. They don’t love Jesus Christ, they love his being crucified. Remember, Christianity was not born out of Jesus Christ’s sayings – there is nothing much in them. You cannot make a religion out of them. The whole of Jesus Christ’s doctrine can be condensed on a postcard.
Christianity was not born out of Jesus’ teachings, it was born out of his crucifixion. Why was the cross accepted so easily? – and Christianity is now the biggest religion in the world. It suited man. It helped man in a very dangerous way. It made you aware that your misery is nothing compared to the misery of Jesus Christ. You are carrying a very small cross around your neck; Jesus had to carry a very heavy cross on his shoulders. Three times he fell on the road because of the weight of the cross. He was whipped and told to take up the cross again.
The crucified Jesus is your religion. Compared to your misery, his misery is immense. Naturally, Christianity became the biggest religion in the world, because it is the biggest philosophy of being miserable.
Jesus said, “Carry you cross on your shoulders. Everybody has to carry his cross on his shoulders.” I don’t see any point in it. Why carry a cross on your shoulder? Are you mad? Rather, carry a flute with you, a song, a beautiful flower – a rose I can understand. But then you will be hated by all those who have missed the joys of life. But nobody else is responsible for their missing, they themselves are responsible.
Jesus says, “Blessed are the poor.” This is sheer nonsense. Wretched are the poor. But it gives solace to the millions of poor people of the world. Jesus says that those who are poor here will be able to inherit the kingdom of God. I do not understand the arithmetic. If they are going to inherit the kingdom of God, why should they be poor here? Why can’t they inherit it here, now?
I say to you: the kingdom of God is yours herenow, this very moment. Just drop the cross. My religion is very simple: drop the cross. You have carried it long enough, for thousands of lives; it has almost become part of you.
So when you see someone dancing and you are crippled – crippled because of your cross, you are dying under its burden, and somebody is playing on his flute – you cannot forgive this man. He makes you aware that you have missed the train, that you are a fool. Nobody wants to accept himself as a fool – except a wise man.
The moment you accept that you are behaving foolishly, the change starts beginning. It is your responsibility. I have never seen any miserable man for whom anybody else was responsible. It is your conditioning.
Jesus says, “The camel can pass through the eye of a needle, but not a rich man.” The animals, the camels, are going to inherit the kingdom of God, remember; they will pass through the needle. But a rich man cannot pass through the gates of God. They have taught you to remain poor, they have given you all incentives to remain poor.
My religion is a religion of richness.
Why wait for tomorrow? Why wait for a lifetime, in which you cannot be certain of inheriting the kingdom of God after death, and for that, suffer your whole life here? I say to you, forget God and forget the kingdom of God. I give you here and now! Just be ready to drop your conditionings. You are not handicapped, you are not crippled. Every child is born a joy, a celebration, a dance, a song; but somewhere he loses it all. That’s why all the poets of all the languages go on remembering how beautiful it was to be a child.
What was beautiful in being a child? I cannot say that, because I have been becoming more and more blissful; childhood was just the beginning. If an old man says that his childhood was paradise, that means his whole life has been a hell. He has not been growing up, he is going down. Just to grow old is not growing up.
Growing up is a totally different phenomenon. It means the last moment on the earth for you will be the most precious moment. The departure from this life will be the climax of your joy. Childhood is only a beginning.
But the religions start distorting the children from the beginning. They create guilt in them, they create unnatural ideals in them. They create their conscience in such a way that they cannot live happily ever. On every point they are at a crossroad, and they will choose the road that suits their conditioning.
Christians say you have been punished because Adam and Eve disobeyed God. It is impossible for me to conceive that Adam and Eve’s disobedience is still keeping you miserable. And what had they done? It was sheer curiosity. And they did well. Instead of worshipping God and Jesus Christ in your churches, worship the serpent. Adam and Eve, they are the right people; they disobeyed. It was needed; otherwise there would have been no humanity. There would have been no Albert Einstein, no Bertrand Russell, no Gautam Buddha. There was no possibility. You would have been still animals, naked in the Garden of Eden.
And God immediately drove them out of the garden. I sometimes wonder what model of car he used to drive them out. It must have been a Ford, because “blessed are the poor.” And strange: four-wheelers, Fords, are going in and out of God’s garden, his gate, but a rich man cannot enter. Ford himself cannot enter.
If you teach people to be poor, and you bribe them to remain poor…. And the bribe is bogus – it is after death that you will have all the pleasure of life…. But if in God’s garden all the pleasures of life are available, one thing is certain, that pleasures are not condemned.
If you look at the Mohammedan concept of paradise – your word paradise comes from a Mohammedan word, firdaus – all kinds of pleasures are available. Beautiful women stuck at the age of sixteen for eternity, they don’t grow up; rivers of wine – bottles are not enough…. Drink, swim, have a deep plunge into the wine; enjoy it as much as you can – and all free. This is the arrangement for the religious people.
But I cannot see how the contradiction can be resolved. Here wine is a sin. Here, to have many beautiful women is a sin, and there it becomes a virtue. Virtues are rewarded by sins – strange logic! But it was needed to keep the poor, poor.
In India I have never seen a single rich man converting to Christianity. I have seen only poor, starving, orphans being converted to Christianity. Christianity thrives on poverty, because only the poor need the consolation. Only the poor need motivation to drag their life up to the grave – beyond the grave everything is just as it should be.
When I say celebrate – because this life is a gift of existence to you…. You have not asked for it, you have not paid for it. You, in fact, don’t deserve it. Still, existence is overflowing toward you, sharing all its joys. But you turn out to be such an idiot that when the sun is rising and the sky is full of colors – a time to dance, to sing – you are sitting in a dark church, gloomy, before a cross.
My people worship, but not in a church.
They worship the beauty of existence.
A bird flying, a cloud wandering in the sky, the moon, the stars…Outside you can see the whole existence is in celebration, but you have closed your eyes to it. With closed eyes you are saying, “Ave Maria, Ave Maria,” and you go on saying it.
Yes, all the religions are against me because I teach celebration, because I teach joy, because I teach comfort, I teach luxury, I teach richness.
And man has the intelligence to make the whole world so luxurious that even if there are saints in heaven, they will start praying to go back to the earth. I cannot see that the saints in heaven can enjoy beautiful women, because they missed here, and this is a rehearsal, just a training period of seventy years. If for seventy years you have been repressing yourself, just by entering into heaven, what will you do with your repression? What will you do with your guilt?
The Bible was written two thousand years ago; otherwise, marijuana, LSD, hashish – everything would have been made available to the saints in paradise. Of course, here it is a crime and would have remained a crime, but for saints you have to be lenient: they have suffered so much; you have to compensate.
I don’t tell you about tomorrow, I tell you only of this moment. And if you can enjoy this moment, the next moment you will be more capable of enjoying. If tomorrow ever comes, you will be ready to dance, to love.
These religions are bound to be against me, because they are not religions. I want it to be emphasized that this is the only religion. All those religions of the past were sick, pathological. If you start thinking about them, you can easily see that they were pathological. They have made the whole world sick, and they are still going on doing it. They call it “service to humanity.”
Mother Teresa wrote a letter to me. Because I criticized her a few years ago, she wrote a letter to me: “I cannot understand your criticism. Service to humanity is the true religion. Don’t you agree with it?” I wrote to her, “Yes, I agree. Tell all six hundred million Catholics to commit suicide. That will be a service to humanity.”
The world is suffering from overpopulation – Christians should start committing suicide and serve humanity. But they go on doing just the opposite; they go on opening hospitals, they go on saving orphans. They are against birth control, they are against abortion. This is service to humanity? Nothing can be more poisonous to humanity than what Mother Teresa is doing.
In her letter she asked me, “Are you infallible? I believe in the infallible Jesus Christ.”
I am not such a fool as to be infallible. I am an ordinary man just like you. I am very much fallible. One of my Indian sannyasins is here – his name is Falibhai. Whenever I see him I think to change his name to “Fallible-bhai.”
Jesus is claiming that he is infallible – and he cannot see that Judas is going to betray him. He cannot see that going to Jerusalem during that religious festival is going to death. Only on the cross does he wake up; and he shouts at God, “Have you forsaken me?” But the skies remain silent.
Silence is so beautiful. It is good that the sky does not answer your prayers; otherwise there would be so much noise around the world. And it would be difficult – what answer is given to whom? The sky remained silent.
Jesus asks for water because he is thirsty, it is a hot day. And you call this man infallible? He should just have carried a thermos. If he can carry the cross, why can’t he carry a small thermos? When you go for a holiday – and he’s going forever – a thermos is exactly the right thing to take.
Jesus is infallible, and the popes are infallible because they represent Jesus. This is a good arrangement: God is infallible, naturally his son is going to be infallible – and then you can conclude the son’s representatives are going to be infallible.
One of the last popes before this pope the Polack was homosexual. It was a known fact. In fact, when he became the pope his boyfriend followed him into the Vatican. He became his secretary. Secretaries are very good – girlfriend or boyfriend, it does not matter, but secretaries are very good. Do you think this homosexual is infallible? Do you think this pope the Polack is infallible?
Just now he has been trying to convince the Jews that Christians are not anti-semitic. Why? For two thousand years they have been anti-semitic, for two thousand years they have been killing Jews. Has God changed his mind? But infallible people don’t change their mind, only fallible people change their mind.
Why is he trying now? His effort is to call a conference of Jewish rabbis and Christian bishops, just to meet together and settle the thing: “We are not enemies.” He has been telling bishops, “Don’t say anything against Judaism.” That can mean only one thing: that all the popes that have preceded him were fallible. Or, if they were infallible, then this Polack is fallible.
I am not infallible. In fact, life is a continuous change. And the conscious person goes on moving and changing with life and existence. He is like a river, moving – not like a dirty pond which only goes on becoming more and more muddy; he goes nowhere, he never changes. A river goes on flowing, changing, taking new routes.
Consciousness keeps pace with the change of life and existence.
There are many questions which remind me, “In 1972 you said this….” Forget all about it! What I am saying now is the truth – only for now, not for tomorrow. I will see tomorrow what is the truth. I am not a blind man. I see, and I see the existence continuously changing. But these bibles don’t change, these korans don’t change, these gitas don’t change – they are dead books, just rubbish. These old religions don’t change; they go on clinging to the past which exists no more.
Galileo was called by the pope because he wrote that the earth is round, not flat. the Bible says it is flat. Of course, I cannot condemn the Bible; it looks flat to us too. Our vision is not that vast; we cannot see the whole earth, we see only small fragments, which look flat.
When Galileo wrote that the earth is round, that it is a globe, he was forced by the pope: “You have to change it, because the Bible cannot be wrong. And we cannot allow one thing to be wrong, because that will create suspicion; then other things maybe are also not right. If one thing can be wrong, then everything can be wrong. the Bible has to be true word for word, as a whole.”
Galileo must have been a man with a tremendous sense of humor. He said, “I will write whatsoever you say. If you say the world, the earth is flat, I will write it.” And he wrote it, “The earth is flat – but forgive me, this is my statement; as far as the earth is concerned it is a globe. I cannot do anything about it. I can change my statement, but what can I do with the earth? How can I make it flat to be consistent with the Bible?”
1972? Don’t even ask me about what I said yesterday. It is gone. What I am saying this moment is truth. And if tomorrow I see changes, I am not stubborn and I am not a fanatic, I will change; hence you will find thousands of contradictions in me. Anybody who is aware will have thousands of contradictions in his statements. Only a fanatic is consistent, he never contradicts himself. He keeps his eyes closed, he is afraid to see the truth.
Celebration is the very nature of existence.
Don’t separate yourself from existence; otherwise, you will be miserable. You cannot be nourished, you cannot eat the Bible and the Koran and the Gita. They will not nourish your body, they will kill you. If they cannot nourish even your body, how can they nourish your consciousness?
There is only one nourishment: your roots have to be deep down in existence. There is no other nourishment. And if you are nourished…I say, “Blessed are the nourished. Blessed are those whose roots go deep into existence. They are the richest people.” Richness does not mean only money. I am not against money; it is a perfectly good servant for exchanging things. But money alone is not richness.
Richness is multidimensional. It happens when you are in tune with nature, in harmony with nature; it starts happening multidimensionally. You may not be aware of what will happen to you if you destroy your conditionings of Christianity, Hinduism, Buddhism, and simply rely on and trust in nature. If your consciousness also trusts nature just the way your body remains trusting toward nature….
You don’t know what treasures you have got. Once there is nourishment you will start blossoming. You may not know that you can become a painter, you may not know you can become a dancer. You may be a Picasso, you may be a Nijinsky, you may be a Van Gogh, you may be a Rutherford. You don’t know who you are. You will know only when you blossom; there is no other way to know. And blossoming happens only in harmony with nature. Your roots should go not toward any church, not toward any scripture, not toward any dead prophets, but toward the nature that is available to you.
Just be natural. Drop all sense of guilt. The guilt arises only because your conditioning says, “Don’t do this” and your nature is hungry to do it. Now you are split. Your religion, your Jesuses, your Mohammeds say, “Don’t do this, this is wrong.” Those Ten Commandments, three thousand years old – they are still dominating you. Why are you degrading yourself? Those ten Commandments say, “Don’t do this, this is sin. You will suffer in hell” – and your whole nature wants to do it.
Listen to your nature, not to your conditionings, and celebration will happen on its own accord.
Have you seen any tree miserable? Have you seen any bird miserable? They are in harmony. Fortunately they don’t have priests, popes, shankaracharyas, imams. If the trees had popes and imams and shankaracharyas, then all the trees would stop flowering, would not come to fruition. They would somehow survive – only survive. Survival is not life! Survival is the minimum. You have to be overflowing, you have to be so full that you can share, and still your fullness remains full. That’s what the meaning of celebration is.
But the religions are bound to be against me, because if I am heard, then there is no need for any other religion in the world. They are trying to stop my words from reaching you; otherwise, there is no hope for themselves. And they have a great investment.
In Russia I have my sannyasins – of course, underground. But I am not a serious man; only fanatics are serious. When Russian sannyasins asked me what to do about the red clothes, the mala, I said, “Forget all about them – they don’t matter. They are just to provoke people.” But there sannyasins will be killed, so they have to meet in basements. Still the Russian government has started torturing them. They have taken their books, they have taken their tapes that they had smuggled from the outside. And they are torturing them to make them give the names of other sannyasins.
Why does communism fear us? – because communism is also a religion. It has its own trinity: Karl Marx, Frederick Engels, V.I. Lenin – the trinity. They also have their bible: Das Kapital. Neither Christians read the Bible nor do communists read Das Kapital. I am the only unfortunate one who has been reading all this rubbish. Communism is an atheist religion.
All these people are going to stop my words from reaching people. That’s what is happening here.
I was tremendously disappointed when I came to America. I had thought that it was a democratic country. It is not, absolutely not, because what they have been doing to my people, to me, is fascist. Democracy is just a mask; behind the democracy everything is fascist.
You will be surprised to know that one of my sannyasins, one of my oldest sannyasins, Yoga Laxmi, who was the president of the Indian section of my sannyasins for almost ten years, and has been with me almost for twenty years…. She is frail, small-bodied…she has cancer. She has been operated on, much of her stomach has been removed. Still, in America – remember I am saying in America, not in the Soviet Union – she has been beaten by your naturalization services. She was not allowed to have her legal expert, she was not allowed to phone anybody. She was not allowed – because other sannyasins were waiting outside.
The officials took her first into the front part of the building. They were very sweet – just the way communists are in Russia. They tried to bribe her. They said to her, “We will give you a green card without any difficulty, we will help you in every way. And if you help us and whatsoever we say you support, we will replace Osho’s secretary and put you in power.”
When she refused, when she said, “Whatsoever you are saying is absolute lies, and I am not power-hungry,” when they found that she could not be seduced in a friendly way, they forced her – four strong people for a tiny person, fragile, the body is dying – and they took her to the back. She told them, “Please, let me have my advocate with me.” They did not allow it. And at the back of the building they started beating her – of course in such a way that no medical evidence can be found. And she is so weak….
You call this democracy?
My sannyasins – the president of the international sannyas movement, the president of this commune, the head of another corporation – all these three women, and I don’t know about others, whenever they come into the country or go out of the country officials take them into a dirty room, force them to be naked, and force their fingers into their vaginas under the pretext that they are searching for drugs. This you call democracy?
And doing it to three women…. Perhaps they have done it to many. Those poor women cannot say anything, just out of shame: what to say to anybody? And there is no witness; those officials will deny it flatly. These women are tortured in an ugly, inhuman way – and this is a democratic country. Sometimes I think the attorney general of Oregon must be the reincarnation of Pontius Pilate.
This is also humiliation of womankind. Not only should sannyasins fight it, all the women of America should fight it. This is simply against every woman; it is not a question only of my sannyasins. But other women will remain silent because they are Christians, they are Protestants, they are Catholics, they are Jews. People cannot see because they have so many curtains before their eyes.
Yes, religions are against me – it is natural. I am also against all of them. And remember, if Jesus could work with only twelve disciples and managed to have the biggest religion in the world, what about me?

Osho,
I am happy that you are speaking again, but at the same time I'm sad too. Can you say why?
It is very simple. You are happy because I am speaking. You cannot understand my silence. To understand silence you have to be silent, and you are not. Hence you are happy that I am speaking again; you can understand words.
The problem for you is that you are sad also. That is a little bit complicated. You are sad because I may disturb you. I am a very unreliable person. In these thirty years it has happened many times; thousands of people have come to me, remained with me, and at a certain point dropped out. If I were silent they would have been still with me. I said something which they had never expected.
When I was speaking on Jesus, many Christians became sannyasins. Now when I am speaking on Jesus, only those who have guts will remain with me; otherwise they will betray me. That’s why you are sad. Knowing my past, you know I don’t give you, like Christians do, any catechism which remains fixed. I am continuously moving, and you may be afraid whether you will be able to move any further.
What I am saying today is nothing.
And I am not going to be silent again either. I will go on saying things, more and more dangerous, unto my last breath. Even if I lose all the sannyasins, it does not matter.

============================================================

Osho,
Do you ever get sad?
Really a tough question! Yes and no. Yes, I get sad for you and for the world in which you are living. And you are not aware that you are living in the midst of a vast madhouse. You are so fast asleep, you don’t know what is being done to you, to others.
The politicians make me sad because they are the ugliest animals on the earth – continuously lying to people, exploiting people, humiliating people.
Before the last election in America, the governor of Oregon had a secret meeting of all the top officials of his government. The attorney general was there, Norma Paulus was there, and everybody who means anything in the government. They did not allow the journalists inside…. And still you go on calling this a democratic country?
They were deciding about my people, but they did not allow any of my people to be present there. And the governor came out and gave a press conference in which he lied completely. What happened inside and what he said outside are completely contradictory. In the press conference he said, “Things are normal. There is no need to be afraid, everything is in control. We are trying to calm down the Rajneeshees.”
I don’t know how he was trying to calm us down. He never came here, he never sent a message to us, but he was calming us down. Does he think he is a magician? And he said he was trying to keep the opposing people from getting too hot.
Inside, everything was different. Now the confidential record of the meeting has been found – he was thinking it had been burned. But in this world impossible things also happen. Now we know what happened inside the meeting; there was no question of calming anyone down, no question of creating peace. On the contrary, they were deciding how much time it would take their army to reach Rajneeshpuram to destroy it completely. They had decided to put the army on alert so any moment, within three hours, they could destroy my people.
Of course, in a way it is calming us down. If you are not here, there will be calm. It has been calm here in this place for many decades, but that calmness was death. There was only one house, and there was only one family to look after this big place. It is one hundred and twenty-six square miles – three times bigger than New York. Of course it was calm. There were no birds to sing, there were no trees to blossom. It was a dead place; we made it alive.
Now birds have started coming. Nature has a tremendous harmony when there are so many people loving, singing, dancing. Birds have started coming to this place, flowers have started blossoming.
But it is not noisy, it is not “hot” in the governor’s sense. You cannot find a cooler place in the whole world. Of course the sun is hot – that is not our fault. But the place is cool, calm, there is no disturbance. In these four years there has not been a single fight. But they want to destroy this calmness. They would love to have a dead place, the serenity of a cemetery.
There is serenity in a garden too. Do you think birds singing, flowers moving in the air, disturb anything? They make the silence deeper, meaningful. Silence in itself is meaningless unless it has the potential for a song, unless it has something in it to blossom, something to grow.
In the meeting they decided that the army should be put on alert, and the army was put on alert. And they were ready, in three hours, to destroy this place, these people. Of course we would have died singing and dancing. We would have made history.
But these people make me sad – and they are in power, and they go on lying. Now what do you call it – is it not a conspiracy, to tell the people that everything is normal? Then why is the army on alert? And what crime have we committed that we have to be destroyed?
Just the other day the information came to me that in California, whenever there is a boxing match…. The University of California has been researching it, and they have found that whenever there is a boxing match in California, for a few days the murder rate goes thirteen percent higher than normal. And this is the murder rate – it says nothing about smaller fights, people wounded, rapes. Still boxing continues to be legal.
This place, where nobody fights, is illegal. People come close only to hug each other. This small and beautiful life is not to be wasted in fighting. That’s why I say yes, sometimes it makes me sad.
When I look around the world…we are in exactly the same economic situation as the world was in before the second world war. The American dollar was going higher and higher, and all other countries’ economies were falling apart. This is the kind of atmosphere when war becomes absolutely necessary.
When I was in India the dollar was worth seven and a half rupees. Now it is worth twenty rupees – three times higher. The same is the situation in Germany, in England, in Holland – all over the world. The same was the situation before the second world war. You cannot live in an ocean of poverty, with economies failing, nations going bankrupt, people all over the world dying and starving. Sooner or later this euphoria of the American dollar will backfire; it will become an absolute necessity to start the third world war to divert people’s minds.
Seventy-five percent of every nation’s income goes for war preparations. People are starving and dying – and you are creating bombs. Bread is needed, not bombs. Can’t you see the insanity?
Isn’t there a single nation which can declare, “We are going to stop creating nuclear weapons at the risk of being defeated”? Anyway, a country like England, which has lived for three hundred years in great luxury, exploiting the whole world…. Now the empire has disappeared. England is dark, dismal; there is no hope – and still they are putting all their resources into creating nuclear weapons, knowing perfectly well that they can never again be a world power. They cannot compete with America or the Soviet Union, or even China.
When you are not going to be a world power – even with nuclear weapons you will be defeated and destroyed – then what is the point of creating those weapons? In fact it is such a beautiful situation that you can dissolve all defense measures, you can stop having a defense ministry. There is no need; you will be defeated anyway.
But what to say about England? Even India, which is dying, goes on and on creating more and more war material. They are also after nuclear weapons.
In the history of man there has never been such a beautiful moment, when some courageous nation can say, “There is no need for any defense. We are all human beings – who is going to attack us?”
And do you see the cunningness? All these defense departments are not really for defense, they are for attack. Adolf Hitler attacked the world, but he had no department for attack. It was the defense department that was attacking.
The world will be going more and more into darker spaces, ditches. But nobody is ready to listen; their minds are conditioned so deeply that they are almost deaf. They hear, but they don’t listen.
I just heard that one clergyman from Europe is here. He loves me, he has been coming to all the celebrations. But because I said something about Mother Teresa, he became very upset. This makes me sad. Why did he become so upset? Can’t he understand a simple thing? – that Mother Teresa is helping poverty to increase in the world, and poverty ultimately means war.
He said that his four girlfriends…. Strange, a clergyman having four girlfriends? Even I cannot afford that. And nobody is there to prevent me, I am my own master; I don’t accept orders from anybody. Four girlfriends of his had been to Mother Teresa, and they all said that she is a nice woman. So what? There are millions of nice women, far nicer than Mother Teresa. And I have not said that she’s not nice. Why do you get upset? Yes, she is a nice old witch. Now get upset. And pack your luggage and go back. Your love for me was of no worth.
This makes me sad. In these thirty years thousands of people have come along with me; they will go a few steps and then drop away. They had the potential, they had the courage; otherwise even to go a few steps with me toward the unknown is difficult. But after a few steps, why did they drop out? Something I said disturbed them. But they are not aware – it is not their consciousness which is disturbed, it is their conditioning which gets upset, disturbed.
Are you going to listen to awareness or to all kinds of rubbish that rabbis, bishops, popes, mothers and fathers have forced into your head when you were very small and vulnerable?
I sometimes feel puzzled: why do you call Mother Teresa “mother,” and why do you call the pope “father”? Popa in Italian means father. Instead of calling him pope start calling him popa – that sounds better. You call the pope, who has no children, “father.” You call Mother Teresa, who has no children, “mother.” Let these two get married. And put them on the pill, because we don’t want their progeny. Enough is enough!
Existence does not make me sad. My own inner being for three decades has never felt a single moment of sadness for myself. I have completely forgotten the strategy, how to be sad. But what goes on happening around the world just brings tears to my eyes.
This world is not worth saving. Once in a while I think it will be better if the third world war happens and destroys this whole stupid humanity. Perhaps there is a time when a thing gets so rotten that it is better to burn it.
Consciousness is eternal. Even if this earth becomes without human beings, I don’t see any problem in it. There are at least fifty thousand planets around the earth where life exists. Your consciousnesses will move to other planets. Nothing will be destroyed – only this ugly earth, these ugly politicians, priests; they will be finished.
This makes me sad: man on the earth has the highest quality of consciousness, and yet his behavior is barbarous. And everything that you call civilization is just a word.
Once a man asked George Bernard Shaw, “What do you think about civilization?”
He said, “It is a good thing, but it has not happened yet.”
What the religions go on doing around the world makes me sad. They go on making you more and more idiotic. Their basis is faith. They force every child to be faithful, a believer, and if possible, to be a fanatic believer. You will find all kinds of fanatics around. Even if you don’t want to be delivered, you don’t want to be saved, they will force you to be saved.
There are Christian sects who are self-appointed saviors. Who gives you the authority to save another? And are you certain that you are saved? Your face, your eyes do not give any proof of it; you look angry. Even a nice man like Jesus was an angry man. Who gave him the authority to beat the money-changers in the temple of Jerusalem and throw them out? Self-appointed judges….
Jesus wanted to save the world – he could not even save himself. And he has left an ugly heritage which goes on growing like a cancerous growth, destroying everything that can raise you to beauty, to truth, to silence, to ecstasy.
I have never seen a Christian ecstatic. Even Jesus was not ecstatic; he was burdened, and continuously having hallucinations. Now thinking oneself the only begotten son of God – do you think the man was sane? Thinking that he is the only real messenger bringing truth to humanity – do you think this man is mentally healthy? He is utterly sick, and Christians are sick.
But it is not only the Christians; the Hindus are in the same boat, the Mohammedans are in the same boat. Their names and their theologies and their scriptures are different, but the basic madness is there. They are all hallucinating.
Your religions are nothing but opium. Drugs are prohibited – and the greatest drug is your religions. They should be abandoned, completely abandoned, if we want man to get rid of hallucinations. Otherwise, people are hallucinating that soon they will reach heaven and all the angels will be there dancing and singing, “Alleluia!”
There is no heaven, and there are no angels. Heaven is a state of consciousness. It is not a place. It is not part of geography; otherwise there would be very much confusion. In India, if you ask the Hindus where hell is, they say, “Just under us, deep down.” But if you make a hole from India deep down, you may enter Oregon – and their heaven is above. But the earth is round; everything is above, and everything from some angle, some place, is below. The Hindu’s hell is your heaven, your heaven is a Hindu’s hell.
You go on listening to these people, and you go on absorbing their nonsense in you. It is sheer poison. The politicians, the priests, make me sad. They are all programming your mind and changing it into a computer, a mechanism.
My work here is to deprogram you. Whether you get upset or not, I don’t care. You will get upset, because deprogramming is upsetting. You have believed a certain thing for fifty years, sixty years, and suddenly I say that it is nonsense. You cannot accept it, because that means you have been a stupid guy. But if you have guts and intelligence, there is still time to get out of the rut.
I am, and my religion is, nothing but the science of deprogramming. And remember, don’t get mixed up with the deprogrammers that exist in California. They are not deprogrammers, they are reprogrammers. If any Christian moves away from Christianity, his parents becomes paranoid; they force the person to go to those so-called deprogrammers. They don’t deprogram him, they reprogram him. He was escaping from Christianity, they bring him back to Christianity. You call it deprogramming….
Deprogramming means that you are simply left without any program. You are left without any religion, you are left without any theology. You are left alone to be yourself, an individual.
People go on asking me, “How many followers do you have?” I have not a single follower in the whole world, because my whole work is to destroy following, followers, and to create courage in people so they can stand on their own and be individuals.
It makes me sad that you are not individuals. Somebody is a Christian, somebody is a Hindu, somebody is a Mohammedan, somebody is a Buddhist. You are not individuals. You are blind followers, programmed by other blind followers.
But as far as I am concerned, there is no sadness in me. Day and night, I am in absolute bliss. That also makes me sad, that what is possible for me – an ordinary individual like me – why can’t it be possible for all? I do not claim any speciality. I do not claim that I am the only begotten son of God. I do not proclaim that I am the prophet bringing a fresh message from God.
All these prophets, messengers, avataras, are just holy shit! Of course, it has been clinging to you so long that when I start hitting you hard so that this holy shit drops, you get upset.
I can understand, but I cannot stand it!

Osho,
Please comment on this statement by J.P. Markham: “I fear the contented man. I fear him because there is no progress unless there is discontent.”
I do not care whose statement this is. One thing I know, that discontent certainly makes you speedy. You go on running your whole life. You become just a vehicle that goes on moving faster and faster. But for what? I do not call it progress.
You may have all the money of the world, still you will be running after money. You may have all the knowledge, and still you will be running after more knowledge. In every dimension there is infinite space to run.
I have heard…. A man and his wife were flying in a plane; the man was piloting. The plane was going full speed, and the wife asked, “Where are we going?”
The man said, “Don’t bother where – look at the speed! We are certainly going somewhere.”
Discontent is another name for inferiority complex. Discontent means: you look around, people have this, people have that, and you don’t have it – you are discontented. But just seeing that somebody has it, you becomes discontented, you start feeling inferior. You have to surpass it, you have to get ahead. This continuous getting ahead is called progress – it is not progress. And this kind of progress begins even before your birth.
When a man makes love to a woman, the living cells that he releases into the woman’s body start running. Progress begins there, because in a single lovemaking millions of living cells are released. They must have been feeling imprisoned in the man. Whenever they get the chance they go fast – you cannot understand how fast, because they are so small you cannot see them with your eyes.
The passage between them and the female egg, in proportion to their size, is almost two miles. And their life is very short, they are almost on their deathbed, because they can live for only two days, not more than that. In those two days those tiny cells have to run two miles, with millions of competitors, and only one will reach the female egg.
Sometimes it happens, two reach at the same time – that’s why twins are born. Once the female egg opens and receives a male cell, it closes, and all those millions – those progressive people – simply die. If your lovemaking is counted, you have been murdering millions of people your whole life.
And don’t think that the celibate monks are not murdering. Their cells die in imprisonment – at least you give them a little freedom, a little democracy, a little chance to progress. The celibate monk, Catholic or Hindu, does not allow those poor people to get out of his body. Yoga has methods to go on preventing them from getting out of you. They go on dying within you…. You are eating, you are getting nourishment, and it is a natural process. The body goes on; the body knows no religion.
The body goes on doing its function. It is programmed by nature, not by any priest – it will go on creating new blood cells, it will go on creating new semen cells, it will go on creating everything that the body needs. But when new living semen cells are created, the old have to die and vacate the place. The new ones have come – the new generation has come and the old generation has to go. There is not much space for all of them to coexist.
When you think of progress…it starts with your lovemaking – a mad race – and where do you end? You end with a woman. Great, just great!
And then your whole life it is the same, the same story. People are running after power, people are running after money, people are running after respectability. People are running after everything you can imagine, and where do they end up? Even if you reach the last rung of the ladder – there is no such thing, just for argument’s sake I am saying it – even if you reach the last rung of the ladder, what will you do then?
I remember I was driving and a dog started following my car, chasing – he was hot, really progressive, very discontented. But he was not acquainted with me. He must have chased other cars….
I stopped the car – the poor dog was huffing, his tongue was hanging out. I stopped the car and asked the dog, “What now? What do you want?”
And the way the dog looked at me…Ronald Reagan would also look the same way!
Even if you become the president of a country, or a prime minister of a country, so what? You call it progress? It is obsession with speed.
Discontent brings conflict because it brings competition. If you are running, others are also running. There is going to be competition, there is going to be cut-throat competition. Hence all these wars.
The Polack pope is reaching out to the Christians around the world with the message, “Drop your antagonism with the Jews.” The Christians cannot understand. For two thousand years they have been killing Jews. When Adolf Hitler killed almost one million Jews in Germany, the high priest of the Christians in Germany blessed him; he had done a great religious act by removing these Jews.
For two thousand years Christians have been killing Jews because Jews killed Jesus; and nobody bothers about the fact that Jesus was a Jew, he was not a Christian – it is none of your business! If Jews want to kill another Jew, it is their internal affair. Jesus never claimed that he was a Christian. If he had claimed that he was a Christian, he would not have been crucified – then, who bothers?
Jews were upset because he was saying he was their Lord, that he was coming from God just as Moses, Abraham, Ezekiel and other prophets have come. And in a way he is higher than all those prophets, because they were only postmen, nothing much. He is the only begotten son. Naturally this Jew was going to be killed by the Jews. But they killed a Jew, they never killed a Christian. Christians have been killing Jews. I don’t see the mathematics of it.
And how after two thousand years it happens in a Polack mind…and it is known all over the world that anything like mind does not exist in them, they are empty bottles of alcohol. If you are a cannibal and you eat a Polack, you will know what I mean. Just a little taste of a Polack and you will go unconscious!
This Polack popa is trying to create a bridge, a communication between the Christians and the Jews. Why? These things are not religious, these things are political. After the second world war they created a Jewish nation, Israel. Jews think the Americans, the British and other allies – who were all Christian – have done a great favor to them; it is not so. It was a very cunning strategy.
Israel is the holy land of the Jews, and also the holy land of the Christians. It was not in existence centuries ago – because the population was Mohammedan; there was no Israel before 1945. There used to be a nation, Palestine, which is no longer anywhere; it simply disappeared.
Christians could have taken possession of Israel, but they were aware that if they took possession of Israel, then Jews would be against them all over the world. And Israel is surrounded by Mohammedans, the whole of the Middle East is Mohammedan; Israel itself is full of Mohammedans. It would create a conflict, a war, a continuous war between Christians on the one side and Jews and Mohammedans on the other side. In fact, Mohammedanism is closer to Judaism than Christianity is; much of Mohammedanism is borrowed from Judaism.
To avoid this situation of having Jews against them…. The politicians could not do that, because if the Jews are against the Christians, then who is going to donate to their election funds? It would have been disastrous, particularly in America, because all these politicians in America are supported by Jewish money.
And it was in the hands of America, because American forces were there in Israel to hand over the country to anybody – either to Christians or to Mohammedans or to Jews. It was a Mohammedan country and it would have been right to give it back to them. But Christians are against Mohammedans for a very simple thing – that’s why I say this whole world needs to be finished – a very small problem.
Mohammedans accept Jesus as a prophet of God but not as a son of God. And they are very logical about it: where is the wife? There is nobody, other than the holy ghost. And nobody knows about the holy ghost, to what sex he belongs. Is he male? Certainly Christians cannot accept that he is female, because to raise woman so high that she becomes part of the trinity, the highest in existence…the holy ghost has to be male. But that makes God a homosexual, and homosexuals don’t produce children. Then Jesus’ whole position becomes very strange.
Hence Mohammedans say Jesus is a prophet, a messenger of God, but not a son of God; God has no relatives. This is the only difference. And Christians and Mohammedans have been killing each other for fourteen hundred years. These things should be laughed at, not fought for.
The Americans could not give it to Mohammedans, although the country was Mohammedan, and it had been under the Mohammedans for a long time. They could not keep it for themselves, because that would mean creating two enemies: Jews and Mohammedans. They found a very political and cunning way: they gave it to the Jews. In that way they created a bridge between Jews and Christians, a friendship; they avoided one enemy, the Jews, avoided the other enemy, the Mohammedans, and very cleverly put the Jews in such a bad situation that they will continually have to fight with the Mohammedans.
Nobody can see any end to it because the country is Mohammedan, it belongs to the Mohammedans. It was forcibly taken and given to the Jews. This gave a very good opportunity to American Christians to get more donations from Jews; and it was a very good situation: they need not kill Jews, Mohammedans will kill them. Can you see the strategy? – so beautiful, so sophisticated.
Mohammedans will kill them – they have been killing them – on the one hand; on the other hand, the Jews will remain dependent on Christian countries. Israel is not independent; if America stops giving support to them, they will be finished within minutes. They have to remain under American control. Israel is nothing but a slave country of the Christians. And it will have to remain a slave; otherwise Mohammedans will kill it.
American politicians have done a good job. Jews think they have been favored; that is nonsense. They have been put in such a fix that they will never be out of it. And Christians have made a great step toward absorbing them. That has been the desire of Christianity: to absorb the whole world.
This hand of friendship is a not a hand of friendship. It is a hand that wants to destroy you. Jews are in tremendous discontent, Mohammedans are in tremendous discontent, Christians are in tremendous discontent. Whoever has said that discontent is needed for progress? Humanity has been in discontent for as far back as you can imagine. What progress has happened?
Yes, you have better roads, you have better machines, you have high technology – but you don’t have a better man. And your high technology, your nuclear weapons, your so-called good roads, beautiful buildings – without a good man they are just dangerous; not only useless, very dangerous. It is giving a naked sword into the hands of a child. Man remains retarded and he is being given nuclear weapons.
I have heard…. When Ronald Reagan became the president of America, he was on a morning walk on a beach with his favorite friend, a chimpanzee. Great progress is happening: chimpanzees are friends of presidents! One man sitting there on the beach was very much puzzled. He said, “Mr. President, sir, am I hallucinating? What is this chimpanzee doing with you?”
Reagan said, “You are not hallucinating, he is my friend.”
The man said, “I am not asking you, I am asking the president. Don’t interfere.”
In the first world war, for the first time psychoanalysts were employed by the governments to find out the intelligent quotient – I.Q. – of the soldiers. And it was a shock: the average man’s mental age is close to fourteen years. He may be seventy years old, but his mental age is not more than fourteen – it may be less.
What progress has happened? You have not been able even to keep a synchronicity between man’s physical age and his psychological age, and you call your world a civilized world – where everybody is retarded?
But these retarded people are needed by the politicians, by the priests, by all the vested interests, because if a man’s intelligence also grows along with his body, then he will not become just old; he will grow up. His old age will be a beautiful experience. He will be able to drop all the conditionings which have been forced upon him.
But a retarded person cannot do that. He cannot even understand anything higher. He cannot even understand Leonardo da Vinci, he cannot understand Kalidasa, he cannot understand Rabindranath Tagore, he cannot understand Lao Tzu. He can only understand third-rate newspapers – The Oregonian. Yes, that he can understand.
He can follows a man like Reverend Jim Jones. Only a retarded man can do that. It is not a surprise that Jim Jones’ followers were all black. Of course, they are more retarded than the white people; they have lived in slavery for so long, uneducated, humiliated – they are not first-class citizens. They have not been treated as human beings. Reverend Jim Jones had not a single white man as his follower. Those who died, committed suicide in Jonestown, were retarded people.
A man of intelligence would like to love, to live, to laugh. A great opportunity has been given by existence; he would like to drink out of it to the fullest. He would like to squeeze all that life contains.
But Jim Jones convinced those fools to commit suicide. Of course Christianity has the ultimate responsibility for it, because Reverend Jim Jones was an ordained Christian priest. Of course the cross is the symbol of suicide, and the whole teaching of Christianity is not for living joyously.
If Jesus can convince retarded people in Judea that when he reaches God, soon after they will all follow him…. He never defined how long this “soon” is. Two thousand years have passed; the “soon” is still there. Jim Jones carried the logic to its very end. He said, “Why should I wait there and and you wait here? You die with me, so we all go together.” He convinced those retarded people to commit suicide.
Retarded people can be convinced about anything. Retarded people are being convinced to go to Vietnam to kill innocent people who have done no wrong to them. They can be sent anywhere, can be convinced to do anything.
Japan had suicidal soldiers – a separate division. They would take an aeroplane full of bombs, and the pilot knew he was not going to come back, but he was dying for his country. Only retarded people can be convinced to die for a country. What is a country? Where is Palestine? And for Palestine people have been dying. Countries exist only on the map; the earth is one.
That’s why I say Rajneeshpuram is not in America, not in Oregon. This whole earth is ours. Rajneeshpuram is the capital of the whole world.
We don’t believe in nations. It is idiotic – what is the need of all these nations? Yes, a world government is needed, but not nations. Unless we create a world government, wars will continue because these nations will go on fighting – India with Pakistan, China with India – the war will continue somewhere or other.
The only way to stop war is not what the pacifists go on doing – carrying posters in processions. There are a few people who enjoy it; it is good exercise. And they are boiling because of discontent, so it is good in a way to shout slogans; it releases something in them. But these pacifists are not going to stop the war that is just on the horizon. Any moment, any chimpanzee can trigger it.
Tomorrow is more uncertain than it has ever been. The next moment is more uncertain than it has ever been.
Protest, protest marches, slogans – this is not going to help. These people are exactly the same retarded people, they are just on a lower rung of the ladder. I have been watching these pacifists and their processions, their shouting and their slogans. It does not give the sense of peace; these are warmongers. Perhaps they are ready to fight for peace.
There is only one way: nations should disappear, they are an unnecessary burden on us. The world can easily be one, there is no need of different colors on the map. If the world dissolves the nations, whom are you going to fight? And if the world becomes a little more intelligent and drops all religious nonsense, whom are you going to fight? And if you are not going to fight, there will be no Ethiopia, there will be no poor India – because all your energy, all your money, all your resources that are going into war efforts will be freed. The whole humanity can live richly.
People ask me, “What are you doing for Ethiopia?” Whatever I am doing, I am not sending Ethiopia some bread, some butter – that is not going to help. In the first place it is never going to reach Ethiopia, it will reach the Christian missionaries. In the last year they collected fifteen million dollars in America for Ethiopia. All has disappeared, it never reached Ethiopia. The same has happened before; Ethiopia has been in trouble for four years. In the name of humanity, service, these missionaries collect the money and swallow it.
Last year when the fifteen million dollars simply disappeared, it was enquired what had happened. The Christian missionaries said they did not want to send the money to the Ethiopian government, so they found a French agency to distribute the money, food, clothes, to the starving Ethiopians. When the French agency was asked, they could not believe it; they had never heard about these missionaries.
Ethiopia will be there, more Ethiopians will be there tomorrow. Small efforts won’t help. I don’t believe in throwing a spoonful of sugar into the ocean to make it sweet. I am not retarded.
This Ethiopia, this India, the poor countries in the East, in Africa – this is your doing! First you create the problem, and then you start talking about serving humanity. Why create the problem in the first place? Dissolve all the nations if you have any love for humanity. And dissolve all the religions if you have any respect for civilization.
A civilized man cannot be a Christian, a Jew, a Mohammedan. He cannot be an American, he cannot be an Indian. A civilized man is simply man. And if wars disappear, the world will not need priests to persuade you that “Blessed are the poor,” because there will be nobody who is poor. Then the priests will not be able to distract your mind toward heaven, because we can make heaven on this very earth.
If God has thrown out Adam and Eve, do tit for tat: throw him out. We will make the Garden of Eden here! Let God beg to come in.
Why should you pray and beg that you should be accepted, when we can create paradise here? But these politicians, these priests, go on diverting your energies. They are diverting science toward war. Science has now come to a point where it can make this earth so beautiful, so comfortable, so lovable that there will be no Jonestown. Nobody will want to commit suicide.
It is a discovery of scientific research that man’s body has an inner capacity to go on renewing itself – of course only for seventy, eighty years, and in rich countries for a hundred years. But in some countries even up to two hundred years the body remains young. We just have to put our scientific intelligence in the service of life – up to now it has been in the service of death. Man can live forever on this earth; there is no need to search for an eternal home beyond death – that is just a consolation for you.
But if you can be as blissful as they have been depicting people in paradise, naturally you won’t take any interest in their bibles, in their korans and gitas. You will not go to confess your sins, because there is no sin.
People just need more understanding. People need more life, more wisdom, more clarity. You don’t need to be forgiven. You have not done any wrong.
You have been doing only one thing wrong: you have been following idiots. God, who does not exist, may forgive you. I cannot forgive you for that.

============================================================

Osho,
If discontentment does not lead to real progress, then is the contented man the alternative?
No. The religions of the world have tried to create the contented man. The contented man is really the repressed man. He has all the desires, all the ambitions, but he is repressing them. He is very disturbed inside.
So I cannot say that the contented man is the alternative. I say contentment is the alternative. Don’t misunderstand me. The point is a little delicate.
Contentment is a state of consciousness. And when there is contentment, there is no man, no woman. There is no ego, there is no “I.” There is only contentment.
It is just like when you are silent. Is there a silent man? No, there is only silence. When you are in meditation, is there a meditator? No, there is only meditation. You disappear, you have to disappear, because you are discontent, you are disturbance. You are anguish, anxiety, despair.
Christians say that there is only one sin God will not forgive, and that is despair. Perhaps that is the only statement I can agree with – not with the idea of God, but that despair cannot be forgiven. Despair simply means all these things together: anxiety, anguish, discontent, frustration.
Contentment is the answer. But the religions have been trying to create a pseudo type of contentment. They tell you that if you are poor, you are blessed; be contented with it: “God must have a design behind it, and you will be rewarded soon.” If there is any reward in the future, then your contentment is false. You are really suffering and waiting for the reward.
All the religions have been giving you rewards – or punishments. If you don’t listen to them, you will be punished; if you don’t follow them, then you are bound to go to hell. And the Christian hell is the worst, for the simple reason that you will be there for eternity. It is so illogical, so absurd, that even an idiot can understand it.
Christianity believes in only one life – that means seventy years, eighty years, a hundred years. In a hundred years can you commit so many sins that the punishment will be for eternity, forever? Even Adolf Hitler or Joseph Stalin or Mao Tse-tung – all three combined cannot manage to commit so many sins.
Bertrand Russell is right. He says, “If I count all my sins that I have committed, and also count all the sins that I wanted to commit but have not committed, even then, four or five years in hell would be enough – more than enough.”
Do you know the psychological fact, that when you are in pain each moment becomes longer? Have you been at the bedside of a dying man in the night? It seems it is not going to end ever.
Time is a relative phenomenon; it changes with your psychology. In pain, despair, anguish, it moves very slowly; in utter despair it seems that the clocks have stopped. When you are happy, blissful, time moves faster. Suddenly time appears to have wings. When you are with a friend, hours pass, and it seems you have just met. When you are with your lover, your beloved, then the night becomes very short. In fact, life seems so small to a lover that seventy years look like seven days or seven hours.
Each moment in hell – Bertrand Russell is not aware of it – will be an eternity unto itself, what to say about being in hell for eternity? And what sins have you committed? Not many people are murderers, not many people are thieves, dacoits.
What sins are you committing? Even to call them sins is wrong. They are only mistakes – human, expected. Because you are not all-knowing, mistakes are bound to happen. Because you are not omnipotent, omniscient, omnipresent, mistakes are bound to happen. To err is human. Anybody claiming infallibility is a criminal. Perhaps that is the only sin that you can commit.
The religions have created a false contented man – false because the man is trying to be contented, waiting for the rewards in heaven, in paradise. He is repressing here. He knows this life is small, much has passed, the remainder will also pass. He has become accustomed to its pain, its suffering, its frustration, its poverty. And deep down there is great hope that soon he will be in the blissful paradise – and forever.
Have you ever considered that any pleasure, any happiness, if it continues forever, will not remain happiness anymore? Just think…kissing your woman forever. You will curse God.
Change is beautiful, it keeps you moving. But the old religions are against change, they preach permanent things. And there is nothing which is permanent except change, because anything permanent becomes dead. If you are permanently in heaven, heaven will turn into hell. The very idea of permanence is non-existential.
Yes, the old religions have tried to create a contented man. It is a strategy to keep the poor, poor, a strategy against any rebellion, revolution. It is a strategy to keep the suffering, suffering; to find explanations for why he is suffering. Adam and Eve disobeyed God – that’s why you are suffering. Strange logic! You have never met Adam and Eve, it is simply a myth. Have you met serpents giving sermons?
And disobedience is something very essential for every human being in becoming an individual. Not disobedience for disobedience’s sake – but when you see something irrational being imposed upon you, and you go on obeying it, you are going against yourself. You are destroying your humanity, you are murdering your individuality. You are becoming a slave.
Obedience is beautiful if it is in harmony with you, with your understanding, with nature. But disobedience is also beautiful. If man had continued to disobey the politicians and the priests, we would have been in a far more beautiful, peaceful, loving world. They don’t want you to disobey. They don’t want you to rebel, because of their vested interests. They want you to cling to the past, because that is the only way to exploit you.
The Hindu priest goes on exploiting millions of Hindus in the name of Krishna, in the name of Rama, who cannot be said even to be religious people – there is no question of their being incarnations of God. They have committed everything that is inhuman, ugly. And still Hindus go on worshipping them, because the priest is the mediator between the worshiper and the worshipped – nobody knows whom they are worshipping. The priest knows! The priest pretends to know, and imposes the idea on you that you don’t know, so whatever he says has to be obeyed.
In this twentieth century, in India, if rains are not coming, then all over the country jagnas – fire worship – is arranged. Millions of dollars are wasted to feed the brahmins, to pay their fees, because by their ritual…which is absurd – throwing into the fire valuable food, in a poor country which is starving, and repeating mantras from ten thousand-year-old Vedas.
Nobody understands what those mantras mean. Brahmins have been insisting that they should not be written in any language other than the original Sanskrit, because once they are translated you will laugh; they are stupid. And they have no connection with rain. They cannot persuade the clouds to come; there is no relationship at all.
There are mantras in the Vedas…. A brahmin is praying to God, “This year let your clouds rain only in my field, avoid the fields of my neighbors.” They are praying to God, “My cows should give more milk, and the cow of my enemy should not give any milk.” Great prayers! But in ancient Sanskrit, which is not understood, which has never been used as a language by people…. People have not been allowed to use it. It has never been a living language; it has been the monopoly of the priest.
Out of hundreds of jagnas, rituals, sometimes rains come, and they say, “Look! The Vedas are still significant, they are not outdated. Existence still listens to the prayers.”
But out of hundreds of rituals, ninety percent of the time rains are not going to happen. Then they are always ready to say that something has gone wrong. Mantras have not been chanted as accurately, as exactly as they should be. Brahmins have not been fed, have not been given their fees. Something must have gone wrong in the ritual; God is not happy.
I am reminded that when I was in Pune…. Pune has seen its glorious days: ten thousand sannyasins were always there; all the hotels were packed, business was great. Although they were all against me, they never suspected that I am a very unreliable man. One day suddenly I left Pune.
I live in the moment. I don’t care for the future. For me the present is enough.
Suddenly I called my secretary and told her, “I want to leave this ugly place – dirty, full of lousy people.” Naturally when I left, slowly all the sannyasins left. Now Pune is in ruins.
Just by the Pune commune there was a five-star hotel, the Blue Diamond. Before we reached Pune it was on sale because they were not making money, they were losing. It was a beautiful, big building, but only fifteen percent of the rooms were ever filled. They were not even able to pay the servants, the manager. When we were there, the Blue Diamond was overfull.
They had offered it to me, they were ready to sell it as cheap as possible. But when sannyasins started coming, and we needed space and enquired, “Are you still ready to sell it?” they said, “No, not at any price.”
The owner of the hotel is one of the richest men in India, Kirloskar. He was very much against me for a simple reason: his daughter is married to Morarji Desai’s son, and my friendship with Morarji Desai seems to be going on for many lives. I had to tell you this, otherwise you would not have understood.
I have heard that Kirloskar himself arranged a vedic ritual – a hundred brahmins for seven days, throwing wheat, rice, milk, butter, into the fire and praying, “Bring Osho back to Pune.” But it is not going to happen; there is no God who can order me to go to Pune. What I have left behind, I have left behind. I go on breaking the bridges that I pass. Once is enough-the world is vast. But Pune became a world-famous name. Now all that glory has disappeared; no vedic ritual can help it.
These religions go on giving you hope. Hope is the poison; it keeps you dragging, waiting for the moment when the hope, the promise, will be fulfilled.
Christians are waiting for Christ to come back. He said to them again and again, “I will be coming soon on the clouds of glory, with a divine body, for the salvation of all those who believe in me.” He has not come, and I can say to you categorically: he is not going to come again. What did you do to him when he was here? That experience is enough to prevent him – because I know if he comes back, you will crucify him again. But the hope….
Hindus are hoping, because Krishna has promised – all these prophets go on promising – Krishna has promised that whenever there is misery, whenever there is irreligiousness in the world, whenever virtue disappears, whenever things are not as they should be, “I will be coming.” For five thousand years everything has been wrong – but there is no sign of his coming back. But Hindus still go on living in hope, still they go on repeating the promise of Krishna, that soon he will be coming. This keeps people unconscious of the reality. It is opium – very subtle, very psychological.
The contented man has been created by this opium: here be contented, and there you will be immensely rewarded for your contentment. Don’t be bothered about the rich and the luxurious. It is just momentary; soon the rich will be suffering in hell. Don’t be jealous of them and don’t be competitive with them. Be contented.
India, perhaps, is the oldest country in the world; its religions are certainly the most ancient religions. But in India not a single revolution has happened, and it has been suffering for thousands of years. Starvation, poverty, sickness – it has been living in a nightmare, but with the opium of hope: that the Hindus are the privileged people of God, and this is only a momentary life. The suffering is just a test of your faith. Once you have passed through the test, all the joys of heaven are yours.
That’s why I said I don’t want the contented man. That is false, pseudo, sick, retarded, believing in lies.
I teach contentment. And the basic principle of contentment is to drop your ego. Don’t think for a single moment, “To be or not to be.” Just not to be is the rule. What have you gained by trying to be? Just for a change try not to be, and you will be amazed. The moment you are not, there is contentment, there is silence, there is beauty, there is bliss.
Meditation is only a methodology to make you aware that your only disease is your ego, and your only health is egolessness.
The discontented man is suffering from his ego. He is comparing his ego with others. Somebody is more beautiful than you, somebody is stronger than you. Somebody is richer than you, somebody is more powerful than you. All around there are people who have something which you don’t have. You have to complete against the whole world – by any means, right or wrong, but you have to reach the top.
Sometimes I think of Edmund Hillary standing on the highest mountain, the Himalayan peak, Everest. There is not even space for two persons to stand together. And whenever I think of it, I think of poor Edmund Hillary. He must have looked silly. Now what to do? You have reached the top of the world, but what now? Jump and commit suicide.
Whatever you can attain, you will remain discontented.
Napoleon Bonaparte was not a very tall man, he was only five feet five inches. But I don’t see any problem. I am five feet five inches. I have tried to figure out why he was puzzled; I am not puzzled. Even if I were seven feet, my feet would touch the ground. At five-five they still touch the ground, so what is the problem? But Napoleon was very much disturbed, because his soldiers were taller than him, his bodyguards were taller than him. That was giving him a continuous feeling of inferiority.
One day it happened, he was trying to put a nail in the wall to hang a picture. His hand was not reaching to the right spot, and his bodyguard said, “Sir, you need not bother about it, I can do it – I am higher than you.”
Napoleon Bonaparte imprisoned that guard, and told him, “You used wrong language. You are taller than me, but not higher than me!” That poor guard had unconsciously used a word that touched a deep wound in Bonaparte. Bonaparte had everything, but discontent was there.
There are ordinarily two types of people in the world: the discontented and the repressed discontented. I need the third type of man to evolve: the man who has no ego; hence, he cannot be discontented.
Contentment is not something to be practiced. When discontent disappears, you find contentment has always been your nature.
Do you think a small bush is discontented because just by the side of it a tall cedar tree is standing, reaching to the stars? Do you think a small rosebush is discontented? There is no discontent in nature anywhere, except in the mind of man. It has been created by the politicians, by the priests, by the educationalists. Every child is being told to come first.
My father was a very simple man. He was not even aware – because he had eleven children – who was in which class and where. If some visitor, some guest asked him, he would have to call me and ask,
“In what class are you?” He never asked me, “Have you passed or failed?”
When I came first in the whole university, I thought, “He will be happy, I should inform him.” I told him, “I have come first in the whole university.”
He said, “So what! That simply means your whole university is full of stupid people; otherwise, how could you manage to come first?”
I said, “That seems to be right” – and I threw the gold medal given to me by the university into the well.
My father said, “What are you doing?”
I said, “I am simply destroying the gold medal, because I don’t want to be first among thousands of stupid people. I am perfectly okay as I am.”
He said, “But don’t burn your certificates. You will need them for employment.”
I said, “Okay. For employment I will need them, but the moment I leave employment, the first thing I am going to do is to burn them all” – and that’s what I did.
For nine years I was a lecturer in the university. Then one day I left, because when I can share my silence, my ecstasy with millions of people, why should I waste my time with a dozen students, teaching them something which is of no use, something I am against?
I had to teach Aristotle, and I think Aristotle is one of the most criminal minds in the whole of history. But I used to say that too. I would teach Aristotle, and then I would say, “Now, what I feel about Aristotle I have to say to you.”
Aristotle created a logic of duality: yes and no, and there is nothing in between; either something is or it is not. This is not true.
Life is a rainbow…all the colors.
Between yes and no there are many stages.
Life cannot be divided and cut into two separate parts. Life is an undivided rainbow – one color melting into another. Yes and no are two ends of the same rainbow, two colors of the same rainbow. They are not opposite to each other – that is Aristotelian logic – I say they are complementary to each other.
But it was a tedious job, first to teach Aristotle and then to contradict him. And my students became confused. They complained to the
vice-chancellor, “What are we going to do? This man is strange. He teaches Immanuel Kant and contradicts him, he teaches Hegel and contradicts him. How are we going to answer in our examinations?”
The vice-chancellor told me, “You are creating trouble for those poor students.”
I said, “I am not creating any trouble, I am simply giving them the whole picture. Now they can choose. To give them only one side just to avoid their confusion is cheating.”
Mulla Nasruddin was made a judge. The first case came before him; he heard one side and started writing the judgment. The court clerk could not believe his eyes. He whispered in Nasruddin’s ear, “What are you doing? You have not even heard the other party.”
Nasruddin said, “I am not going to allow myself to be confused. Right now I am perfectly clear. Why should I listen to the other party and be confused?”
I told the vice-chancellor the story of Nasruddin. I said, “Do you agree with Nasruddin?”
He said, “You are just impossible. Do whatever you want to do.” But I could not manage to remain confined in a university when the whole universe was available to me; soon I left. The first thing I did was, I burned all my certificates.
I left Pune forever. Now they are praying for me. When I was there, they were trying to throw me out. Now they know all the joy and the dance and the beautiful people from all over the world no longer come there; they are coming here.
Had you ever heard about Oregon before? It never existed. It has come to life for the first time, and you have brought your joy, your meditation, your contentment.
My sannyasins are contentment, not contented men. My sannyasins don’t care about politics. I have sometimes out of necessity to force them. Look at poor Krishna Deva. I had to persuade him to become mayor of Rajneeshpuram. Somebody has to be mayor. If you find somebody not dancing, looking sad, you have found K.D. Nobody is interested in politics here, nobody is on a power trip.
Contentment is a state of consciousness.
I teach contentment.
And out of contentment comes real progress.
The discontented man has created the world – ugly, disgusting. This is not progress. The repressed, so-called contented men – the monks of all the religions – what progress have they brought to the world? Yes, they have contributed something: homosexuality, lesbianism.
Homosexuality, lesbianism, are very religious matters, because when you confine only men in a monastery, and you confine only women in a nunnery, what are they going to do with their sexuality? – which is natural, simple, not a sin. You are born out of it.
Everything in existence is sex energy. Yes, it can be transformed, it can be raised higher, but you cannot deny it. The contented man created by the religions has denied it. But your denial will not make any difference to your physiology, your chemistry, your hormones. Your body is neither Christian, nor Hindu, nor Mohammedan. That’s why the same medicine works for all; otherwise there would be a Mohammedan cancer, and a Hindu cancer, and they would have different treatments for them. Your body is part of existence, it is existential. And my philosophy is pure existentialism.
Homosexuality and lesbianism were born in monasteries. This is their contribution. AIDS is their contribution to the world – real progress! Who had heard about AIDS before? A great invention! What have they contributed to the world? Neither the discontented man nor the so-called contented man have given progress. Progress is possible only out of contentment.
Just for a moment think that there is no ego in you, that you are simply nobody, and you will feel so clean, so pure. And out of that cleanness, purity, you will start growing, growing to be what your potential is. You may become a painter, you may become a musician, you may become a poet. You may become anything – a scientist, a dancer – but it will come naturally to you. When something grows naturally in you, there is progress. And if the world can be rich with music….
I say to my people, “Don’t listen to Jesus, who says everybody has to carry his cross, no.” I say to you, “Everybody has to carry his guitar.” Why carry a cross when guitars are available?
Just grow to your potentiality – not according to any discipline, because then you will never be yourself; not according to any dogma, because that is distracting you from yourself. Without any dogma, without any religion…can’t you have a little courage just to be yourself? Part of this vast universe, nobody special…. And you are in for a great surprise.
Yes, there have been painters before: Picasso, Van Gogh, and hundreds of others. But have you ever thought that the paintings of Picasso are sick, insane? If you go on looking at a painting by Picasso, continuously for one hour sitting before it, meditating over it, then you will know what I mean. This is not a painting, it is a vomiting! That man was crazy, he vomited.
Of course, if Picasso had been a contentment, a painting would have grown; it would not have been insane and crazy. Looking at it, you would have felt a serenity descending upon you. Watching it, you would have felt peace surrounding you. But this is not possible with Picasso’s paintings – he is a very discontented man.
This is not possible with George Bernard Shaw’s books. You cannot find a bigger ego than George Bernard Shaw. He writes a play of fifty pages and gives it a one hundred fifty page preface. Can you think this man sane – a small play needs such a big introduction? Something is wrong with the man.
When he got the Nobel prize, one day he remained silent, made no comment. He was in the headlines of all the third-class newspapers of the world. The second day, he rejected it; he said, “I don’t want to receive the Nobel prize because it is far below me! Give it to some amateur writer, a beginner. I have passed that stage long ago.” Again he was in the headlines.
It was an insult to the Nobel prize committee, which is presided over by the Norwegian king or queen. From all over the world, all the royalty, all the significant, powerful, important celebrities, thousands of telegrams poured in to Bernard Shaw, saying that this was an insult to Norway, an insult to the king, an insult to the Nobel prize committee.
He waited for two or three days, made a great fuss, and finally agreed to accept it. And all these days he was in the headlines. He accepted the Nobel prize – that was a great relief for all the royalty, and all the presidents, and all the premiers. And the next moment he donated it to a society; again he was news.
For almost two weeks he maintained himself as the most important news in the world, because it was discovered that the society to which he had donated the prize was his own society – he had named it the Fabian Society – and he was the only man in the society. He was the president, and he was the secretary, and he was the membership.
Again he was in the news. And when he was asked why he did it, he said, “When you get a Nobel prize you get headlines for just one day. I managed to have myself in the headlines all over the world for two weeks. Nobody can beat me!” His ego was like a balloon which went on getting bigger and bigger.
These people cannot create real art. Their art is going to be a reflection of their mind.
Progress out of contentment will be totally different. Poetry will arise in you, just like a rosebush grows. It will give flowers to the world, and the fragrance – and without any claim for any reward, because contentment is its own reward. What more can you want than to come to fruition, to flowering? What can give you more blissfulness than just to grow into your real potential?
I do not promise anything to you. I have no theology of hell or heaven – those are all bogus, created by fools for other fools. In my vision the very contentment is the reward, the very silence is the reward, the very meditation is the reward.
And nobody can feel inferior to you. A contented man, if his contentment is of the old pattern, is going to feel either inferior or superior – which are not different, they are two sides of the same coin.
I have heard…. Three Christian monks met on a crossroad. One of them said, “I highly appreciate your monasteries, but our monastery is more scholarly than your monasteries.” Remember the “more.”
The second one said, “That’s perhaps true, but my monastery is more ascetic. I have every respect for your monasteries” – this is all garbage, this respect, it is all phony – “but as far as ascetism is concerned, as austerities are concerned, you come nowhere close to us.”
The third one said, “I also have great respect for your scholarship, for your austerities, but in humbleness we are the tops.”
“In humbleness, we are the tops”! I am not talking about this kind of contented man. A real contentment will make you humble, but not the tops. Humbleness will come naturally to you. A real contentment will give you, without any effort, a respect for all that exists. It is not etiquette, it is not British; you will simply respect. How can you disrespect?
A tree, a bird on the wing, a cloud just floating, a river flowing to the ocean, a child smiling; an old man with all the experience of life; a child with all the freshness of life….
Whom can you disrespect? How can you feel superior to anybody? Can you feel superior to a rose? Can you feel superior to a bird on the wing? How can you feel inferior to anybody? You have all the contentment, all the serenity, all the silence. Where can that dark wound – inferiority – exist in you? You are all light.
This is the man who can bring beauty to the world – songs of silence, out of silence; really authentic poetry. This man will transform the whole nature of science. Progress will not stop, but it will have a different dimension to it.
Now the whole of science is devoted to destruction. Albert Einstein cannot be forgiven; he was the man who wrote to President Roosevelt that the atom bomb can be created, and that it is the only way to defeat the fascist forces in the world. He repented his whole life, but that repentance cannot restore Hiroshima. It cannot give life back to thousands of children, women, men, trees, in Nagasaki, in Hiroshima.
Einstein was an unconscious scientist – it was out of discontent. Basically he was a German, but unfortunately a Jew; he had to escape from Germany. He was doing the same work for Adolf Hitler. If he had remained in Germany, perhaps there would have been no Nagasaki, no Hiroshima. There may have been London, New York, Washington, Moscow, but not Nagasaki and Hiroshima.
Einstein escaped out of the fear that because he was a Jew he might get into trouble. And as a revenge against Adolf Hitler, he wrote the letter to President Roosevelt. He was not aware of what he was doing. He created the atom bomb, and he awoke only when Nagasaki and Hiroshima were finished. But it was too late.
I don’t teach you repentance. Christians teach you repentance – naturally, because they don’t make you alert, aware, meditative, contented. So out of your unconsciousness, out of your discontent, out of your tense mind, out of your anxiety, you are going to do something for which you will repent later. But it is always too late! It may help you to feel less guilty, but that does not change anything in existence; you have committed a crime. And Albert Einstein understood it. Before his death he was asked, “If there is another life after death, would you not like to remain a physicist?”
He said, “No! I would rather be a plumber, but never again a physicist.”
This kind of science will disappear. Out of peace, the whole dimension will change. Progress will not stop, but progress will be for the benefit of humanity, for the benefit of the whole existence. Science is capable, if it is in the hands of contented, meditative people, of feeding the whole earth abundantly, of creating everything that is needed – not just for survival, because survival is not life. Life has to be overflowing, it has to be luxurious. A rosebush just surviving somehow is not going to give you roses.
The earth can become abundant with everything. Science just has to be creative and not destructive. A contentment inside you will not allow you to be destructive.
If all the scientists of the world simply revolt against the politicians, the world will see a tremendous transformation. But there are very few scientists who have guts, because their guts have been destroyed by their educational system.
I am reminded of Sakharov. He was given the Nobel prize because he was the best physicist of his time. But he was a Russian. He was director of the Academy of Sciences in Russia, the highest post for a scientist – position, respect. The Russian government did not want him to receive the Nobel prize because it comes from capitalist countries, and in the Russian mind – particularly in the communist party and the people who are in power there – it is a kind of bribe, in the name of a prize.
They do the same on their own, so they know; they give the Lenin prize in capitalist countries. And by giving the Lenin prize they are bribing the person to reveal secrets. So they don’t want any Russian to receive the Nobel prize, because that way he becomes sympathetic toward capitalist countries.
Sakharov is really an individual. The whole communist programming has not been able to destroy his spirit. He went against the Russian government, knowing perfectly well what had happened before to those who had not listened to the Russian government. Two other scientists had been given Nobel prizes before Sakharov. They did not listen to the government; they accepted the prize. They were not allowed to go out of the country to receive it; on the contrary, they were imprisoned, tortured – and Russia has really progressive ways of torturing.
For fifteen days those two scientists were kept awake. They were given injections so they could not fall asleep. The mind is a very delicate thing; if for two weeks continuously not a single moment of sleep is allowed, the person starts losing his rationality, sensitivity. After fifteen days he has lost all interest in science. After twenty-one days he has lost interest in his family. After thirty days he has lost all interest in himself; the mind is dismantled. And then he is brought before a court. Of course, the court judges him to be mad.
First you make him mad, and then you bring him before a court! This had happened to those two scientists, and because they were mad and dangerous, they were both exiled in Siberia. Nobody knows what happened to them.
Sakharov knew what he was doing: when he accepted the Nobel prize the same would happen to him. And he accepted the Nobel prize, and the same happened to him. He was immediately removed from his power and position. His car was taken away…. A car is a great luxury in Soviet Russia, because only very powerful people can have their own private vehicle. Everybody else has to use the public system – buses, trains.
I am against communism, because if a person is deprived of his private possessions, something of his individuality dies. His private possessions are a kind of safety around him, that keep him alive as an individual.
Sakharov’s salary was cut, his car was removed, he was not allowed to go out of Russia. And then finally he was sent to Siberia. He is still alive. The best physicist of the world is simply rotting in Siberia! – and nobody bothers about it.
Just this incident of Sakharov should have been enough for all the scientists of the world – not only of Soviet Russia – to simply disconnect themselves from their governments. And if the politicians are so interested in fighting, they can have wrestling matches and you can enjoy it. They can have boxing matches, and you can enjoy it. If those fools insist on fighting, perfectly good. The Soviet prime minister wrestles with Ronald Reagan – enjoy it, there is no harm. But these people should not be given power to destroy the whole humanity.
My people cannot in any way create anything that will be harmful. They can create only something which will be a joy to see. They have created this small commune which has become a nightmare to the politicians of America.
We are not doing anything except making this land, which has remained barren for years, green again. We are dancing, singing, meditating, farming, gardening. We are not doing any harm to anybody. Even deer understand it, but the attorney general of Oregon cannot understand it. You can see in the evening, deer moving on the road without any fear. You go on honking your horn and the deer does not care. He knows these people are not destructive.
My own peacocks in my garden make me come here late sometimes. They will not move from the road, they will walk just ahead of me. When I go back, they are all ready just in front of my porch, dancing. I have to stop the car and wait till they decide to give way to me. They know perfectly well nobody is going to harm them.
Deer have come, birds have come. Even the poor juniper has become a rich tree. When I came here these junipers were just dying, somehow managing at a survival level. The juniper is a very strong-willed tree. Where nothing else can exist, the juniper can. But no birds to sing, no people….
You have to understand: this existence is a cosmos, it is a deep harmony. When people moved here, suddenly birds started coming, deer started coming. Even junipers understood the presence of my people. They are far greener, far thicker, far bigger than they were when I came here.
There is a deep connectedness in life. You cannot live without trees, trees cannot live without you. When you inhale, you need oxygen; when you exhale, you exhale carbon dioxide. The tree does just the opposite: when it inhales, it takes in carbon dioxide; when it exhales, it exhales oxygen.
Life is a harmonious whole. Everything is connected with everything else. The smallest leaf of grass is connected to the farthest star, a star you cannot see. Harming a small grass flower, you are harming the whole existence, because nothing is separate.
Contentment brings you insight into this wholeness. And I call only that man holy who understands this wholeness of everything. I call that man holy who can understand that sex and silence are not separate, that sex and meditation are not separate. Nothing is separate. Everything is woven into everything else. All colors are mixing with each other.
I have an idea – I’m just waiting for the right time. I would like my sannyasins to wear rainbow clothes. But I have to wait a little and keep you in red clothes for two reasons: one, to shock the fools outside; and two, so that I can recognize you easily. But before I leave this world, you will be in rainbow clothes.

Osho,
In the last few days, as I listen to you, it seems you are trying to be a martyr. Are you?
I am not even a Christian – why should I like to be a martyr? The word looks beautiful, but the reality is that those who would like to be martyrs are suicidal.
Jesus was suicidal; he was trying in every way to be crucified. He was not even courageous enough just to shoot himself. Why unnecessarily make other people responsible for your crucifixion? If Jesus had shot himself, the Jews would have lived in peace without any trouble. But he forced the Jews to do it.
It is to Sigmund Freud’s credit that he discovered a suicidal instinct in man. It was always accepted that man has a deep lust for life; he wants to live and live, and live forever. But in existence nothing exists without its opposite. That was the discovery of Sigmund Freud, and it is absolutely right – with the life instinct there is a death instinct. There is not a single man on the earth who has not at least once thought of committing suicide. From where does that idea come?
But a man who is contented has all the bliss that is possible. Both the instincts simply disappear. He has no desire to go on living; he has no desire to destroy himself by his own hands or by other people’s. For him this moment is all. Whatever happens in the next moment is welcome.
I have no desire to be a martyr, but if somebody kills me, what can I do? It will be absolutely their responsibility. As far as Jesus is concerned, Jews are not absolutely responsible. Ninety percent of the responsibility is Jesus’ himself. If Mansoor is killed by the Mohammedans, even more – ninety-nine percent of the responsibility is al-Hillaj Mansoor’s.
If Gandhi is shot, one hundred percent of the responsibility is his, because before his death he is reported to have said many times, “Now I don’t want to live. It will be a mercy if God takes me away from this body, because I have become absolutely useless.”
Strange…. To think in terms of use is ugly. Neither do you have to use anybody – because to use somebody is to exploit them – nor do you have to allow anybody to use you. That is your birthright.
Gandhi wanted to die, and he was praying for death. That makes one thing very clear. When Nathuram Godse shot him…. It is good that Nathuram has “Ram” in his name: Ram was Gandhi’s God.
Nathu is meaningless. In India, if a couple finds that their children die and don’t survive, then something has to be done. So when a new child is born, either his nose is pierced – a hole is made so a ring of gold can be put through – or his ears are pierced and rings of gold are put in. Nathu means nose, so if the nose is pierced, Ram becomes Nathuram. If the ears are pierced, Ram becomes Kunchiberam – kun means ears.
In fact he was just a “Ram” with a pierced nose – Gandhi’s God. And when Gandhi was shot, he put his hands together, looking at Nathuram Godse, and the words he uttered were, “Hey, Ram.” He was waiting for it; that’s why I say one hundred percent. And he was rejoiced – he wanted to die, because his ideology was no longer listened to. Nobody was ready to follow his suggestions.
The country had become free. Gandhi was needed when the country was under slavery, under British rule, because he controlled the masses. The superstitious Indians cannot be controlled by logic, by reason. They can only be controlled by their emotions, sentimentality, superstitions, religiousness, and all kinds of rubbish. Gandhi was an expert in rubbish.
I have no desire to live the next moment, or to die the next moment. I have known and experienced everything that is possible. If existence allows me one moment more, I will create a little more disturbance in people. If existence feels that I am no more needed, it is perfectly good to go into eternal sleep. To me, death is not going to be a death, because I am not going to be reborn.
You are reborn if you have committed mistakes, and if you feel guilty. Albert Einstein must have been reborn, and of course, as a plumber, because the last desire becomes the seed for your future life. I have no desire. My death will not be a death.
In India we make a difference. When an ordinary man dies, it is death. When someone who has attained enlightenment dies, it is samadhi, it is not death. And the word samadhi is immensely significant. Samadhi means: one who has attained the ultimate harmony with existence.

============================================================

Osho,
I can't conceive of you ever being unenlightened. Did you really become enlightened only thirty-two years ago?
Neither can I conceive it. This is one of the very fundamental things in the nature of enlightenment. Once you are enlightened, you are in a very strange situation – trying to conceive how you could manage to remain unenlightened for so many lives. It is a tremendous work, it needs great effort. Misery, jealousy, competitiveness – all that is ugly is needed to remain unenlightened.
Enlightenment itself is simple, it is natural. Unenlightenment is your creation.
Enlightenment is a gift from existence. So it is up to you how long you want to remain unenlightened. Any moment you can drop unenlightenment. Never ask how to become enlightened, because nobody can become enlightened. Everybody is born enlightened. Just ask, “How can we drop all those props that are keeping us unenlightened?”
There is a beautiful story in Gautam Buddha’s life. Again and again he has told it….
In one of his past lives he met an enlightened being. Out of respect he touched his feet. But he was surprised – in return the enlightened man touched his feet. Buddha could not believe his eyes. He said, “What are you doing? I am an unenlightened man, ignorant. I have not experienced truth. I have not yet been able to love, to be compassionate. My laughter is still phony, my heart is full of discontent. Why have you touched my feet?”
And the enlightened being laughed. He said, “Don’t be worried. As far as I am concerned, you are as enlightened as I am.”
From your side, that is your problem – I don’t see any of you here as unenlightened, it is impossible. Enlightenment is your very center, your very being. But you have been conditioned, programmed to remain unenlightened. All your religions are responsible for it. They don’t want you to become enlightened, because an enlightened man cannot be a Christian, a Hindu, a Mohammedan. From his state of consciousness, all these theologies, religions, are sheer nonsense – fictions created by ignorant people for other ignorant people.
Never ask how to be enlightened. You can ask how to remain unenlightened, that is relevant. If you want to be enlightened, you are this very moment. Nobody is preventing you except yourself.
And you are making so much hard, arduous effort to become enlightened. That is one of the ways to remain unenlightened. The very effort keeps you troubled; and each effort is going to fail, because what you are already you cannot become.
Just see the difference between these two simple words: being and becoming. Enlightenment is being – you cannot become it. Becoming is a process somewhere in the future after long journeys, doing all kinds of stupid things – yoga postures, Christian prayers, fasts, remaining celibate, entering into a monastery forever, you will not come out of it….
There are monasteries where you enter but unless you are thrown out you cannot get out; only your dead body comes out some day. I have heard about such a monastery. It was famous for two things: one, for one thousand years no woman had entered into the monastery – it was prohibited. Even a six-month-old baby girl was not allowed.
When I heard about it I thought, were monks living in the monastery, or monsters? A six-month-old baby is not allowed in! You can conceive the mind of those people who are living inside.
And second, it was famous in that silence was the rule. Only after seven years – once, after seven years – if you wanted to say something to the abbot, you could say it, and then for seven years again silence.
One man became a monk. For seven years he suffered, because the mattress was missing, he was sleeping on a bare floor. It was hard, it was cold, but he had to wait for seven years to say, “I need a mattress.”
Seven years, by and by, passed – they must have looked to that man almost like seven centuries. And he was so happy when he went to the abbot and said, “Master, I have a complaint to make. In the room you have allotted me, there is no mattress. And for seven years I have been prohibited from speaking.”
The abbot said, “Okay, a mattress will be provided immediately. You go back.”
A mattress was provided. But the cell in which the monk was living was very small, and the door was very small, and the mattress was big. So while they were bringing the mattress in, the door fell out and the window’s glass was broken. Somehow they forced that big mattress into the small room. For seven years the poor man again suffered – from rain, wind, snow, because there was no door and the window was broken. In fact, he started thinking that the first seven years were far more beautiful: “I was an idiot to make that complaint!”
Again after seven years he went to the abbot. And the abbot said, “Again?”
The man said, “I have to say something, I am compelled to say it: the mattress that was provided was bigger than my cell, and the people, the other monks who brought it, somehow forced it in. I could not say no – I could not speak. They broke the door, they broke the window, and you can conceive – for seven years I have been living in wind, in rain, in snow. I was not thinking that I would be able to survive, but somehow by God’s grace I am here again. Please put the door back and mend the window.”
This was too much. The abbot became angry, and he said, “In all these fourteen years you have done nothing but complain, complain, complain! This is not a way to be religious. You simply get lost!”
Enlightenment is not something to be achieved. It is not an achievement, it is not a goal far away that you have to journey to. It is not a pilgrimage at all. The more you seek and search for enlightenment, the more you will miss it, and the more miserable you will be.
Enlightenment is a very simple understanding. So once you stop all efforts to be enlightened and just remain at ease with yourself, totally accepting yourself as you are…. That’s how existence meant you to be. Don’t try to improve upon existence, you cannot do that. Relax, be existential, not religious. And suddenly you are amazed, “My God! I have always been enlightened.”
Your question is right. After enlightenment everybody is amazed – and knows that he has always been enlightened.
Thirty-two years ago I awoke from the nightmare of making a continuous effort to attain enlightenment. I simply dropped all efforts to be enlightened. I simply accepted myself as I am – good or bad. I simply stopped judging myself. And a miracle happened: with judgment disappearing, with ambition to become enlightened disappearing, it was as if I came out of a nightmare fully awake. And when I saw myself as enlightened, I saw the whole existence as enlightened.
You are part of a tremendous blissfulness, but you are keeping yourself closed. You go on doing something against nature, against existence. You have been taught that to be natural is something wrong; you feel guilty when you are natural. You feel happy when you repress your nature, when you become phony, a hypocrite. All religions have been doing only one thing for thousands of years: making people hypocrites.
I want you to drop all that crap, and just be yourself – with no effort to go anywhere, because you are already there, this very moment.
I know about a man who is present among you, his name begins with “T.” Forgive me, I cannot tell you his full name. I know his tent number, but I cannot tell you the tent number. He has come here to assassinate me.
I cannot tell you his name and his tent number, because I don’t want to interfere in anybody’s life. If he wants to assassinate me, and can have a moment of joy – I have had enough, so let him have the joy.
xxxBut I would like him to wait at least for the 6th of July, because I have a date with death. Whenever I die, I will die on the 6th of July. The year does not matter, but the 6th of July matters. I want it permanently to be the Master’s day. So, Mr. T., only this much favor you have to do for me.
He is trying to find ways, proper situations, spaces, places, from where he can assassinate me, and he is in much trouble. I am perfectly willing – after enlightenment what is there? All is fulfilled. I will be of every help to him. He could have approached me and asked, “How to assassinate you?” and I could have given him exactly the right information. I could have left my bedroom door open in the night…because I don’t want that man to suffer. After assassinating me, my sannyasins will not leave him to himself. He will be killed immediately, and I am against violence. But that is the trouble he is facing: everywhere there are thousands of sannyasins – he will be caught.
I cannot even do what Jesus did on the cross. He prayed to God. There is no God, so I cannot pray. And he said to God, “Please forgive these people because they know not what they are doing.”
That too, I cannot say, because Mr. T. knows exactly what he is doing or planning to do. He just does not know how to do it. He seems to be an amateur. I feel sorry for him; perhaps he will not be able to do what he has come here for. I cannot interfere with him, I cannot interfere with my sannyasins. And my sannyasins also have guns. I don’t interfere with anybody.
I have always been enlightened, but just thirty-two years ago I recognized it, just thirty-two years ago I became aware of it. And the same is going to happen to you too. Whenever you become awakened, you are in for a great surprise.

Osho,
Women have a better feeling for others than men do. How come there have been no great masters among them so far?
It is a very delicate question, and a little difficult too – about women everything is difficult – but I will try my best.
First, you never ask why no man in the whole history of existence has been pregnant, why he has not given birth to a child. You simply know that biologically he has no womb. He can make many women pregnant. This has to be understood; that’s why there have been religions which allow four wives to a man, but no religion allows four husbands to a women, for the simple reason that a man can make many women pregnant. But once a woman is pregnant, then you can bring Muhammad Ali the Great – even he cannot do anything; for nine months the woman is booked.
I know women have a much more feeling heart, are more loving, are more open, are more receptive. But these are the qualities of a disciple, not of a master. The disciple has to be open, receptive, vulnerable, loving, feeling. The only thing the disciple has to drop is his mind, not his heart. His mind is a constant disturbance. It goes on creating skepticism, and a disciple cannot be a skeptic.
The woman can be a prefect disciple, but cannot be a perfect master. Now, I am not responsible for it, I am simply saying what the fact is. And you can see it with your own eyes. I have more women disciples around the world than men, and I can trust women more than men. I have given every responsible job in all the communes around the world to women, not to men.
You must be surprised, because man has better reasoning, is more rational, is more authoritative, is more interested in being higher and higher in a hierarchy. The woman is not interested in hierarchy. Her interest in life is not through reasoning, but through feeling. Logic is not her world – love is her world.
To be a master is a very strange job. You have to convince people about the heart by argument and reason, rationality, philosophy; you have to use the mind as a servant for the heart. The master’s work is to take your mind away from you, so that your whole energy moves into your heart.
It is from the heart that we are connected with existence, it is not from the mind. Nobody can go directly from mind to existence.
Mind can create science, but it cannot create poetry, it cannot create paintings, it cannot create sculpture. And it is impossible for the mind to go into the dimension of religion. If the mind tries to go into the dimension of religion it creates theology, not religion.
The word theology has to be understood: theo means God, logy is logic – logic about God. Mind is capable of creating logic about God, arguments about God. God is not there, but through your argumentation, your reasoning, you can create a hypothetical God. All gods of all religions are hypotheses, and hypotheses which are absolutely unnecessary – not only unnecessary but dangerous, because if you get caught up in those hypothetical gods you are not going to ever find the authentic truth.
Heart knows no argument; it feels. And existence has to be felt. Even when a man feels existence, he feels through the heart. But the heart cannot convince anybody.
The man has a tremendous capacity for logic and reason. Once he has found reality, enlightenment, through his heart, he can use the mind to spread the fragrance that he has found. The woman cannot do it. That’s why there have been not only no great masters, there have been no masters who were women. Even the famous religious women saints were disciples.
Saint Teresa – I don’t mean Mother Teresa – Saint Meera, Saint Lalla…these three women were absolutely capable of becoming great masters, but the could not. They became enlightened, but they remained devotees.
And there is nothing great in being a master; it is just a technical thing. The real thing is to realize your potential and your flowering.
Your question is like: “Why in history has a woman never been a husband?” What can I do? A woman has to be a wife, and there is no suggestion that the husband is higher than the wife. In fact, just the opposite is the case.
I have never come across any husband who is not henpecked. If you don’t want to become henpecked, then be a freelance lover, then never get married. Marriage simply means you have surrendered your freedom, your individuality – everything. Yes, when you go out of the house you go like a lion, roaring. But when you come back to the house you come like a rat, trembling. It is a strange thing.
This is a factual story I am going to tell you. Akbar, a great Mogul emperor in India – perhaps the greatest Mogul who has ruled India – was very curious about everything. One day he asked his council of wise people – he had collected nine of the most famous wise men around himself in his court – he asked them, “Can you find a husband who is not henpecked?”
Only one remained silent. He was the most wise; his name was Birbal. The other eight said, “Yes, we can find many husbands, what to say about one?”
Akbar looked at Birbal and he said, “You have not raised your hand.”
He said, “I cannot, because even you are a henpecked husband. You are a great emperor of a vast subcontinent, and I know the moment you enter your harem, you are nobody; the woman rules over you. These eight people don’t know the reality. First they should think about themselves. I would like to ask these eight people, ‘Are you henpecked or not?’ As far as I am concerned, I am. When I cannot remain free, I don’t believe these people are free. They have not pondered over it. But give them a chance – if they can find one, it will be a revelation.”
Those eight wise men went to New Delhi, the capital of India, to look for a man who was not henpecked. Akbar gave them two horses, beautiful horses from Kabul, one pure white and one pure black. And he said, “Whoever you find that is not henpecked, you can give one of these two beautiful horses as a reward from me.”
They were really precious. In those days horses were something of a treasure; to have a beautiful, strong horse was a great joy. Now there are no more horses; there are cars which have horsepower.
Those eight wise men went around the capital, and they were getting frustrated again and again, because they could not find one. The condition was: “If you say you are not henpecked, and it is proved not right, you will be hanged. If it is proved right, one of these two horses will be your reward.” There was nobody courageous enough to take the risk.
Only one man they found, who was a very strong man – seven feet tall, a great wrestler, a champion wrestler. He was sitting outside his house in the garden. His body was something to see; so solid that if he hit a man just with his fist, he could kill him. He looked like a man made of steel.
They thought, “Perhaps this man is the man we are searching for.” They asked him, “Are you henpecked?”
He said, “If you repeat it again, I will kill all of you. Me henpecked? Are you mad?”
They looked inside the house. A very small woman, very thin, was cooking food. The eight men said to the strong man, “Just to find out the facts – which horse would you like as a reward, the black or the white?”
And the man turned back and asked his wife, “Muna’s mother” – that is the way in India it is done. You cannot take the name of the husband or the wife. The wife says, “Muna’s father,” the husband says, “Muna’s mother.” Muna is just like Tom, Dick, Harry. He asked, “Muna’s mother, should I take the white horse or the black?”
Muna’s mother said, “If you take the black horse, I will give you hell! Take the white one.”
And he told the wise people, “I would like to take the white one.”
They said, “You come with us – you don’t get either. You will be hanged!”
In the house, within the boundaries of the house, the woman has tremendous power. But she is not interested in the outside world. Women’s natures are different. A woman can become a great disciple, but for a woman to become a master is almost impossible. But there is no question of somebody being higher.
The master is not higher than the disciple. The master is simply trying to awaken you. The moment you are awakened there is no master and no disciple. It is just out of gratitude that the disciple remains a disciple – just out of gratitude. But there is no difference; they have known the same reality. They have become what nature wanted them to become, they have blossomed.
So don’t feel depressed that women have not been great masters – they have been great disciples.
Man finds it difficult to become a disciple. In fact, man should worry about it, because to become a disciple is the real thing – and the beginning. And to come to the perfection of being a disciple is the end.
A man passes through a very difficult phase. He cannot become a disciple, or can become one only in a wishy-washy way, always ready to quit. And without becoming a disciple, there is no question of becoming a master. Yes, once in a while it happens that a man becomes a master without becoming a disciple. But for that immense patience, a certain stubbornness, is needed.
I don’t have any master. In my previous lives I never had any master. I have lived with many masters, I have known many masters, but I could not manage to become a disciple. That is why I am so late; otherwise, Jesus would not have preceded me. But it was simply difficult for me to be a disciple. I remained searching, and searching on my own. Yes, it took many many lives to arrive where I have always been.
I have never been initiated by anyone. I am not a sannyasin. I am really outside of any crowd, and that’s the way I have always been. It was a long, arduous journey to find that there is nothing to find.
Women are far more fortunate, because the beginning is in their hand, and the beginning is almost half the achievement. That I can see myself.
This was the basic reason why women could not become great masters. But there is no need to feel sad. They became great disciples – which is far more fortunate, because to begin from the beginning is easier than to begin from the end.

Osho,
We have been studying this community for a few years. What do you think are the most important things to observe and understand? How can outsiders have a better understanding of what it is like to be a sannyasin? How can we show what is special about sannyasins?
It is not one question, there are many questions in it. First, this is not a community, it is a commune – and there is a vast difference between the two.
Christianity is a community, Hinduism is a community. A community is a closed phenomenon. This is a commune, it is an open reality. Anybody can enter – anybody. I have not made any qualifications to be fulfilled before you become a sannyasin. And any moment you want to leave, it is absolutely acceptable; you are not condemned. You are received with love, and if you want to leave, you are given a goodbye with love. It is a very important thing to understand.
In existence nothing is closed, everything is open. In existence there is no noun to be found, everything is a verb. It is our language which has made great trouble.
You call a tree a tree, a river a river, but you are not aware that the tree is constantly growing; it is not dead, it is alive. In a better language it would be “treeing,” because it is growing. For a river a better word would be “rivering,” because it is flowing. Everything is a verb, always moving, growing, expanding, changing.
A community is a dead thing. A commune is alive, growing, expanding, open – people coming in, going out.
I am not offended when somebody leaves the commune; it is not my business. I never try to convert anybody to become a sannyasin. It was his desire to be a sannyasin, it is his desire to leave it. You cannot blame me. I remain completely a witness, like a mirror; things go on passing. When they are in front of the mirror, the mirror reflects them. When they go out, the mirror remains silent. It is not angry, it is not feeling that something has to be condemned.
But the people who have left the commune – they are not many – they only think they have left the commune, because I have not left them. Wherever they are, they are talking against me – here they were talking for me. In fact, here they may have forgotten me, may have taken me for granted; once they leave the commune, I am with them twenty-four hours a day. Whether you talk in favor of me or against me, you belong to me. Once a sannyasin you are always a sannyasin. You can drop the clothes, you can throw the mala, but you don’t know; it is impossible to be anything else again, you will remain a sannyasin.
In fact, that is the trouble for those few people who have left – mostly they are men; if a woman has left, she has left because of the man she loved. These people who have left the commune cannot mix with the outside world. If you have left me, forget all about me! They cannot forget me. Don’t forgive me, but please forget me! They cannot mix with the outside world, because I have deprogrammed them. When they are in church listening to an idiotic sermon, they will remember me, and they will be in favor of me inside their hearts.
So what do these people do? They start creating a small group. In America, in Santa Fe, there are a dozen sannyasins who have left. Now, why are they all in Santa Fe? That is my commune! They are just stupid people – why waste time on a man with whom you are no longer, from your side, in communion? Why waste your time? Those twelve people there in Santa Fe are continuously talking about me, against me.
Do you understand the psychological phenomenon? They cannot get rid of me. If they are not in favor of me, then they are against me, but they cannot get rid of me.
And why have they gathered together? Because in the outside world, who is going to listen to them talking against me – people who don’t know me? And they have gathered also because they cannot mix with the outside world. They cannot be again Christians and Hindus and Mohammedans and Buddhists. They were Rajneeshees, now they are anti-Rajneeshees. It makes no difference at all: they are my people. And in existence everything has its opposite as a complementary. These people are complementary Rajneeshees.
A commune is a flowing phenomenon, a rivering, a treeing, a flowering. It is not a noun. So please don’t call my commune a community, it is not a community. A community is closed. A community depends on belief. A commune depends on communion. Here people are meeting heart to heart.
You have asked, “How to explain sannyas, sannyasins, this commune, to the outsiders?”
It is not possible. They will think you are crazy. The only way is to somehow trick them into coming here. It is something to be experienced, not explained. It is not a theory, it is something existent.
Just think of a country where no flowers grow. Can you explain to those people what a flower is? They will laugh, they will say, “You must have hallucinated, you must have gone crazy. Trees never give flowers.” They will not understand the word flower. You will have to take them to where flowers exist. They can see with their own eyes, and they can smell with their own nostrils.
I lived in India in a place, Jabalpur, for at least twenty years. Just thirteen miles outside Jabalpur is one of the most beautiful spots – perhaps the most beautiful in the whole world, something that seems to be not of this world. A great river, Narmada, flows between two mountains there. The mountains are not ordinary mountains, they are marble mountains. Just think of a white, marble mountain…for two miles on both sides, two marble mountains. The river flows just in between, and in the full moon night the mountains are reflected.
I tried my best to explain to one of my teachers in the university who loved me very much – Dr. S.K. Satena. He had been a professor in America, in Hawaii, around the world; he was one of the foremost authorities on Indian philosophy. I tried hard to explain to him, but he said, “I have seen the whole world – you cannot convince me. You have not seen the whole world, you cannot convince me that there is a spot which is the most beautiful in the whole world. I know the whole world, you have not traveled anywhere.”
I said, “It is not a question of comparison. The moment you see the place…. You cannot conceive that anything can be more beautiful.”
I tortured him continuously. Finally he agreed, “Okay, I am coming with you.”
On a full moon night I took him there. For thirteen miles he was continually saying, “I don’t see anything here.” I remained silent. He said, “You are very articulate, very vocal. This is the first time I am seeing you silent, and I am continually saying that I don’t see anything.” But I remained silent. He said, “What has happened?”
I said, “You just wait” – because those thirteen miles are ordinary. Beautiful road, surrounded with beautiful trees, but nothing special. I took him in a boat. For almost half a mile the mountains are not marble. He asked, “Is this the place?”
I said, “Just wait. When the place comes I will not need to tell you, ‘This is it.’” After half a mile, suddenly you enter into those marble rocks and the river, the deep river. I remained silent.
He said, “I am sorry. This is it.” He had tears in his eyes, because he had not listened to me for two years. He said to me, “I might have died without seeing this place.”
As we went deeper the place became just something other-worldly, almost a dreamland. He said to me – he is a very logical man – he said, “Take the boat close to the rocks. I want to touch them and see whether they are there, or I am hallucinating, or you have given me some drug.”
I had to take the boat close to the mountains. He touched them, he kissed them, and he said, “You need not go around the world to find the most beautiful place. This is it.”
This is my answer to you. Don’t try to explain to anybody. This is an experience – or, in my language, an experiencing; the word experience again is dead. It is a continuous experiencing. Come again after one month and you will see the commune’s new colors, new faces, new dances, new songs. I am not a consistent man, neither are my people. I am consistent only as far as inconsistency is concerned. Whenever you come you will find an alive, breathing commune – new flowers, new dances, new songs.
You have to bring those people. If you tell them that this is a religion, they will think it must be like Christianity. And you know the inside of a church – gloomy, reminds you of death, a cross in front of you…. If you talk to a Christian, his experience of a church will come and disturb your explanation. What can you say? He will not believe that this is possible – a godless, a religionless religion? A religion that has no holy book? – because I call all holy books, holy shit!
There are far better books than your holy books. Don’t waste your time with reading the Bible, the Gita, the Koran. It is better to give the time to Dostoyevsky, Tolstoy, Chekhov, Gorky; you will be immensely enriched by these people. Don’t be bothered with the Old Testament when I am giving you the Last Testament – unless you are an antique collector, that is a different matter.
Truth is always fresh. It remains fresh only when it finds a master to speak it. You can write notes. Remember, those notes will not have the same quality, the same fragrance, the same truth – although the words will be the same as I am speaking.
Do you know that no master ever wrote a book in the whole history of humanity? Can it be just a coincidence? No, it is not a coincidence. No master ever wrote a single book, for the simple reason that the moment the word is written it is dead, it is a corpse. The word has to be alive. It has to come from the heart, it has to beat. Only then can it reach to your heart.
Only heart can commune with heart.
Bring those people here. There is no other way of explaining what is happening; otherwise, you will become a laughingstock. This is a very dangerous game. Truth cannot be explained, it cannot be described. But truth can be tasted.
I remember, a missionary had gone to the cannibals in Africa. He was the first Christian missionary who had dared to go to the cannibals to convert them to Christianity.
Cannibals are the most difficult people to convert. They have not even dropped eating man, they have eaten their own people. In the beginning – the beginning of this century – there were thousands of cannibals in Africa. There are only three hundred left, because if you cannot get your food from outside, you eat your children, you eat your old men – what else to do? Their number goes on decreasing; they will disappear. Perhaps the last cannibal will have to eat himself.
But the missionary was a fanatic. And just the way Jesus believed that God would save him from the cross, a miracle would happen…. And nothing happened. It was such a disappointment to thousands of people who had come to see the miracle. It was a greater disappointment to Jesus himself.
He looked again and again upward – as if God is sitting on the roof of Rajneesh Mandir. He called, prayed – no answer, no miracle. Not even an angel playing on the harp, coming down on a cloud – nothing stirred. Slowly people started going away, thinking that it was just a waste of time, the whole day wasted in the heat.
This Christian bishop was also just as fanatical as Jesus Christ. He said, “The Lord is with me. What can the cannibals do to me?” But the cannibals did what they wanted to do. It is strange, this God of your is very strange. He was not with the priest, he was with the cannibals; he was not with Jesus Christ, he was with Barabbas.
When Pontius Pilate asked…. It was a ritual that if the people demanded it, then one person could be freed from being crucified. Three persons were being crucified that day. One was Jesus Christ, who was utterly innocent, simple – more exactly, a simpleton. Pontius Pilate was thinking that people would ask for Jesus, because the other two were confirmed criminals; Barabbas had committed many murders. And the people asked for Barabbas to be released!
God’s miracle was happening to Barabbas, not to Jesus – and not just one time. Because Barabbas was accustomed to murder, he did not care about crucifixion or anything, so even though he was forgiven…. In fact, Barabbas was resurrected, not Jesus Christ. From the cross he was brought down; he was reborn, not Jesus Christ. God! Perhaps this was the miracle!
Within three months Barabbas was caught again, because he had murdered, in three months, three people. But the law was, once a man is given freedom from the death sentence by the Roman emperor, then he can never be crucified again. So now they could not crucify him for his murders; they had to find a substitute. They sent him to Sicily to work in a coal mine for his whole life. And you will be surprised: the coal mine collapsed, all other prisoners – there were thousands – died, and Barabbas was saved!
And you think Jesus is saved? And these fanatic Christians are trying to save others.
A miracle did happen: thousands of people died and Barabbas was the only one who was saved. Even the emperor of Rome was impressed; twice the man had been saved. Barabbas was called to Rome for their annual festival, where they brought their criminals to fight with lions. And you will not believe me: Barabbas was again saved. He killed the lion!
Even the emperor called him close and touched him; he seemed to be the very representative of God. He gave him not only freedom but first-class citizenship – because slaves are second-class people, and Barabbas was a slave, sentenced for his whole life. The emperor freed him. This God seems to be crazy. This whole idea is nothing but imagination, projection.
The fanatical missionary was caught immediately by the cannibals. He said to them, “Have you ever tasted Christianity?”
They said, “Wait. Just within an hour…. Look at that pot.” There was a pot, a big pot boiling.
The missionary could not understand. He said, “What do you mean?”
They said, “We will put you in that boiling pot and make a soup of you, and then we will taste Christianity for the first time. Everybody is so eager to taste Christianity.”
I think those barbarians were right: religion is something to be tasted, not explained. Bring those people here. We are not barbarians, we are vegetarians.
Only in this milieu can you help your friends to understand what sannyas is all about, and what this commune is.
You are asking me if there is something special about a sannyasin that you can tell to your people. Yes, there is. A sannyasin is extraordinarily ordinary. He has no claims to any superiority. Not only in regard to human beings, he is in tune with trees and birds and rivers and clouds, and he claims no superiority even to animals and trees and rocks. We are all part of one cosmos. But please don’t try logically, rationally to explain this to them. This is not a theology that I am giving to you.
This is a taste, this is an experiencing.
This is love, not logic.
But why are you concerned to explain to those outsiders? As far as I can tell, you are still not a sannyasin, because a sannyasin would not ask such a question. If you really want to help people to understand the tremendous phenomenon that is happening here, the first step should be: become a sannyasin. Of course, you will be thought mad. So what? In a mad world, to be thought mad means you are the only sane person.
Become sane. That is the meaning of becoming a sannyasin.

Osho,
Should we take your advice not to take anyone's advice?
Advice is the only thing in the world which everybody gives and nobody takes.
You can ask me a question, but you cannot ask for advice; I am not that foolish. I will never give you any advice, because who am I to give you advice? You are unique, every individual is unique. My advice will be my experience. That may distract you from your own life, that may take you away from your own being. I have never advised anyone.
Yes, you can ask a question. The answer that I give only has to be understood, it has not to be accepted on my authority. You have to be just a listener to it, without any prejudice. My answer, listened to without any prejudice, will become a totally different thing in you; it will be molded by your being. Then it is no longer mine; it is yours.
That’s the function of a master – not to create followers, but to create masters.
I am not saying anything to be believed. I am saying, just give me a little understanding, try to understand what I am saying to you. Listen – and it will take a different shape, a different form, a different aura within you. It will not be the same that was said, because words are empty.
When the words are in my heart they are full. The moment they leave my lips, the content is left behind; only the container reaches you. But if you allow the container to enter you, it will reach your heart – because it is coming from the heart – and your heart will fill it with its own content. Then it is yours, it has nothing to do with me.
You cannot blame me; whatever happens to you, it is your responsibility. I just like talking – I don’t take any responsibility. Why should I take anybody’s responsibility? I like talking, you like listening – good! So far, so good.
But understand the whole alchemy of listening: listening rightly, you will have your own understanding flowering. You will not be dependent on me, you will not be my follower. You will be yourself.
You are asking for advice. I don’t give any advice. And I say to you, don’t ask anyone for advice either. You ask advice only because you are not courageous enough to experience on your own. The moment you ask for advice, you become a slave. And if you follow it, you have committed suicide.
I don’t want you to commit suicide. I want you to grow higher and higher into life, into love, into light.

============================================================

Osho,
Why haven't other enlightened masters told the truth about God, Jesus, heaven and hell?
The phenomenon of enlightenment is very rare. It should not be so, because everyone is born enlightened and then enters into a dark tunnel of religions, cultures, civilizations, education. Enlightened you are born, unenlightened you die. That’s why I say it should not be so rare.
It should be just the contrary; most of the people should be enlightened, to find unenlightened people should be difficult. But that’s not what has been happening down the ages.
The society is not interested in enlightened people. They are dangerous, contagious. They cannot be enslaved – and all societies want people to be enslaved, exploited, oppressed.
The enlightened person is rebellious, against all that man has been doing to other human beings. That’s why all the societies from the very beginning start closing the doors and the windows from where any light can enter the child. They will start making him a Christian. Now, no Christian can be enlightened. He will have to drop his Christianity before he becomes enlightened. The same is true about Hinduism, Mohammedanism, Buddhism, communism, fascism.
The enlightened person has no “ism.” He need not be concerned with any ideology. He has his own eyes open, he can see; he need not think. Only a blind man thinks about where the door is to get out, where the road is to move on. Only a blind man waits for someone to help him to cross the road. Only a blind man needs a guide, a master; if you have eyes, you cross the road yourself, you find the door yourself. In fact, there is no question of finding: you don’t even think about it, you see it.
Please understand the difference between seeing and thinking. Thinking is a very poor substitute for seeing. If you have not seen a lotus flower, howsoever you think about it, you will not be able to figure out what a lotus flower is. The moment you see it, thinking stops. There is nothing to think about; the thing itself is in front of you. And a lotus flower is so beautiful that it is bound to stop your thinking process at least for a second. Only in that second will you experience the beauty, the grandeur, the godliness of the flower.
The world is divided into civilizations, societies, cultures. They all do the same thing to the visitors coming into the world, the new people – the children. Mankind has committed the greatest crime against its own children. The children are dependent on you, they think you know all – and you know perfectly well that you know nothing.
The children are very curious about each and every thing. They are continuously asking, their enquiry is constant. You try to shut them up – not because their questions are irrelevant, but because you don’t have answers. And you know perfectly well that by the time they reach your age, they will understand the situation – and they will do the same with their own children. This goes on and on, generation to generation; hence very rarely have there been enlightened people.
Of the people who are known as enlightened, at least eighty percent are just bogus. How can they criticize God, Jesus, heaven and hell? In fact, they are accepted as enlightened because they accept Jesus as the son of God. They are accepted as enlightened because they go on telling people they have seen God, met God, talked with him; he has sent messages through them to you. How can they criticize God? That is their foundation. How can they criticize heaven and hell? Their whole enlightenment, saintliness, wisdom, depends on these fictions. Destroying them, they will destroy themselves.
Hence, eighty percent of your so-called enlightened people are more unenlightened than you are. But it is a strange world. The blind go on leading other blind. Of course, finally they all fall in a ditch someway or other. But the other blind far away in the line don’t know that the leader and the close followers have fallen in a ditch and disappeared.
I cannot accept anything that is not my own experience. I have enquired without any investment. I do not want to be worshipped; hence, I am not dependent on you. I do not want to become a God to you; hence I am absolutely free to say what is the truth.
Eighty percent of enlightened people have been either Christians or Hindus or Mohammedans or Buddhists. To me this is something of a fundamental contradiction. A man is enlightened and is still a Mohammedan? Then what is the difference between blind people and enlightened people? At least he should renounce Mohammedanism, Hinduism, Christianity. He should simply say, “I am myself. I am not a sheep, and I don’t need any shepherd. I am a man of my own consciousness, and I have a light of my own. I don’t need the Bible to guide me, or the Vedas to be my vision. I have my own vision.”
An enlightened person cannot belong to any religion. He belongs to existence. So you can cut off eighty percent of your enlightened people without any difficulty.
Ten percent of enlightened people remain silent. You never come to know about them, for the simple reason that you cannot understand silence. And to be enlightened is one thing; to give it an expression is totally different. And unless the enlightened person starts expressing his vision, his experience, his realization, how are you going to know about him?
Why do ten percent choose to remain silent? It is because to be articulate is a different quality, it does not come in the same parcel as enlightenment. You don’t expect an enlightened man to be a painter necessarily. You don’t expect him to be a poet necessarily. Why should you expect that he will be able to be articulate with words? And it is a very difficult job. Perhaps the hardest job in the world is to tell you about something you know nothing about.
Even Gautam Buddha remained silent for seven days after his enlightenment, thinking, “What is the point? First, I cannot say what I have seen; there are no words for it. Words are impotent and the experience is so immense, so vast….
“Words are so small, they are for day-to-day use. They are not made by enlightened people, they are made by blind people living in darkness. Those words have connotations of ignorance. Now, to express light through those words is almost impossible.”
“Secondly,” Buddha thought, “even if I speak, manage somehow to deliver the message, who is going to listen?”
People are interested in money, in power, in politics, in becoming bigger and bigger, higher and higher compared to others. Who is really interested in enlightenment? It is just an accident if you come across a man who is enlightened and get infected. The thing is contagious, and there is no way of preventing it – and no antidote.
So Buddha said, “Even if I speak, people are not going to listen. Perhaps they may hear, but hearing and listening are totally different things.”
When I am speaking even buffaloes are hearing, donkeys are hearing, but they are not listening. Hearing is a simple thing; you have ears, that’s all, nothing else is needed. The buffalo will go on chewing the grass – and you will go on talking about enlightenment. And man is not much different; in fact he is worse, because the buffalo at least has no rush of thoughts in her mind. She is a simple being, just chewing grass, enjoying the morning sun, the cool air – tremendously happy.
Have you seen any buffalo laughing? You must think that buffaloes don’t laugh because they are in tremendous misery. You are wrong. You laugh because you are in tremendous misery. You need the laughter just to keep you going.
Jews have the most beautiful jokes in the world, because they have suffered the most in world. Strange…I have been searching my whole life for a single Indian joke – I have not found one.
They have lived peacefully. India has never invaded any country, has never been aggressive, violent, has had no desire to become bigger and bigger, huge; India has never been imperialistic. It has been invaded by many people, and for two thousand years it has been a slave country under Hunas, Turks, Moguls, British people, Portuguese people, French, you just say the name – and India has been invaded by everybody.
And why did such a vast country, almost a continent, yield so easily? They were not interested in fighting. Small groups of people…what is England? – not bigger than a district in India. What is its population? If all the Indians had pissed simultaneously, England would have drowned. No atom bombs would be needed!
I have heard that when for the first time the Americans reached the moon, walked on the moon, they were surprised: a few Indians were sitting there. They could not believe their eyes! They were singing their bhajanas – “Hare Krishna, Hare Rama.” The Americans thought, “My God! We have been putting so much energy, science, money into reaching the moon – how have these idiots managed?”
They asked the Indians. The Indians said, “It is not difficult. We just started standing upon each other’s shoulders, and finally we reached.”
India is a huge and vast country. Eight hundred million people…eighty hundred million people…no…You guess how many! They can reach the moon without any trouble, just standing upon each other. And small groups of Turks and Moguls defeated them!
This is not history; actually India has never been defeated by anybody. India simply allowed anybody to invade – they welcomed them! The country was peaceful, there was enough food, enough space – what did it matter if a few more people were absorbed? There was so much to be shared. These peaceful people, without any desire to be aggressive, remained slaves for two thousand years, for the simple reason that they were not interested in fighting.
Are you interested in meditation, in enlightenment? You have heard the word, but listening to the word enlightenment, does anything stir in your heart?
Buddha thought, “Whom am I going to teach? In the first place teaching is difficult. In the second place to find a disciple is difficult.” And he thought, “Even if I can manage to convey something of my experience, and I can also find some disciples who cannot only hear, but listen too….”
Listening means hearing without thinking.
The prerequisite for listening is that you put your mind aside, so you are just a pure space. It does not mean believing; you need not believe what you listen to. But unless you listen, how can you decide whether it is true or untrue? And a fundamental law of life is: if you listen without thinking, you will be able to see whether it is true or not. There will not be any need for you to think logically, to balance this way and that, to argue for and against.
Arguing does not help. Can a blind man argue whether light exists or not? And you have eyes – have you ever argued whether light exists or not? Seeing is enough – you know! In the same way, listening is enough. An immediate understanding arises.
For seven days Buddha pondered over the matter, and decided that it was useless. And the final day, when he decided not to speak, his thought was, “Many masters have existed, and what has happened? People go on living the same way, doing everything the same way.” In fact, things go on becoming worse. If there had been no Mohammed, thousands of wars would have been avoided. If there had been no Jesus Christ, the world would be much more at ease and at peace – because Christians have been killing, Mohammedans have been killing.
Buddha’s insight was that first, to bring the experience down to the level of language evolved by blind people, some kind of braille-ish language is needed. Then to find disciples, then to teach them to hear rightly – that is, to listen….
“And if a man is capable of all this,” Buddha thought, “even without me, sooner or later he will become enlightened. It may take a little more time, but that does not matter in the eternity of time.”
The story is beautiful…. In Buddhism it is said that gods came, after waiting seven days for Buddha to speak. In Buddhism there is no God, but there are gods. And gods are not creators of the world. They are just people like you who have earned so much virtue in their past life that they are given a holiday period in paradise. As they spend their virtue, they have to come back to the earth again, back into the misery, the suffering. Yes, they enjoyed the weekend in heaven…. Those people are called gods in Buddhism.
The gods became very much afraid, because they were waiting for Buddha to speak. If they can understand Buddha, then there will be no need for them to end the weekend. If they can understand him and become enlightened, then there is no need to come back into the world of suffering, misery, pain, anguish, anxiety – gods are not superior to enlightened people in Buddhism.
So seven gods, representing all the other gods, came down on the seventh day when Buddha had decided not to speak, and persuaded him, “All your arguments are right, but there may be just a few people who are on the margin, just on the borderline, a little push and they may jump into a new existence. And we have waited for a man of enlightenment for thousands of years; now you have become enlightened and you are not going to speak! One enlightened man in thousands of years, and he is not going to speak, he is not going to be of any help to anybody.”
I am telling this story to make it clear to you that ten percent of buddhas, enlightened people – that is the meaning of buddha – have remained silent.
They have achieved, they have known, they have arrived home, and the experience and the ecstasy is so tremendous – who has time, or energy, or inclination to go back on the county roads to find disciples?
Nine percent of buddhas have spoken, but they have not criticized Jesus, God, heaven, hell, or anything, for the simple reason that they were aware of the fact that it is very difficult to attract people to your vision, and if you start hitting them…. A Christian comes and you speak against Jesus – rather than changing the man’s enquiry into a deep intimacy, you create an enemy.
Only one percent of enlightened people have tried that. And I am the one percent – because I am not interested in any bullshit. I am not interested in increasing my numbers, I am not a politician. I don’t care a bit about more and more people becoming sannyasins.
There are six hundred million Catholics. So what? – just labels. I don’t want to put a label on you. And I want to say that the ninety-nine percent of enlightened people in the past – whether they have spoken, remained silent, or were bogus themselves – have failed.
A new humanity has to emerge. It has to begin with a new kind of enlightened man; there is no other way. The new enlightened man heralds the beginning of a new history, a New Man, a new hope, a new future.
I will criticize everything that hinders, that prevents you from knowing your self-nature. I will hit you hard. If you escape, that is your problem. If you are strong enough, and you go on being with me, soon it will be possible to drop all the crap – Christian, Hindu, Mohammedan…crap is crap; it is very sticky.
And forgive me, because I have to bring you to that purity in which you were born – in that beautiful, utter nudity, when you were just yourself; nobody had manipulated you, you were innocent.
All the cultures and religions have used your innocence, have treated it as ignorance. It was not ignorance; it was not knowledge either. To be ignorant you have to be a little knowledgeable – of course, in a wrong way, upside down. The innocent person is totally different from the knowledgeable and the ignorant. The child is innocent, not ignorant.
I want to offer you back your innocence. But much garbage has to be moved out of the way. You are carrying all kinds of rubbish around with you; you have become identified with it – that’s why I have to use hammers!
I will expose the bogus enlightened people. I will criticize those who remained silent – they were not people of compassion. Even if nobody listens to you, it does not mean that you can excuse yourself. If the sun rises and no flower blooms, do you think the sun will stop rising? “What is the point? No bird sings, no flower blossoms” – no, the sun will go on rising.
To me, to experience the ultimate automatically brings a tremendous urge to share it. If you reject it, that is your problem. Passing by a rosebush with beautiful fragrance, if you close your nostrils, hold your nose with your hand, what can the rose do? But it does not mean that roses should stop blossoming. A rose blossoms out of its own realization. If somebody is thrilled by its fragrance, good. If nobody even comes around it there is no harm, the rose has done its work.
I cannot forgive those people who remained silent. Even if they were not articulate, they should have tried at least. If they could attain to the ultimate they were people of great intelligence, they could devise methods and ways. Listening to me, you know I go on devising methods for meditation.
In fact, there is no method for meditation. All the methods that I use are for a different purpose: to prepare you for meditation. Those methods are not meditation themselves, they simply prepare you, they bring you to the very bank of the river and leave you there. Now it is up to you to jump and have the joy of the running water and the coolness and the swim, or to remain stuck on the bank like a lamppost. That is up to you.
But I cannot forgive those people who remained silent. They were selfish, utterly selfish, more selfish than those people who go on accumulating power, money, and all kinds of things of the world. They are nothing, because what they are accumulating is junk. But the man who has known enlightenment and keeps it to himself, he cannot be forgiven. I am going to condemn those people.
And the people who have spoken – the nine percent – I have to show you how many of them are only using borrowed knowledge. I don’t think Jesus is enlightened, he is simply quoting the Old Testament. Here and there he tries to improve on it, but it is not his own experience. He is trying to prove to his people that he is the only begotten son of God.
Just the other day I was talking about Barabbas to you. When I put Jesus Christ and Barabbas side by side, I think Barabbas looks…he was a son of a bitch, but he looks as if he is the only begotten son of God: three times he returned from death. Jesus does not look enlightened.
An enlightened person cannot claim such egoistic things – that he is the only begotten son of God, that he is the messenger, the latest messenger, that his word is law, that those who follow him, their paradise is guaranteed and those who are not going to follow him…. At the day of judgment, the last judgment, he will sort out people. His people will go to paradise and the remaining ones will fall into the abysmal darkness of hell.
Sometimes I have been wondering: on the last judgment day, how many people will be there? The whole history…billions, trillions and trillions. Perhaps mathematics hasn’t a number for them.
Mathematics was born in India. Only in Indian mathematics are there numbers which can manage even the last judgment day. No other language has words for such large numbers. The largest number in Indian mathematics is mahashankh. Shankh means that which can be measured, counted. Mahashankh means not countable.
Mahashankh people will be there on the last judgment day. And remember, half of them will be women…chattering, fighting. It is going to be a very difficult day, because a man may have been a husband to millions of women, a woman may have been a wife to millions of men – so many lives! There is going to be so much shouting and fighting – I don’t think God will be able to manage judgment. And Jesus Christ says he will sort out his people. Forget it, boy, it is impossible!
And Jesus was not a great mathematician either. He must have used his fingers to count, because he was an uneducated man. Uneducated people count on their fingers. That’s why in every language ten digits are the basic digits, because there are ten fingers; mathematics was born out of counting on the fingers. There are only that many real numbers; other numbers are just additions and repetitions of those ten, again and again.
I don’t see any statement of Jesus which proves enlightenment. He talks about prayer, but not about meditation – and without meditation there is no way toward enlightenment. Prayer is a childish thing. You don’t know God. To whom are you praying? You don’t know the language that God understands. In what language are you praying?
I don’t think that God could understand all the languages. Three hundred languages exist just on this earth, and there are fifty thousand planets where life exists, so there will be millions of languages. God must have gone crazy by now – listening to all these prayers, and consulting the dictionaries….
And how can pray when you don’t know God? It is mad! Your God is a belief. Jesus has given you a system of beliefs, he has given you a faith.
An enlightened man gives you a science, not a faith. Belief or faith means you simply have to accept something without knowing it. A man of integrity will simply reject it. He will say, “Unless I know it, how can I trust?” All the religions ask you to believe, and you have never enquired what belief means.
Belief means preventing you from enquiry into truth. You already believe there is a God – then there is no need to enquire. Science has progressed because it is not based on beliefs. All religions are retarded. There has been no progress in any religion – cannot be, you have cut the very roots.
Faith is not needed, but an enquiring mind. But no religion supports enquiry; they are afraid of it. If they have the truth, why should they be afraid of enquiry? They don’t have the truth. They have invented a God. They may say, “God created man in his own image” – the reality is just the opposite: man has been creating God in his own image. That’s why there are so may gods around the world.
A Hindu God cannot have a Jewish nose, that is inconceivable. A Mohammedan God cannot be conceived by the Jainas. A Mohammedan God says, “Convert people to Mohammedanism by the strength of the sword.” Mohammedanism is not argumentative, it knows nothing of logic or rationality; it believes in the sword. Its argument is the sword.
Now, somebody puts a sword on your neck, and says, “Either be converted to Mohammedanism or be ready to die” – because Mohammedanism believes even if you kill a person because he was resisting conversion to Mohammedanism, you will both be rewarded.
You will be rewarded because you tried your hardest – certainly you did! And the other will also be rewarded because if he had been left to live without being converted to Mohammedanism, he might have committed many sins and would have suffered in hell. Now he is dead, and the dead don’t commit sins. You have released that man from the opportunity to fall into hell. And if you die fighting, you will reach paradise.
Jainism cannot conceive of such a God, such a religion. Their religion says that even if you kill an ant, you will suffer in hell. Now, I don’t see that anybody can be anywhere else than in hell. Whatsoever you do, you will be killing millions of live things every day! Your whole body system continuously goes on changing: dead cells are thrown out of the body, new cells go on coming in. According to Jainism, just to live is to commit a sin.
To breathe is to commit a sin, because your breath exhaled is hot, and in the air there are millions of small living cells moving around you. That much heat is enough to kill them. Even to breathe is enough to send you to hell. You are not killing anybody knowingly.
The Jaina prophet, Mahavira, slept in the night only on one side. He would not change sides, because if you change sides you will be killing more small living beings. Just remaining exactly in one posture the whole night…. I cannot conceive of him being enlightened. Just think, even in the night you cannot relax. Just keeping one posture the whole night, can you relax? Such an unrelaxed man cannot be called enlightened.
I am going to tell you the truth.
If it hurts, that is your problem.
And I am not asking anything from you – that’s why I don’t care whether it hurts you or not. I am not the only begotten son of God, so I don’t depend on you. I don’t claim to be the messenger of God, I don’t claim to be a prophet; all these people are unknowingly becoming dependent on you. They are becoming slaves to you. If all the Jews leave Moses, his prophethood is gone. Who is going to call him a prophet? If all the Christians drop Jesus completely, who is going to make him the only begotten son of God?
I don’t depend on anybody, I am simply myself. For that I don’t need anybody’s consent, belief, faith. I don’t need anybody to nourish my ego. And anybody who is trying to be nourished by others, particularly for his ego, is not enlightened.
The enlightened man has no ego at all. He is simply without any “I.” I have to use the word, but there is no corresponding reality in me. The word I is just a linguistic device – it has no reality.
Whether you listen to me or not makes no difference. I am not saying believe in me, because what I know you can know; there is no need for any belief. All beliefs are anti-religious, anti-spiritual. All belief systems have to be dropped, only then can man be at peace. These belief systems are keeping you fighting each other, destroying each other. They don’t give you even a chance to discover yourself.
Getting rid of all belief systems is liberation. For that liberation I am criticizing people like Jesus or Mohammed or Mahavira, and I am criticizing their strategies to exploit you: heaven and hell. Through heaven they create fear in you, and greed. Through hell the same thing, fear and greed. Fear and greed are poisons, but they are saying, “Those who believe and believe totally….”
They are asking something impossible. That’s why you are all tense, because you cannot manage it. How can you believe, and believe totally, something you know nothing about? They are not even saying to you, “Believe only hypothetically.” They are asking you, “Believe totally.” How can you believe? Deep down you know you don’t know. Deep down you are repressing your disbelief.
All believers are underground unbelievers. Underground, all Christians are continuously suffering, because by their belief they have created a division, a split in their being. The belief says Jesus is born out of a virgin girl! And they believe it, out of the greed for heaven – for enjoying the beauties of heaven for eternity – and the fear of falling into the depths of hell. And the Christian hell is the worst – avoid it! If you want to fall into hell, fall into any other, because every other hell has a time limit; the Christian hell is for eternity.
These religions are living on your fear and greed. I have to destroy your fear and your greed, because they are preventing you from seeing your reality, seeing your eternal being, your immortality. I have to go on hitting on the head of your so-called God, because if God is there then man can never be liberated. God is another name of eternal imprisonment.
If God can create, just out of his whim – because there seems to be no excuse for creating the world…. Why did he create the world? And just four thousand and four years before Jesus Christ was born? What was he doing before that? For eternity, going backward, he has not done anything. What prompted him to create the world four thousand and four years before Jesus was born?
No explanation is given by Christian theologians, because there is no explanation. If they give any explanation, that means God can be forced to do something. If they say that God created the world because he loved to create, where was this love to create for the whole eternity? And suddenly one day…? There must be some reason. No Christian theologian in two thousand years has been able to say what prompted God to create the world – and this world.
And if God is whimsical – that is the only possibility; he is whimsical, eccentric, a little off the track; in short, just a nut – if he created this world, why did he create heaven and hell? If he enjoyed creating, he could have created you without all that which can lead you to hell. If he can create this whole immense world, can’t he create a man without sex, without anger, without jealousy, without greed, without fear, without death? He seems to be a very cruel type of God, very unkind.
And then he creates the priests who preach to you, “Be celibate.” Some great conspiracy is going on. God creates you as a sexual being, and his priest – who is infallible, the pope – teaches you to remain celibate. Have you ever asked, “Is the pope against God?” He must be, because God creates love in you, God creates anger in you, and the pope says you have to drop all this. To whom are you going to listen? To God? Or to this Polack pope? And this is the situation of all religions.
I am telling you, listen to nature and just be natural. Sex is beautiful because it is natural. And a tremendous transformation happens when you accept your naturalness. When you accept everything that you are, there is a transformation, because a new thing has arisen in you: acceptance – which all the priests of all the religions have been destroying.
They destroy your acceptance of yourself, they create guilt in you. That is something of an ultimate crime – to create guilt. And the easiest way is to teach you to go against your own nature.
You cannot go against nature.
Who will go against it?
You are nature.
So all these monasteries of Hindus and Mohammedans and Buddhists are full of hypocrites; there is not a single man worthy of any respect. And these religions have created all kinds of perversions in the world. When you suppress your sex, it starts flowing in unnatural ways. You cannot stop nature, it will find some other way. If you keep men and women apart you will be responsible for creating homosexuality.
When I was a lecturer in the university, the first thing I did…. In India the girls and the boys cannot sit together in the class. The girls sit on one side, the boys sit on the other side, and a space is left between them. The first day I entered the university I said, “Get mixed up.”
They were very much puzzled, nervous. They said, “But we have been told to remain separate.”
I said, “This is my class, and nature has not told you to be separate. Nature has managed in every way to bring you closer. I am not against nature – just get mixed up.
“And you know, when a girl is not pinched by a boy, how much she suffers. I don’t want any suffering here. You can sit mixed up, you can hold hands. I want you to be relaxed, because then you can hear me better; otherwise I am wasting my time here. You are throwing your letters to the girls and girls are throwing letters to you – I cannot tolerate this nonsense.”
Of course, the vice-chancellor was very disturbed when he came to know. He called me and asked, “What are you doing?”
I said, “I want you just to remember your own student days.”
He said, “But what has that to do with it?”
I said, “It has everything to do with it. Were you not hankering to be closer to the girls? Tell me the truth!”
He said, “You just go and do whatever you want.”
It is absolutely natural that boys will write letters and follow girls, and girls will try to escape. This is just a natural game. The girl does not want to escape! You just stop chasing her and she will start chasing you.
That is continuously happening in my commune. No man is chasing women, the women are chasing men, because the number of men is less, and the number of women is more. And it is perfectly natural – the girl escaping from the boy is simply becoming more attractive to him, becoming a challenge to him.
You will never be interested in a woman who is chasing you, if you are a man, because she is not a challenge. Man loves challenge; it is a hide-and-seek game. But it is natural, and whatever is natural is virtue; whatever is unnatural is criminal.
And I can say all these things to you because I don’t claim any extraordinariness about myself. I am a simple, ordinary, natural human being. Perhaps this is the first time any enlightened man has had the courage to say that he is just ordinary, simple, natural.
If you understand me, what I am saying…. I am saying, with me begins a new era in enlightenment.

Osho,
There are many questions I want to ask you, and I feel the answers within me too. But the answers that I feel do not help me. Why is it so?
Because they are not answers! Are you stupid or something? If they don’t help you, and the question remains, you have some nerve to call them answers. Forget those answers, they are not.
The moment you find the answer to your question, the question dissolves, the problem disappears. This is the criterion to judge whether it was an answer or not.
But the man who has asked the question must be very egoistic. He says, “I have many questions that I want to ask; I have my own answers but they don’t help.” They will never help. Please ask your questions.
And you cannot have many questions either. That is an exaggeration. These are the ways of the ego: “I have many questions, and I also have all the answers.”
But the ego is just like a balloon: if you go on filling it with air, there comes a moment when it bursts. Today, that moment has come.

Osho,
I am happy to be free from any God, and to be living more and more on my own authority. But now I cannot imagine what enlightenment is all about. Isn't it just another God?
It seems to be the same stupid man. How do you know that there is no God – because I have said it? But when did I say it to you, “Believe in me”?
You must be enjoying great egoism: “I am free of God.” You are not free even of your ego, how can you be free of God? How do you manage to know that there is no God? One can know this only after enlightenment, because then the whole existence is crystal-clear, open; life is there, but there is no God anywhere.
Because you started with a belief – hearing me say again and again that there is no God – you felt good, because if there is no God then you are free to do anything. When I am saying there is no God, I am not freeing you from responsibility. In fact, when there is no God you become totally responsible for every act. If there is a God you can commit a sin and then just go and confess to the priest, and you are forgiven. But if there is no God, nobody can forgive you; you will have to undo what you have done. Your responsibility is tremendous. You cannot pray for any help – no help will be coming.
The religions have kept man in this idiotic situation because on the one hand they say, “Don’t do this” – and they know perfectly well you will do it, it is natural. Then they give you the medicine for it: you can confess. Or you can go to a holy river and take a dip in it and all your sins will be washed away. Or chant a mantra every day, do transcendental meditation – which is neither transcendental nor meditation – and you will always be clean, forgiven.
God is looking after you, he is holding your hand in his hand. All this has kept you crippled; you have not been able to walk on your own feet. And you have not been able to see what you are doing, why you are doing it. Is it right? Is it confirmed by your consciousness, your awareness?
A man of awareness never repents, because a man of awareness does only things that can done with full consciousness. But Jesus goes on telling Christians, “Repent! Repent! The day of judgment is coming soon.” He does not teach people a life of non-repentance – and that’s what I teach you.
Be alert, be conscious. Don’t go against nature. Don’t try to swim against the current, go with the river. Be in a let-go. Accept anything that arises naturally in you. And you will not need any repentance, any prayer, any God.
You say you are freed from God and you are enjoying it. You are enjoying only a licentiousness; it is not freedom. Freedom is responsibility.
A slave need not be responsible, his master is responsible. In fact, I say to all the religions of the world, “You need not be worried. When you face God tell him, ‘It is you who created us in this way, with these instincts. We are not responsible. Why should we repent, and why should we pray? You should repent for this creation, and you should ask forgiveness from us. This is a day of judgment!’”
But you don’t know that there is no God. You are not freed from God, you just have another belief. And I go on saying to you: Don’t believe in me!
I am not creating a faith.
I am giving you a science.
Enquire, search – and find. If you had found that there is no God, then your question would not be there: “What about enlightenment?” That would have happened before. You could not have asked, “Is not enlightenment another God?” because you would have known yourself that enlightenment is not a god, but it is absolute godliness. And remember the difference: God is a person, godliness is a quality.
Godliness is the fragrance of the man who has attained enlightenment.

Osho,
I have heard you say that Jesus was not a healer, yet my personal experience is that you are. Can you comment? Also, is this a religious matter?
You must be kidding! Me, a healer? I am suffering from so many sicknesses myself – and I touch myself so many times in the day! The diabetes remains, my asthma remains. Just because of your holy scriptures that I have been reading for forty years continuously…they have destroyed my eyes. And I have found nothing in them – sheer garbage, to be burned.
Godliness is a totally different thing.
You cannot worship it, you cannot pray to it.
It is not the beginning of your religion, it is the very end, the flowering. It is a quality of the man of enlightenment.

============================================================

Osho,
It has been my understanding that the meditator and the lover have different paths. The other day we heard your beautiful explanation of the path of meditation. Is this path different from that of the lover? If so, how to tell which path to choose?
There is no path – either of meditation or of love – because a path leads to some goal. There is no goal in life. What you are searching and seeking is already present within you.
So the first thing to be understood is: there is no path to truth. There has never been, there is no possibility of there ever being – for the simple reason that every path leads you somewhere else, farther and farther away from yourself. If you are going somewhere a path is needed, but you are not going anywhere. You have gone so long already, so far already, from yourself. You have to drop all paths altogether.
Drop the path and it is there.
Jesus says, “Seek, and ye shall find.” I say unto you: Stop seeking and you have found it. Jesus says, “Ask, and it shall be given.” Nonsense! Who is there to give it to you? And a truth that is given can be taken away any moment. It is worth nothing; it is against the dignity of human individuality. And why ask anybody?
Stop asking, begging, praying; you are just being stupid. You are it! In each of your breaths it is here – I will not say “there.” There is no distance between you and the truth. I say unto you, stop asking, begging, praying, and you will be surprised that it was the asking, begging and praying that was preventing you from finding it.
Jesus says, “Knock, and the doors shall be opened unto you.” The doors are already open! Where are you going to knock? And if you manage to knock, you must be knocking your head against some wall. The doors have never been closed.
And that is the beauty of existence: it is always open, available – just for you to take. Existence will not respond to your questions; it responds only to your silence. And knocking is making noise, beware of it.
Can’t you see a simple thing? You are alive, and life is truth. And out of this life many flowers blossom; out of this life grows love, out of this life grows laughter. You are not to seek life. You have been seeking it for millions and millions of years. It is time: be kind to yourself, stop all this seeking. The moment a person stops seeking, asking, knocking, he is where he always wanted to be.
Jesus was a carpenter, so the word knocking comes very easily to him. I cannot say that because I know, the door is open. Your eyes are closed. Are you going to knock on your eyes? Then you will go blind.
Just see, the door is open.
And you are not outside, you are inside.
All the religions have been teaching you that you are outside the kingdom of God. You are not, you are the kingdom of God, you are in it.
Whatsoever the biblical story says, that God threw Adam and Eve out of paradise, I categorically contradict it. He cannot throw out Adam and Eve, because there is no place outside paradise. This whole existence is paradise – infinite in every direction. Where can you be thrown? Wherever you will be, you will be in; you cannot be out. There is no “out” in existence, all is in.
You say this is your understanding, that there are two paths, the paths of love and meditation. Understanding knows only one. It is misunderstanding that knows the two and the many. It is not your understanding that I have been speaking on the path of meditation. These are simply words. Call it love, call it meditation, or invent your own word, because all words are invented. The words don’t mean anything; they mean what you want them to mean.
You have not understood what I have been saying to you. I have been saying to you, “Drop all effort and you will be full of meditativeness.” And meditativeness cannot be anything other than love. When you are full of meditativeness, it means you are at the very center of your being. The experiencing of the very center of your being starts blossoming into love, into laughter, into a song, into a dance.
Just remain at your center. And when I say remain at your center, I am saying that you have not moved from it; you are only dreaming that you have moved. Renounce only one thing in life…. I do not tell you to renounce the world, to renounce the family, to renounce the wealth, no; all this is nonsense. Religion is not renouncing, religion is rejoicing.
Rejoice in the world, rejoice in your family; rejoice in all that is available to you. Rejoice simply because so much has been given by nature to you. And in this rejoicing can you think of hatred, of anger, of negativity, of any dark holes? When you are at your very center, everything is light, everything is love, everything is as it should be. You are not to do anything. This is the most difficult thing, to stop doing anything.
Have you not seen a dead body floating in the water? When you are alive, if you don’t know swimming you will go down into the water till you die. Strange, the dead body knows some secret which you have forgotten. You cannot drown a dead body. Not that the dead body knows swimming; the dead body has stopped doing everything, swimming included. And suddenly a miracle: the dead body is floating on the water.
People who drown get drowned not by the water. It is a scientific truth that just as the earth has gravitation – it pulls things downward…water is just the opposite. Its law is not gravitation, its law is levitation; it raises things up. That’s why in water you feel light; in water you can lift a big rock very easily. The same rock you may not be able to lift outside the water, because the water – the levitation – is helping you. The person drowns not because he does not know swimming; he drowns because he makes so much effort to remain above water. That very effort exhausts him.
If you don’t know swimming, and by chance you fall into water, just get drowned without any effort. Just go immediately to the very bottom, and you will be lifted up by the water itself. Swimming is absolutely unnecessary.
A Japanese scientist has been working on swimming. He started teaching six-month-old babies swimming – must be mad! But he succeeded, because six-month-old babies don’t make much effort. Then he went even to three-month-old babies; they were even more successful, they simply floated. They don’t know how to swim, how to make an effort to survive. They don’t take water as the enemy who is going to drown you, they are utterly innocent – and for a simple reason: they have a trust. In their mother’s womb they were swimming in water for nine months – not swimming, just floating.
That Japanese scientist is convinced, and I think his conviction is going to prove right, that even a just-born baby can be left in water and he will float. He has been floating for nine months.
Going to your center is just like that. You have been at your center, not only for nine months, but perhaps for nine million lives. But you go on making hectic efforts in all directions – searching, seeking, becoming Christian, becoming Hindu, reading the Vedas and the Bible and the Koran. Naturally you prove to be a crackpot; you are going to end up insane.
So please don’t say that you have the understanding – you don’t have it. Yes, you have a misunderstanding.
I have not been talking about any path. I have been talking about pathlessness. Meditation is my word for pathlessness. I have not called it love, because then there is more possibility of your misunderstanding. I know your love. You will immediately translate my word into your kind of love – which is not love at all. It may be chemistry, it may be hormones, it may be physiology, it may be biology, but not love.
You are attracted to a woman or to a man; you think you are in love. You are unaware of the fact that it is your hormones, your chemistry, your biology. Just very easily your hormones can be changed, and all your love for the woman will disappear. Your chemistry can be changed, and a man can become a woman, a woman can become a man. The difference between a man and woman is not much.
It is very simple. It is just like your pocket: pull it out, it becomes man; push it back into its place, it becomes woman. No other difference. Your sexuality is hanging out; their sexuality is hanging in. And you call it love?
Have you seen animals making love? You must have seen them. Do you remember? – when they are making love they don’t look happy. They are not so foolish. They look as if they have been forced to make love. Their faces show a certain kind of despair: “What is this all about? Why am I being forced?” Look at two dogs making love – both in great trouble.
It is not different for man either. It is this fact that makes people want to love each other in darkness. It is good: you don’t see the face of your woman, what is happening to her; she is going into convulsions. The woman cannot see your face, because your face has turned into a monster. Next time you are making love, just see the truth of what I am saying. And you are not the one who is doing it – something is forcing you to do it. It is something surrounding you, but it is not you; it is your body, your biology.
I know about one spider – they also make love; in this world it seems everybody makes love – and while the male spider on top of the female spider is just coming to orgasm, is trembling, the female spider starts eating him. By the time his orgasm is finished, he is also finished. Great love! And they are doing the same thing you are doing.
That’s why married men and women cannot live together in peace – their love does not allow them to live in peace. Soon they become prisoners for each other, torturers for each other. It is because of this fact that I have not used the word love for this pathlessness.
But once you are at your center, that means you are no longer your biology, you are no longer your physiology, you are no longer your hormones. You are just pure awareness, a witness, a small light, a flame inside, of consciousness. Meditation seems to be a better word, because you are not acquainted with it. But you can call it love if you are alert enough not to get mixed up.
Out of meditation, there is a fragrance which is not chemical, which is not like passing through a hospital. That fragrance is love. It is not directed toward some particular address, it is not directed to some person. Do you think when a flower opens up and sends its fragrance to the winds, that fragrance is directed to some person? No, it is just overflowing. Anybody passing by can enjoy it. I say, anybody passing by can be overwhelmed by it. True love is just like that.
Whenever I use the word love, this is my meaning: it is a fragrance of the flower of meditation, unaddressed. It is not a relationship. Yes, it may relate if somebody happens to be there. If nobody happens to be there, there is no despair; the flower is enjoying its overflowing energy, it is blessed. It has given its treasure to the whole existence.
Yes, it is relating in a way, but it is relating to the whole. It is not that it will keep its fragrance and wait for the person whom it loves. That’s what you have been doing, because you don’t know the authentic quality of love. You are making it a relationship.
Somebody attracts you; there can be any reason for that attraction. Mostly – perhaps one hundred percent, not mostly – the woman you are attracted to has something in her eyes, in the color of her hair, in her way of talking, in her voice, in her gestures, the way she walks…something in her resembles your mother. You are always in love with your mother, and your whole life you are seeking another mother. Of course, you are going to be frustrated.
All lovers are frustrated, except those who never manage to get married. For example, Laila and Majnu – the society did not allow them. Shiri and Farhad – their families came in. They were never frustrated, they remained lovers their whole life. They lived loving the other person, they died loving the other person. But if you come together…. They were prevented from coming together. If you come together you are going to find that this woman is not your mother.
Now, it is a very complicated phenomenon. You cannot get married to your actual mother, or your actual father, but that’s what your biology is seeking. It never finds it. People go on changing their lovers, and each lover frustrates more, because by and by they start becoming aware that this search is never going to end. You can have all the women of the world or all the men of the world; still you will not be contented. In fact, you will be the most frustrated human being ever, because you have known all the women – now there is no hope.
All the old societies insist on monogamy. They are trying to prevent you from getting too frustrated. In India you will not find so much frustration as you will find in America; it is just out of the question. You are married to a woman – this life is finished. If you want to search for another, then wait for another incarnation, but in this life there is no chance. People get settled, not out of joy, it is a compromise – what else to do?
But in California you can never get settled. There are other women around you, other men around you. Perhaps if this woman has failed, there must be some woman who is born just for you; it is only a question of finding her. The poets have given you that idea that every man is born for a certain woman. And when they meet for the first time, lovers usually say, “We are made for each other.”
Nobody is made for each other, and it will not take long to discover that you were wrong. As your honeymoon ends, you know perfectly well, one thing is certain: you were not made for each other. No woman can be exactly like your mother, no man can be exactly like your father. In this world, everything is unique; you cannot find the same person again. But every small girl loves her father, every small boy loves his mother.
In a way it seems natural, but this is one of the basic causes of human misery. Later on, what are you going to do? That first imprint of his mother in a vulnerable child’s mind is going to haunt him for his whole life. Yes, fragments he may find here and there: the color of the hair, the color of the eyes, the sound of the voice. But a fragment is not the whole, and you are searching for the whole.
This is not love. This is biology intending to propagate; it is a strategy, a trick. Just think of one thing: if there is no joy in making love, no attraction in making love, no desire for making love, will you fall in love with somebody? Then I think that, just like a death sentence, in the courts they will give a “love sentence”: “You get married and suffer, this is your punishment.”
But whether courts do it or not, it has been happening for millennia. Since man has come into existence it must have been going on. No court is needed to give you a love sentence, you have given it to yourself. That’s why I avoid the word love; it has very ugly connotations.
If you try to understand, then there is a totally different kind of love. But that happens only when you have found your center. Finding the center is easy. Just not doing anything to find it is difficult.
It is difficult to convince you that enlightenment is a moment when you are not doing anything – the doer is absent. That’s why I call myself the lazy man’s guide for enlightenment. It is not work, it is play, relaxation.

Osho,
I'm afraid that the world is going to end before I get enlightened. What can I do?
You seem to be very much in a hurry. If you understand me, there is no problem – right now you can become enlightened. At least right now the world has not ended. There are thousands of people in the world trying for enlightenment, but their very trying is the barrier. It postpones enlightenment.
For ninety years J. Krishnamurti has been working, first upon himself, then upon others. And now he is getting immensely frustrated. Nobody is to be blamed, he himself has made it a difficult job. He is obsessed with reading detective novels; he has made the search for enlightenment a very sensational, puzzling, difficult detective story. My Krishnamurti Lake is doing far better: just the other day somebody became enlightened there.
You are asking me, “The world is going to end, what am I supposed to do?” Have I to answer you? Can’t you understand? Krishnamurti Lake is not far away.
Krishnamurti himself will not help you. He has been just on the border of enlightenment. One step more…but that one step is missing. And the reason is that he was forced to become enlightened. For twenty-five years in his early life…. The theosophical idiots found him. He was nine years old, the son of a poor, very poor father; the mother had died, he had one brother. The father was in much difficulty. He was just a small clerk in some office; to look after these two children, and do the work – it was becoming maddening.
So when the Theosophists told him they would like to adopt his two children – one was Nityananda and the other was Krishnamurti – he happily handed over the children to Annie Besant, knowing that at least they would be taken care of, given a good education. The theosophical movement in those days was the top movement of the world. Very important, significant, powerful people had become involved in it.
The Theosophists started making these two poor boys enlightened – it had never been done before…so much hammering that Nityananda died. My feeling is that the Theosophists were responsible for his death. They tortured these two boys as much as possible: wake up in the morning at three o’clock; go to the river, take a cold bath, then chant mantras…spiritual teaching that went on deep into the night. Both escaped them finally, because it was absolutely inhuman – Nityananda in one way, Krishnamurti in another. Nityananda died – he must have been of a weaker constitution. Krishnamurti survived.
The Theosophists were going to declare Krishnamurti the world teacher. When he was twenty-five they gathered in Holland to declare him the world teacher, with great hope: “The man who can deliver the whole world from misery has arrived. He is the Christ, he is the Buddha; he contains all the hopes of the past humanity.”
Krishnamurti stood up to declare himself to be the world teacher, but on the contrary, he simply said, “I am nobody’s teacher. I am fed up with teachers! And just forgive me, I am not jagadguru, the world teacher. And I dissolve this whole organization that you have created around me.” A special organization called The Star of the East, a branch of the Theosophical Society, was created for Krishnamurti. He dissolved the organization. The people were simply shocked; they had worked so hard to make him enlightened, and this man freaked out at the crucial moment.
Since then he has been going around the earth alone. But those twenty-five years are still heavy on him; that’s why he cannot take that one step. He is not freed from those dead Theosophists. They are long dead, the movement has almost disappeared, but what happened in those twenty-five years in the beginning is holding him back.
Remember always: love is an attachment; hate is a bigger attachment, far more solid. Compassion is very delicate, but cruelty is very hard.
He is still fighting with the ghosts of the Theosophists. All his life he has been fighting and fighting with those ghosts – who are dead, there is no need to fight with them. One should be simply free of them, but being free means you don’t hate them. Hate imprisons you.
He has become so afraid of the master and disciple phenomenon…. It is his experience – I can forgive him, I can understand him. What happened to him through his masters was so ugly that he has been teaching everybody that you don’t need any master.
This is a contradiction. If they don’t need any master, why are you bothering them? Who are you? You have assumed, unknowingly, the role of a master, of a teacher. What have you been doing for ninety years? – teaching people: Beware of teachers! If the people had really understood you, they would have left you, because, “What is the need? Why should we listen to you? This is what a teacher and a student, a master and a disciple do.” The master knows, the disciple does not know. The master imparts his knowledge to the disciples.
Krishnamurti has been doing that, and I am amazed how blind people are. They don’t say to him, “Shut up! If we don’t need any master, then who are you to bother us? For ninety years you have been bothering people, and not a single person has become enlightened out of this whole effort.”
He has created a different kind of effort: “Don’t make effort, don’t accept any master, don’t be open to any teaching.” All kinds of egoists have surrounded him for all these years, because the egoist feels great that he need not be open, he need not listen, he need not be concerned about masters and teachers; he is enough unto himself.
It is true, you are enough unto yourself, but you don’t know it! Somebody has to hammer it on your head. But things can backfire. That’s what has happened in Krishnamurti’s case: a man of tremendous intelligence, fighting with ghosts, and continuing teaching, telling people there is no master, telling people, “You are enough unto yourself” – this can be misunderstood.
You are enough unto yourself if you relax and settle in your being; otherwise you are the greatest enemy of yourself. If you go on making an effort to become enlightened…. And man is so strange: if you tell him that no effort is needed, he starts making “no effort”!
Krishnamurti has never criticized any individual by name. Although he has criticized principles, doctrines, he has not criticized Gautam Buddha, Jesus Christ, Moses, Mohammed. Just the other day I received the information that he has criticized me. This is great! He has always pretended that it is not worth his while to criticize Jesus, Mohammed, Mahavira; it is something below him. That attitude is ugly.
But he could not restrain himself about me, for the simple reason that I have told my sannyasins, “Wherever he is, just go and sit in the front line.” And you ask me why I have chosen red clothes for you?
The color red has something mysterious about it – just show a red flag to a bull and you will know. You can show a blue flag, nothing will happen; a green flag, nothing will happen. But show a red flag to a bull and he will rush toward you to kill you. Krishnamurti must have been a bull in his past life. The moment he sees my red people he forgets all his philosophy, he starts immediately criticizing me. But this is the first time he has used my name.
And what criticism has he given? – very childish. He has said against me that I am convincing people that enlightenment is their sheer inheritance, it is a gift of existence – just as life is a gift. I have always respected Krishnamurti, his intelligence, his courage to dissolve a great organization. But I cannot help it, I have to say the truth to you: he is just on the borderline, he is not yet enlightened. He can be any moment.
You should not be afraid of the third world war. For you there is enough time. But he is ninety; for him there is not much time. He should come to Krishnamurti Lake and get enlightened!

Osho,
I'm confused hearing you say there is no God. There have been many beautiful moments in my life when I feel something moving through me which I know is not me. I used to call it God, now I call it godliness. But I still don't like hearing that there is no God. Can you ease my confusion?
Baby, my whole work is to confuse you! Unless you are utterly confused, you are not going to drop your knowledgeability. What do you mean when you ask me to “ease your confusion”? In other words, you want certain, settled knowledgeability. You want to convince yourself that you know it. I cannot commit that crime. You do not know it.
So first I have to remove all your knowledge – which is bogus anyway. You have not earned it, you don’t deserve it. It has not grown within you, it is all rubbish that you have collected from books, from people.
I am going to confuse you more and more. And look, what is your confusion? You say that there have been moments in your life which you used to call God – you cannot deceive me. I know you may have experienced a few beautiful moments; everybody experiences a few beautiful moments of well-being, of great uplift.
Seeing a sunset, suddenly you are silent. Or listening to the tidal waves of the ocean shattering on the rocks on the shore, suddenly you feel almost a nobody before this vast existence. Looking into the sky and the stars you may have had certain moments, and you may have called them God. Don’t make God so cheap. I am raising God higher than he has ever been.
The Jewish God says, “I am a jealous God. I am a very angry God. I am not nice, I am not your uncle.” Jesus tried to raise the Jewish God, and that was his crime. He said, “God is love.” Now, this is very contradictory. The Jewish God says, “I am jealous, I am angry, I am not nice,” and Jesus makes him a goody-goody: “God is love.”
This man Jesus should be removed before he destroys their certainty that God is jealous, angry. You have to be afraid of him, because that will keep you on the right path. If God is love, then who bothers what is right and what is wrong? A loving God cannot punish you in hell for eternity.
But Jesus on the one hand says, “God is love,” and on the other hand – he is a Jew after all – the eternal hell remains. He cannot see a simple fact, that if God is love then eternal hell should be removed – because you need not be afraid of love. Love gives you freedom to be yourself; sandwiched between heaven and hell you cannot have any freedom, any individuality.
I am trying to raise God. When I say there is no God, I mean there is no person as God, there is no personality as God.
You have to understand clearly that personality is something false. The word personality comes from the Greek persona – persona means a mask; in Greek drama the actors used to have a mask. You know sona means sound; a sound coming through a mask was called persona. You cannot see who is behind the mask; hence the actor has a personality. And if you all have personalities, you are all actors – you are not being authentic, sincerely yourself. Personality and individuality don’t mean the same thing.
I am taking the personality of God away. I don’t want him to be an actor – you have so many in Hollywood. Strange, that the place is called “Hollywood”…all gods, personalities, great personalities. I don’t want God to be a Hollywood actor. I am trying to destroy his mask, and once the personality drops what is left is godliness. That is the true individuality of existence.
I will not say, “God is love,” because that still keeps God as a person. On the contrary, I say, “Love is God.” You can forget all about God. If you can understand love, that’s enough religion; more than that is not needed.
I use the word godliness and you are confused, because those moments…have you seen anybody in those moments that you can call God? You have not seen anybody in those moments, because there is nobody. You were using a wrong word, I am correcting you. Those moments you can call moments of godliness. I am changing God from a quantity to a quality.
God is a quantity; godliness is a quality. And you are confused by it? Just a hangover. Shake yourself well – slap yourself and shake yourself – and all confusion will disappear.

Osho,
Where is this moment? I keep losing it.
Here!
You ask me, “Where is this moment?” Your question implies it must be somewhere else. You have already lost it. It is always here! Don’t try to find where it is, because while you are finding where it is, you are losing it. You are missing the train continuously.
Time knows no tenses: past, present, future, no – absolutely no! Time knows only one tense, and that is now. It is always now. But your mind can carry the past and destroy the beauty of the now. Your mind can project the future, and can lose the precious moment.
Please, start relaxing here and now.
This is the taste of it.

============================================================

Osho,
Clergyman Olds Grandlund from Sweden has asked you a question. The question has many questions, so I have separated them. He says, “Osho, I have made you sad, but still I don't like you talking bullshit about Mother Teresa.”
Jesus!
Jesus used to teach his disciples, particularly the two fishermen who became his first disciples, how to catch men instead of catching fish. I teach my people how to catch clergymen, instead of catching simply men and women. This is going to be a great feast. We are not cannibals, otherwise we would have tasted Christianity, but still, some vegetable salad can be made.
I have heard a small story…. In a school the teacher was telling the little boys and girls how God created the world, man, woman, and how he created these two sexes in trees, in birds, in animals. And when she was telling all this – that there are two sexes, man and woman – a small boy stood up. He said, “No! There are three sexes: man, woman and clergyman.” It is a totally different species.
I have read his letter – it is so long, many questions in it. Start asking them one by one.
I mean that you have fallen down in the same pit, hollow, like other great masters and leaders, to tell bullshit about others.
First, he was sad because I criticized Mother Teresa. Mother Teresa wrote to me saying that she prays for me every day, and asks God to forgive me. Now, this is an absolute trespass.
I wrote her back, “Who are you to pray for me? – and to a God who does not exist at all. And even if he existed, you have no right to pray for me! I don’t want any interference in my life, in my ways of thinking. This is violating the freedom of the individual. You stop praying to God – at least for me. I am perfectly happy, and my happiness is based on knowing that there is no God, that man is free.”
God was a monopolist, a fascist, an imperialist; he dominated everything. If God is there, there is no possibility of freedom; you are just puppets in his hand. He wants to create you – he creates you; he wants to destroy you – he destroys you. There is no court of appeal against him. He is the final and absolute authority. Christianity is an anti-democratic religion. And all the religions who believe in God are fascist. They have accepted slavery.
The clergyman…I don’t know how to address him, Mr. Clergyman or Mrs. Clergyman – because his sex is neither. So please forgive me, I will just use the address, clergyman.
These people are strange – so programmed, so conditioned that they cannot listen to the truth. I have no enmity with Mother Teresa. But if she writes to me that she prays to God to forgive me…. I have not committed any sin, I have not committed any crime – why should I be forgiven? And I have not given her my power of attorney to pray for me. And if I say this, you are disturbed that I criticized Mother Teresa.
This clergyman was leaving yesterday; he had packed, he was so angry. But then he decided to write all these questions, and decided to listen to what I am going to say. I think after today it will be difficult for him to remain one more day.
Mother Teresa has many orphanages in India. Why in India? Why not in Christian countries? A simple fact…. Those orphans in India she collects from the streets – urchins – and then converts them to Catholicism. It is a politics of numbers. In each of her orphanages there are hundreds of orphans who are being taught Christianity – Catholicism more particularly.
Those orphans are born either of Hindus or Mohammedans; none of them belong to Christianity. But to increase the numbers of Catholics in the world – because numbers mean power – she feeds them, clothes them, provides medical facilities; hence even stupid Hindus and Mohammedans think she is a saint. She is a sheer, dirty politician.
One man with his wife, from America, went to Mother Teresa to adopt a child, because they were childless and the doctors had said that there was no possibility – physiologically they could not have a child; it would be better to adopt one. Mother Teresa said, “You can choose. We have beautiful boys, girls – seven hundred.” But she forgot to ask what their religion was. She assumed they must be Catholics; only Catholics come there.
And as she remembered she had not asked their religion, she asked them. They said, “We are Protestant Christians.” Now there was a great silence. She said, “Excuse me. Right now we don’t have one orphan to give you.” Just a moment before there were seven hundred orphans; now there is not even a single one. And the man and the woman, the couple, were neither Mohammedan, nor Buddhist, nor Hindu. They were Christians – but they were not Catholic Christian, they were Protestant Christian.
They wrote a letter to the newspapers describing the whole story, and saying, “This is strange. We were turned away, we were not taken in. We had no idea that those children are only provided for adoption by Catholics.”
When I wrote to her, asking, “What is this nonsense? What is going on?” she tried to convince me that what she had done was right. She said, “Yes, there were orphans, but because they had been brought up according to Catholicism, they would not fit into a Protestant family.”
Cannot I be allowed to ask her, “Why in the first place have they been brought up according to Catholicism? They were not born Catholics. If you want to teach them religion, then the Hindu orphans should be taught according to Hinduism. If they are Mohammedan, they should be taught Mohammedanism.
“And what a poor argument! You can convert a fully grown-up Hindu, who has lived his whole life as a Hindu, into a Catholic, and there is no problem. But those small children who have been taught the Catholic catechism cannot be accepted in a Protestant family which is Christian? There is not much difference between Protestantism and Catholicism. So where is the problem?” She stopped writing to me.
And if I say these things publicly, this poor clergyman is offended. He wanted to leave.
Read the first question again.
I have made you sad, but still I don't like you talking bullshit about Mother Teresa.
I like it! And I am going to talk as much bullshit as possible. And what is wrong with bullshit? It is divine. And all this bullshit will fall on the clergyman, remember. He will not be able to find his way back to the church.
What do I care whether you like it or not? I am not here to convert you, convince you. And I am not talking to a single religion. Here are people from all religions, from all countries, all ideologies.
And if my talking against Mother Teresa hurts you, it is your problem. It is not hurting anyone else. And why does it hurt? You should ponder over it. Why does it make you sad? It is your programmed mind. And my effort is simply deprogramming. So whenever I deprogram a Hindu he will also think I am talking bullshit.
You should rather contemplate why it hurts you. You are not Mother Teresa. And whatever I am saying, I am giving you absolutely valid arguments. If you were really hurt, sad, you should have given arguments in favor of Mother Teresa. You have not given a single argument in your long letter. You don’t have any! You cannot deny what I am saying, that’s what makes you sad. Try to deny it, accept my challenge. It will help you. Whatever I say, I say with full conviction, and I give you my argument, why I am saying it.
To trespass somebody’s garden is illegal, to trespass somebody’s house is illegal. And she is trespassing my being – praying for me, giving me no answer. This is her answer – praying for me, to a God in whom I don’t believe.
Please try to find something in favor of Mother Teresa.
He says, “I love Jesus more than anyone.”
He also says – you have forgotten – that I have fallen in the same hollow pit as other great masters and leaders. I am neither a great master nor a great leader. I am a simple, ordinary man. I don’t want to be categorized with all those fools.
Being simple and ordinary has one beauty: you cannot fall. To fall, one thing is absolutely necessary, that you should be high, great, on the top of the world. I do not belong to that category. I live a simple, human life, with all its weaknesses, frailties, mistakes. I cannot fall, there is nowhere to fall. If you want to fall, first go up a ladder. I have been walking my whole life on the plain ground.
This is strange. First you make me a great master, a great leader, just to make me fall from there. I know enough logic…. From the roots I cut things. I don’t claim to be great. Only people who are suffering from an inferiority complex claim to be great masters, great leaders of men. I don’t have any inferiority complex. I don’t want to be superior to anybody in the world.
Whatsoever I am, I am tremendously happy and at ease with it. So please show me how I can fall. An infallible pope may fall, but I am fallible, and not a pope. But I cannot fall in his pit. And why does he say I have fallen in a pit? – because I am “talking bullshit about Mother Teresa.” Yes, there is a mistake. I should talk cow dung about Mother Teresa. Bullshit is male; cow dung is female – and she is very old, dried cow dung.
And I can say these things because I don’t want any respectability from anyone. The clergyman will be in a difficulty because he has dealt with people whom you can exploit by the simple strategy of giving them respectability. When you give respectability to somebody, he becomes afraid to say anything that may destroy his respectability.
I do not care at all what people think about me. I am not dependent on them. If I hanker for respectability, then certainly I will not say anything that may destroy my respectability.
I am going to say exactly what is the truth to me. If it brings me notoriety – it has brought me notoriety in these thirty years – I enjoy it.
He says, “You tell about joy, love, life, celebration, freedom, et cetera. My question just now is, Can you feel it in your own life – repeatedly showing yourself in Rolls Royces and feminine clothes, saying, repeating words about Jesus Christ, Mother Teresa et cetera, having bodyguards – any freedom, celebration, joy?”
It really amazes me to know that clothes also have genitals! This clergyman is saying that some clothes are female and some clothes are male. Mr. Clergyman, are you nuts? Clothes are either comfortable or not comfortable. I use what is comfortable to me.
In fact, just on the way coming here I enquired about the clergyman to my secretary: “Has he got a beard and a mustache?”
She said, “No.”
I said, “That is feminine.”
Why have you cut your beard and your mustache, which God has created in you? That’s what so many men have done. Just think of a woman with a big beard and mustache. And it is not only a mustache and beard….
As I have told you, Christianity is the worst of all religions – I never say anything without supporting it with valid reasons. Before the communist revolution in Russia, there was a big Christian sect – Russia was one of the most orthodox Christian countries. The most famous and the most respected Christians were those who used to cut off their genitals. Every year men would cut off their genitals, women would cut off their breasts.
Whatsoever wrong communism has done in Russia, at least one thing good they have done: they have stopped these idiots doing such an utterly insane thing. And this gave those Christians respectability; they became saints.
I looked at my dress and I could not find that it is feminine; it is comfortable, it is beautiful. I am not a soldier who has to be in clothes so tight that just his tight clothes make him kill somebody, so tight he just wants to get out of the clothes.
I am a lazy person. My clothes are nothing – just a loose robe. Without any effort I can take it off, put it on. And strange, that a clergyman should indicate to me that this is feminine. I am reminded…I lived for a few months in a place called Raipur in India; I was a lecturer at Raipur University. Just near my house two trucks collided and killed somebody who was crushed so badly that it was impossible to recognize who it was.
Somebody came running to me and asked me, “What can be done now? A woman has been crushed, and she has died.”
I went there. I said, “Why do you say this is a woman?”
It was a Mohammedan area where I lived. Mohammedan women wear a black mask over their face and a black robe over their whole body. You cannot see a Mohammedan woman’s body. She can see through small holes in front of her eyes. So they thought that this must be a Mohammedan woman. It was a man – not a man, a Christian clergyman in his black habit.
I wonder why Christian clergymen call their dresses habits, black habits. And why have they chosen the black color when there are so many beautiful colors? In fact, black is not a color at all. Black is an absence of all colors.
If you see a rainbow, there are two colors you will not find there: black and white. White is a combination of all the seven colors of the rainbow; it is the richest color. Seven colors meeting and merging create the white. And black is not a color, it is the absence of all seven colors. That’s why down the centuries, around the world, death has been conceived as black – because it is the absence of life, the absence of everything.
Why have Christians chosen the black robe as their habit? They are not messengers of God on the earth, they are the messengers of death! Their black robe indicates their intention. They are all Reverend Jim Joneses; they want to turn this whole earth into a Jonestown.
He is talking about my clothes. I use all the colors. The rainbow is my love. I want finally to give all my sannyasins rainbow dresses. I am waiting for the right time. First I want you, through your red dress, to be identified: that you are not part of any old, rotten religion, that you don’t belong to the blind society that surrounds you, that you are asserting your individuality.
You may have wondered why I don’t use red – because I don’t want you to be my imitators. I don’t want anybody to say, “Why do you imitate Osho?” My seamstresses – Gayan, Veena, Arpita, Ashu – I have told them to avoid red as far as possible in my clothes. I don’t want you to imitate me. I don’t want you in any way to lose your individuality.
The red color is just to shock the outsiders. The color red has some mysterious quality. Nobody can ignore it; it just hits the eyes. Go in a red robe anywhere in the world, and everybody will look at you. Even if you pass people, they will stop and look again: what is the matter with this man?
Do you know the meaning of the word respect? It is not honor, it means seeing again – re-spect. The red color creates great respect.
He asks further, “Aren't you speaking in one way and living in another way? I feel much more free, joyful than you, your sannyasins – yes, everyone in Rajneeshpuram. When I see you, I see a prisoner imprisoned in your own prison.”
Great! Then why are you here? If you think you are more happy than me, more blissful than me, more free than me, then what are you doing here? Why have you been coming here year after year, each celebration? Are you crazy?
I don’t go anywhere. There is nothing anywhere which can make me happier. And what criterion are you using? When you say that you are more blissful than me, there must be some criterion, some way to decide who is more blissful. A blissful person does not go in search of bliss – and you are here in search of bliss. Why are you listening to me, wasting your time? You must be miserable. You want to get rid of that misery.
And still you address me as “Beloved Bhagwan.” You don’t know the meaning of “Bhagwan,” it seems. It means the blessed one. There is no possibility of being more blissful then the blessed one. Perhaps your addressing me as “Beloved Bhagwan” is just Christian hypocrisy.
And you call me “Beloved.” On what grounds? A man who is talking bullshit – are you in love with bullshit? A man who is talking against Mother Teresa and Jesus – are you in some way against Mother Teresa and Jesus but afraid to say so, because it will go against your vested interest? You are a clergyman – that is your job; you are getting money for it, respect for it. I am not getting anything, no salary, no money. I don’t have a single cent with me. I don’t have even pockets in my robe.
Twenty years ago I told my tailors to drop the pocket. It is unnecessary, because I don’t have anything to put in the pocket. And for twenty years I have lived without any money. You cannot find a single man in the world who has lived twenty years without money. I have not even touched money for twenty years – not that I am against money. I have not seen a dollar yet, although for years I have been in America. And I don’t think there is any possibility for me to see a dollar before I die.
You talk about Rolls Royces. I don’t own them. And why do you ask about Mother Teresa, Jesus Christ, Rolls Royces? Is there some connection? There is bound to be in your mind. You seem to be jealous, utterly jealous. I don’t own any Rolls Royces. Those Rolls Royces are owned by my sannyasins; out of their love they provide a Rolls Royce for me for one hour every day. I don’t even know which Rolls Royce they are going to bring today, it is up to them.
And why have they chosen Rolls Royces for me, just for one hour? Because my back is bad. They tried all other cars; only the Rolls Royce seat suits my back. Now what can I do? It is the fault of the Rolls Royce people. And anyway, I am a man of very simple taste. I am utterly satisfied with anything which is the best.
But why should a clergyman be concerned? Poor fellow, he needs a four-wheeler Ford.
It is a good strategy for me to move in Rolls Royces – and not just one. I would like the clergyman to burn even more – there are ninety Rolls Royces. And it is not the end! My sannyasins are trying to have at least three hundred and sixty-five Rolls Royces, so only once in a year, for one hour, do I get the same Rolls Royce. And I know they will be able to manage, because I am not a poor man’s savior. I am the rich man’s savior.
So many people are saving poor people, nobody is looking after the rich. They are completely ignored. This is inhuman. There are thousands of saints looking after the welfare of the poor. I am the only one – and I am not even a saint – who is looking after the welfare of the rich.
I will manage, if there is any heaven anywhere – I know there is none, but just for the argument’s sake…. If there is any heaven anywhere, then a camel may pass through the eye of a needle, but not a poor man through the gates of heaven.
A poor man in heaven will look out of place. Only the people who have lived in luxury will be able to become part of paradise. They are already disciplined to luxury. If you have never tasted wine and you enter the Mohammedan paradise, where water is not available and you have to drink only wine, what will happen to you?
If you have been celibate, as this clergyman must be pretending – because all celibacy is pretension, you cannot go against nature…. And foolishly he has himself admitted that he has four girlfriends. To his congregation he must be a celibate man, and behind the curtains he has four girlfriends. Are you a Mohammedan, by the way? A poor man…you cannot think of his misery when he finds himself in paradise, with everybody singing, “Alleluia! Alleluia!” and doing nothing, because there is nothing to do.
I teach my people the art of non-doing – that is the preparation for paradise. I teach my people to sing, “Alleluia” – that is the preparation for paradise.
A poor man will be simply in a foreign land in paradise; he will not be able to make any connection with the situation that has been depicted as paradise. Rivers of wine, beautiful girls who always remain young…and the whole work is just to go on playing on your harp and singing.
I have heard…once it happened to a poor man. The poor man was a porter in Munich in Germany, drinking as much beer as possible, speaking language which is not included in dictionaries, fighting for any excuse – just ready to fight. By some mistake, he entered paradise when he died. It must have been a mistake – even angels of death are not infallible. Somebody else was wanted, but they took him there.
He was so miserable there! He had been a porter on the station, and he was very happy – the whole day working and then drinking, and then finding some woman. And doing everything…. In paradise there was nothing. Beer was not available. The women who were available were so beautiful he was afraid even to approach them. He had known only prostitutes, poor prostitutes; he had never known those beautiful prostitutes of paradise.
He was handed a harp and told, “Sit on a cloud and just say, ‘Alleluia, alleluia.’”
He said, “This is a strange place. I was far better in my station, doing my job, waiting for the evening to go to the pub, then searching for a woman. This is a strange place. Sit on a cloud?”
He had never played on a harp, he had not even seen a harp in his life. He was so angry, but what else to do? – he started making an effort to play on a harp. It was not music, he knew nothing of music. He wanted to punch somebody on the nose. He was looking all around for this so-called God to ask, “What nonsense is this?”
In paradise you don’t sleep at all. It is always day, it is always light. And he was habituated to using his language, so although he used to sing, “Alleluia, alleluia,” in between he would say, “Fuck you all!” and again, “Alleluia, alleluia.”
It was reported to the guard that this man is dangerous. He says loudly, ‘Alleluia! Alleluia!’ and in between he inserts, ‘Fuck you all!’ He was sent back to Munich. He was so happy you cannot conceive.
I said to you I am not a saint. To me the word saint is more obscene than “Fuck you all,” because fucking is natural. Everybody is doing it – even the clergyman. What everybody is doing, how can it be obscene? When the whole of nature is doing it, how can it be obscene? When even your God was doing it, what is obscene in it?
But the word saint is obscene. You may not be aware of where it comes from. It comes from sanction – the pope gives the sanction to somebody, and makes him a saint. This is simply absurd. Who can make me a saint? I don’t accept anybody’s authority. And a pope giving the sanction – then sainthood becomes something like a certificate.
It happened to Joan of Arc; Christians burned her alive. Christians have committed so many sins in the world that if there is any hell, it will be full of Christians: clergymen, bishops, archbishops, popes, Jesus Christ.
Burning living people, and particularly women – it seems to be a certain psychological revenge, because the priests of Christian communities were prohibited from any relationship with a woman. They were really enraged. They wanted to do something to hurt the woman, because the woman was very attractive. Remember, whenever you are attracted to somebody immensely, you also feel to destroy that person or that thing. Why? – because your being attracted to it makes you a slave.
That’s why men and women cannot live together harmoniously. Both are attracted to each other, and both are destructive to each other. All these husbands and wives are continuously fighting, nagging, harming each other in every possible way. The reason is, they are attracted to each other. They cannot leave each other, and they cannot live together. They are in a fix.
The priest, the clergyman, is in an even more difficult situation. The woman attracts – attracts him more than anybody else, because others have some experience of woman and he has none. He would like somehow to force the woman to be destroyed, because deep in his heart is not Jesus Christ – it is Mary Magdalene. He goes on repressing Mary Magdalene by repeating some stupid prayer. But he knows perfectly well she is there, so he wants to destroy the woman.
In the Middle Ages, Christians burned thousands of innocent women – they just had to find an excuse. And the excuse was that the women were in a conspiracy with the devil.
Christians have been taught that the woman has been an agent of the devil from the days of Adam and Eve. The serpent did not approach Adam, he approached Eve. Since then the woman has been somehow in connection with the devil. In the Middle Ages the Christians accused thousands of women of having sexual relationships with the devil: “They are witches, and they are dangerous to the society. They should be burned.”
They declared Joan of Arc also a witch. Of course she is one of the most significant persons who has ever walked on this earth. Single-handedly she fought for the freedom of her country, and attained freedom for her country. Certainly it gave the clue to the clergymen that she must be deriving all her power from the devil; otherwise a fragile woman, a young woman – how can she be so powerful? This was the reward that they gave to her: they condemned her as a witch and burned her alive. This was the judgment of an infallible pope.
After three hundred years another infallible pope reconsidered the case – because people were not agreeing with it. It was such an ugly act in the name of God. You rewarded the woman who brought freedom to the country by burning her alive? To keep these people on the side of the church, after three hundred years another infallible pope – remember the word infallible – declared that she is a saint.
Nobody asks, if both the popes were infallible…. Then it seems to be impossible – how are you going to manage? One declares her a witch to be burned alive; another declares, after three hundred years, that she is a saint. Her bones were dug out from her grave and worshipped.
Many nuns were burned alive, many priests and monks were burned alive, but ninety percent of those who were burned alive were women. Even nuns – they were forced to confess, they were tortured to confess that they had had intercourse with the devil. Can you see how the mind becomes perverted when you go against nature? And they were tortured so much that they had to confess.
The same tactics have been used by Adolf Hitler and Joseph Stalin, but the whole credit goes to Christianity. Torture a person – there is a limit, and then the person thinks, that there is no point in being tortured and again and again with the same question. It is better to accept it and be finished with it.
They were tortured and asked, “Have you had any intercourse with the devil?” Now nobody today can even imagine that there is a devil and women are having intercourse with him. Of course because the devil is a man – and he is not a homosexual – that’s why women were tortured. And they were told, “You have to confess the reality.” Finally they confessed; and their confessions are very significant to remember. Mr. Clergyman, please remember what those nuns confessed.
After the confession they were burned, because they had admitted, they had confessed that they had had intercourse many times with the devil. But what was the proof? And Christian priests have been giving them proof: the proof was that the woman said that the devil has a forked prick, so that he can enter the woman’s body from both holes. Great holy people! And the women – thousands in number – confessed. They were nuns. And they were burned.
Now the devil has disappeared completely. After Sigmund Freud, he thought it was better to leave this earth. The few men – monks – who were burned, were burned because they were making sexual approaches or contacts with nuns. You call this a religion?
And if these clergymen, priests, reach heaven, where beautiful men, beautiful women, are all living in absolute freedom, with no fear of sin, with no guilt…. I have not come across a single reference that in heaven there are churches, and there are clergymen, and there are congregations. All that stupidity happens only on this poor earth.
All the priests of all the religions are looking after the poor, exploiting them, exploiting their poverty to convert them to their religion.
I am taking care of the rich. Blessed are the rich, for theirs is the kingdom of God. And of course, in heaven you will get a Rolls Royce. Anything less than that would be a humiliation of paradise, of your God himself. What do you think – which car does your God use? I think it must be a Rolls Royce.
Why is this clergyman so worried about it? It is my problem. If I have to suffer for being in a Rolls Royce and go to hell, I am perfectly happy. In fact I don’t want to go to your heaven, because the best people of the earth will be found in hell, if it is there.
Where will you find Gautam Buddha? He denied God; he must be in hell. Where will you find Mahavira? He denied God; he must be in hell. Where will you find all your great painters, singers, dancers, poets, musicians? They cannot enter heaven.
They have committed so much sin in the eyes of the Christian priests, they must be in hell. You will find all the geniuses in hell – if there is any hell. Of course, there is none.
This priest, this clergyman, must have forgotten my watches, thinking that the letter is becoming too long. But what is the problem? There are a few people who write to me, but they don’t know at all about my watches. This is the cheapest watch in the world. These are not diamonds, these are stones, ordinary stones. It is made by my own sannyasins, it is not a Piaget. My own sannyasins, Ajito and Bodhi, out of their love make watches for me.
And I love everything beautiful. Look at this watch! I don’t make any difference between a beautiful diamond or a beautiful stone. The criterion is beauty. Yes, a few of my sannyasins allow me to use real diamond watches. I have no objection.
In Jainism, which is one of the most ancient religions of the world, in their heaven, mountains are made of diamonds, gold, silver. If in your heaven you can have mountains of diamonds, can’t I have a small watch? This seems to be absolutely consistent. Be rich, be luxurious, be comfortable, because whatever you are here, wherever you go you will be able to adjust to more luxury, to a higher standard of living.
Don’t listen to these idiot clergymen. If you live in a poor way…. And that’s what all the religions teach – live in poverty; if you are not poor you will miss everything after life. I can’t see the logic. Here you practice poverty….
Mahatma Gandhi was practicing poverty. In his ashram even mosquito nets were not allowed; it is luxurious. And in India everywhere there are mosquitoes, and particularly in Gandhi’s ashram they had a great gathering – naturally, so much food, so easily available.
What did Gandhi invent to prevent the mosquitoes? He cannot allow them to be killed by Flit, because he is a non-violent man, he believes in non-violence. Mosquitoes are not to be killed, and a mosquito net is also not good, because it is a luxury. I cannot conceive, a mosquito net is a luxury? So he told his disciples: “Before you go to sleep, put kerosene oil on your face, on your hands, or any part of your body that is exposed.” Kerosene oil….
Mahatma Gandhi’s son, Ramdas, used to be my friend. I asked Ramdas, “If even mosquitoes have enough sensibility not to come close to a person who is painted with kerosene oil – it stinks, even a mosquito is not ready, even though he may die without food – what about the man? How can he sleep with this smell?” But those who did that were great saints.
You will be surprised to know – particularly this clergyman – that in Mahatma Gandhi’s ashram there was a man, Professor Bhonsali, who lived for six years eating only bullshit. And he was worshipped like a god. He had done a great act of austerity – just eating bullshit for six months.
This clergyman should try. At least for six days, eat bullshit, and you will forget all your Mother Teresas and all your Jesuses. And then you will remember me!
He further states, “Osho, you have given me pieces of hell and heaven here in Rajneeshpuram.”
On one thing I can agree with you: I may have given you pieces of hell, that is my business. The other part I cannot agree with. I cannot give you pieces of heaven, you must have been hallucinating.
I know what is actually the case. Whenever I said something which was in agreement with his conditioned mind, he felt euphoric. It was not me, it was your conditioned mind feeling nourished, supported. Those were the pieces of heaven. And whenever I said something which gave you an electric shock, of course those were the pieces of hell. You cannot hallucinate and imagine shocks, electric shocks – that’s why I must have given them to you.
You are hallucinating, imagining, projecting heaven. So whenever I say something which falls in tune with your conditioning, you feel great. You feel great that you are right, that your religion is right, that your Bible is right.
You are certain that your religion is right. You are looking for certainty, for guarantee. And strange – you are more blissful than me, and you are asking for my authority? I have never asked for anybody’s authority, I have never asked for anybody’s support. I have simply lived on my own. I don’t belong to any religion, I don’t belong to any philosophy.
It simply shows that whenever your belief system is supported, you will feel good, great; and whenever hammered, you will feel bad. But in fact, those moments that you feel I have given you of heaven are poisonous, because they are making you cling more tightly to your conditioning.
The moments that you call “of hell” are the real thing. Only those moments, if you are courageous enough, if you have guts – which is very rare in clergymen, because why should a man who has guts become a clergyman? – if you have any guts, then forget all those moments of heaven, and remember those moments of hell. They are going to help you.
My work is surgical. I have to cut so much crap which is clinging to you, and you are clinging to it. It hurts, I know. It hurts. You can forgive me for hurting you – but don’t forget that this hurting is being caused by your clinging.
If you really listen to me, and you see that something is so and drop it instantly, you will not feel any pieces of hell, moments of hell. And the moment you drop all that is painful to part with, a new phenomenon will happen to you. The moments of hell disappearing will make you able to see that your moments of heaven are only hallucination. You have been drugged from your very childhood. All religions are nothing but opium. And if you can drop both, you will be free for the first time.
You are saying that you are more free than me, you are more free than my sannyasins in Rajneeshpuram. Don’t befool yourself. You say that I live in a prison. I don’t live in a prison. Yes, I live in my room almost the whole day. But the reason why I live there is because the world outside has nothing more to offer to me. And the world inside me is so rich, so overflowingly rich, that I need not go looking outside. Yes, roses are beautiful, but inside me I have seen bigger, more alive, more fragrant roses blooming. Now, what do you suppose I should do?
I am the freest man in the whole history of humanity. It is out of my freedom that I am inside my room. Nobody is preventing me. On the contrary, my personal physicians, Devaraj and Shunyo; my caretaker, Vivek; my secretary – they are all trying to get me somehow to go out.
I am trying here for you to go in!
Yes, there are guards around me, because I am not a suicidal person. I am not as suicidal as your Jesus Christ was. He had absolute knowledge that that day he was going to be caught. What was the need for him to go to Jerusalem, unless he was attracted toward death? He had a very great death instinct in him. I don’t have any suicidal instinct in me. Both things disappeared together: the desire for eternal life and the desire to commit suicide. They are two sides of the same coin. I threw away that coin thirty-two years ago.
Those guards around me are not placed by me but by my people. You have to remember that I must be the most fortunate person to have so many intelligent people around me. Just look at who Jesus had: fishermen, farmers, woodcutters, carpenters. He had only one man, Judas, who was a little literate and a little intelligent; otherwise, those so-called apostles needed adult education.
I am here to share myself with you. I have no concern with the moment that has passed, and I have no concern for the moment that is coming. But my people would certainly like me to be with them as long as possible.
It is their arrangement. Not only have they arranged the guards, they have arranged every medical facility in my house, every surgical facility in my house. Any moment, if anything happens, they don’t want to lose time taking me to Portland or to Bend or to Redmond. And I never interfere with anybody. If this is their joy, they should do it.
Who am I to interfere? If somebody wants to kill me, I will not interfere even in that. But if somebody wants to save me, do you want me to interfere in it? And these guards have done no harm to anybody in four years. They are just standing there as a precaution. And it is not me who is responsible for them standing there. But my people are free to do anything they want to do for me.
It would have been beautiful if Jesus had also had some intelligent people around him. Only Judas was a little intelligent, and he betrayed. Perhaps he did well, because he must have seen this suicidal instinct in Jesus. He must have seen that Jesus wanted to be a martyr, he was not going to listen to anybody. He wanted to be on the cross, because by his teachings he had not been able to convert the Jews to Christianity. He was hoping, perhaps, that what he had not been able to do, his martyrdom, his crucifixion may do. And he was right – it happened.
There is no Christianity in the world; it is only “crossianity.” The cross made a great impact, aroused sympathy toward him, just as my Roll Royces and my watches arouse in you jealousy, my clothes create jealousy. But if I was hanging on a cross, then this clergyman would have been at my feet praying to God.
It is strange but true, that you are sympathetic to misery, to poverty, to sickness, to death. Have you ever thought what it means? You are never sympathetic with somebody who is blissful, happy, joyous, dancing, singing, has no worry at all, no tension. Have you felt any sympathy with that man? Have you gone to that man and said, “I have great sympathy for you”? You would look foolish. He does not need your sympathy in the first place. In the second place, his being in a blissful state creates jealousy in you, not sympathy.
The crucifixion of Jesus created great sympathy, and out of that sympathy was born this whole cancer of Christianity.
I am not asking for your sympathy; otherwise I would be carrying my cross on my shoulders. I do not care, because to ask for your sympathy simply means that I am empty within, that I want to fill that empty hollowness through your sympathy, your love, your compassion. No.
Why do people get angry with me? Why do they become arrogant, aggressive toward me? The reason is simple. I am so blissful that only great jealousy starts burning in their hearts. You have never loved anybody who is going higher and higher in his happiness.
If your house is on fire, even your enemies will come to sympathize with you, even those who were not on talking terms with you. But if you make a beautiful marble palace, even your friends will disappear. The jealousy…. That jealousy is all over the letter of the clergyman.
Finally he says, “Blessings.”
Please forgive me, I cannot accept it. I have so much blessedness in me, I am just blissed-out. What am I going to do with a poor man’s blessings? And what blessings can you give to me? You don’t have them in the first place to give. This is simply egoistic stupidity.
You should have asked for my blessings. I have them and I can give them to you, or to anybody. In fact, I am simply throwing them to everybody!
Please forgive me, this clergyman destroyed your whole morning.