---
title: From Bondage to Freedom 01
series: From Bondage to Freedom
talk_number: 1
url: https://oshoworld.com/from-bondage-to-freedom-01
language: English
duration: 01:54:12
author: TALKS IN AMERICA
scraped_at: 2026-01-03T09:13:54.060384+00:00
---
Question 1
BELOVED MASTER,
PLEASE SPEAK ON THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN MEDIOCRITY AND ORDINARINESS.
Mediocrity is the general state of humanity as it is. It is a retardedness of intelligence. Nobody wants you to be intelligent, because the more intelligent you are, the more it is difficult to exploit you, to enslave you.
Every vested interest wants you to be mediocre. A mediocre person is just like a tree whose roots have been continuously cut so it cannot grow. The mediocre person never comes to know fruition, flowering, fragrance. He lives just like a vegetable. But this is the common state. And to keep the mediocre, mediocre, a strange thing has to be put in his mind: that he is extraordinary.
George Gurdjieff used to tell a story....
There was a shepherd who was a magician, and he had many sheep. To take care of them, not to let them wander into the forest and be eaten by wild animals, he managed a strategy. He hypnotized all the sheep and told them, "You are not sheep, you are lions." Since that day, the sheep started behaving like lions.
The mediocre person will rebel against mediocrity because it is ugly to be mediocre. But the society in many ways gives him the feeling of being extraordinary. Hence, it is very difficult to find a man who does not, deep down, believe that he is special -- the only begotten son of God.
He may not say so, because he knows what happens if you say that you are the only begotten son of God. Then crucifixion is certain, and resurrection... nobody knows whether it happened or not. So he keeps it inside. This helps him to remain mediocre.
If he understands he is mediocre, that very understanding will destroy his mediocrity. To understand you are mediocre is a great jump into intelligence.
The ordinary person I talk about is the natural person. Nature does not produce special people. It produces unique people, but not special. Everybody is unique in his own way.
The big pine tree and the small rosebush -- who is higher? Neither the pine tree ever boasts that she is higher, nor the rosebush ever boasts that "You may be higher, but where are the roses? The real height is in the roses and the fragrance, in the flowering. Height itself is not enough to be higher."
But the rosebush and the pine remain together without any quarrel, competition, for the simple reason that both understand they are part of the same nature.
When I say ordinariness, I am saying drop the idea of being extraordinary, which is keeping you mediocre.
To be ordinary is the most extraordinary thing in the world. Just watch yourself. It hurts very much, it is painful to accept that you are not extraordinary. Watch when you accept the idea that you are ordinary. A great burden is relieved. Suddenly you are in the open space, natural, just the way you are.
The ordinary person has a uniqueness and a simplicity, humbleness. Out of his simplicity, humbleness, uniqueness, he has really become extraordinary, but he has no idea of it.
So it is a paradox: the people who think they are extraordinary are simply retarded, mediocre. And the people who are humble and just accept that they are ordinary people like everybody else -- you will see a light in their eyes. You will see a grace in their actions. You will not see them competing, you will not see them cheating. You will not see them betraying. They will not have double minds. They will not be hypocrites.
What is the need for an ordinary person to be a hypocrite? He can show his heart openly to anybody, because he is not pretending anything.
You become secretive when you start pretending. You start feeling very great. You may say it or not, but by hypocrisy, masks, your head goes on becoming more and more swollen. It is a state of sickness.
And who is the person who believes himself extraordinary? The person who suffers immensely from an inferiority complex. To cover it up, he projects just the opposite idea. But he is only deceiving himself, nobody else is deceived by him.
The ordinary person has no need to be a hypocrite, no need to be a pretender. He is just open; he need not be secretive. And there is beauty in openness, simpleness.
So it is a rare paradox that the person who feels himself ordinary becomes extraordinary, and the person who goes on feeling himself extraordinary, remains very retarded, a mediocrity.
Everybody has to look within himself. But people are such deceivers that, deceiving others, slowly slowly they start deceiving themselves. They become so articulate about deceiving. It is dangerous to be a hypocrite, because sooner or later you will start thinking this is your real face.
In my thirty-five years' work with people I have come across thousands of people, intimately, and I was puzzled that these people have deceived themselves. To deceive others can be understood, but they have deceived themselves.
And you cannot take them out of that deception, because that is their only treasure. They know behind it there is just darkness, hollowness, an inferiority complex. So they cling to it.
Even in this commune -- which hurts me, because at least here people should not be like that. Otherwise, what the hell are you doing here?
I just saw Venu at the gate.... Sheela had asked which people were coming with her, and Venu had said that her place is with Sheela. I was surprised. What is she doing here standing at the gate? Her place is not here! She should go with Sheela. Not a single moment she should be here. People should be honest!
Sheela asked me again and again during these four years, "Beloved Master, help me, so that I never deceive you, never betray you."
I told her, "Sheela, asking it again and again means there is a tendency, of which you are aware, that you can betray, you can deceive. Otherwise, what is the point of asking it?"
And finally she did. And the reason why she did is worth understanding for everybody.
When I was silent for three and a half years, she was the spokesman. I knew that this is going to be a difficult task the day I start speaking directly, because then she will see she is no more a celebrity; no interviews on the television, radio, newspapers, magazines.
But I had to speak. Just for one person I cannot hold back from one million sannyasins, and for the sannyasins who will be coming later on, my heartfelt feelings, truths, experiences. And there is too much to say.
As you get prepared only then I can say it. Those three and a half years prepared you, and now you can see the difference between the way I am speaking now and the way I was speaking three and a half years before. As you mature, as you graduate, I can tell you more naked truths, trusting that you will be able to understand them.
So the problem was, I knew that if I start speaking, then Sheela's swollen head will start shrinking, and that will be difficult. I was perfectly aware the day I started speaking, she started becoming sad; and slowly slowly she started being away from Rajneeshpuram, finding excuses that she is needed in Australia, she is needed in Europe. She was never needed before.
And this time when she came, she wrote a letter to me, "Beloved Master, I do not feel the same excitement here. I feel happier in Europe, in Australia, anywhere else." But she did not look why.
I sent a message to her that, "See the point. Where has the excitement gone? The excitement was not being with me, with the commune, creating a new way of life, hoping for a new man to arrive. That was not your real excitement. Your real excitement was becoming a celebrity -- on the television, on the radio, in the magazines, in the newspapers. You enjoyed your name, your photograph; now this will not be possible. I am speaking myself. I am speaking to the whole world press. And certainly you cannot represent me."
I had to teach her everything for three and a half years, two hours every day -- what she has to say, what she has not to say. And she was repeating like a parrot, because it is not her experience. But she did well; as a parrot she was perfect.
But now, when I started speaking, she started feeling sad, gloomy. I sent the message, "You should look at the cause of it. The cause is your ego.
"Three and a half years is a long enough time to get a swollen head, and I am now bringing it back to its real position. It is sick. This swelling is more dangerous than any cancer, because the cancer can kill the body, but this swelling kills the mind and the very soul of man.
"And why are you feeling happy in Europe? If you want to check it, I can come to Europe, and immediately you will know it is not because you are in Europe that you are feeling happy. You will feel even more unhappy than here."
But man is so stupid.... She did not even respond to my message. On the contrary, she collected the bunch of people that she has placed in important places. Now the sadness was turning into revengefulness. The idea was that all these people will go with her, and the commune will be in a chaos.
Now, the commune is always in a chaos! Nobody can disturb it. What more chaos can be there?
And it is a simple law that people who are in power... and I had given her all the powers, simply because I was not interested in getting involved in small things. It was impossible to be silent and get involved in small things.
She removed all the people who were in some way more intelligent, stronger, and a danger to her position; any day they can be the competitors. So she removed those people, and she chose people who were even more mediocre than her. They will never be a challenge.
Now, this Venu was saying, "My place is with Sheela." Certainly her place is with Sheela, because she is more mediocre than Sheela. But I was surprised to see her standing here. What is she doing here? She should have left with Sheela.
It is a good change. Be happy about it. It was bound to happen. Now you can have a better and stronger group of people to run the commune -- because I am not afraid of anybody being more ordinary than me. You cannot find on the whole earth a competitor for me. So this gives me immense freedom.
That's why Arup can ask the question. While Sheela was here, Arup was pushed back in every way. And I was watching, sadly. She is far more intelligent, far stronger.
Now all the people who had been thrown out of the commune by Sheela can come back. So inform all your friends who have left that Sheela is gone and gone forever. And not alone -- with the whole bunch, the whole gang. So inform the people who have left just because of her, because those people were intelligent, and she could not tolerate any intelligent person.
This is a problem with all mediocre people. They cannot tolerate anybody who is better than them because that destroys their illusion of being extraordinary. But nobody can take your ordinariness. It is something which is not a projection, but a reality.
The rosebush is ordinary, the pine is ordinary, the deer is ordinary. Why should any man try to be extraordinary?
Only man seems to be sick. The whole existence lives in absolute ordinariness and is so joyful, such a blessing; but man is sick. His sickness is that he cannot accept himself as he is. He wants to be somebody great: Alexander the Great. Less than that won't do.
But he forgets what Alexander gained. He lived only thirty-three years, spent his whole life fighting, invading, killing. He had no chance to live, no time to live.
He had met a great philosopher, sage, wise man, Diogenes, before he was going to invade India. He asked Diogenes if he had any message for him.
Diogenes said, "Only one: rather than wasting time, live it. You are not living yourself, and you are not allowing others to live. You are committing immense crimes against life -- for what? Just to be called Alexander the Great?
"Everybody thinks like that. Just inside, you can call yourself Alexander the Great; nobody is preventing you. If you want, you can even put a signboard on your chest: 'Alexander the Great' -- but live! You will look like a buffoon, but that is far better than to be a buffoon; at least you will have time to live, love, sing, dance."
Alexander understood the message. He said, "I can see the point. When I come back, I will try to follow it."
Diogenes said, "Remember, nobody comes back from such an ego trip, because this ego trip never ends, it goes on and on. You will end, not your ego trip."
And that's what happened: he never came back home. On the way, he died. And when he was dying, he remembered Diogenes' statement that nobody comes back. Ego drives you, and there is no end for the ego. It creates more goals, new goals, higher goals.
In deep respect for Diogenes, he told the people who were going to carry his body to the grave, "Let my hands hang out of the casket."
His prime minister asked, "But this is not the tradition. Hands have to be inside the casket. Hanging them out will look really odd."
But he said, "I want them to hang out, because I want people to know that empty-handed I had come into the world, empty-handed I lived in the world, and empty-handed I am going from the world."
These empty hands of Alexander the Great represent almost everybody's hands.
If you want to live authentically and sincerely, then just be ordinary. Then nobody can compete with you. You are out of the race of competition, which is destructive.
Suddenly you are free to live. You have time to live. You have time to do what you want to do. You can laugh, you can sing, you can dance. You are an ordinary man. Even if the whole world laughs at it, so what? I am an ordinary man. They are all extraordinary people. They have the right to laugh; I have the right to dance. Their laughter is phony; your dance is real.
Sheela could not tolerate it. I even sent her the message, "If it gives you pleasure that I should not speak, I can go into silence again. Of course, millions of sannyasins today and tomorrow and in the future will be at a loss, because there is much which I have yet to say. But to make you happy, I can do that.
"But remember, if my silence makes you happy, then my absence may make you happier. Perhaps, deep down, my death will be the right thing for you. Then you can become the head. Nobody will be there to prevent you."
If you try to look into things deeper, you will be surprised what revealing factors come up.
Now, Sheela was very much concerned about my death -- almost paranoid. She had arranged so many guards and security. But she will never understand why this paranoia.
Something deep inside herself was longing for my death. And to avoid seeing it, she was projecting that somebody is going to assassinate me.
Mind is very complex. It projects things which are inside onto others.
And she was promising me continuously, "I am yours forever."
I said, "Sheela, don't say such things, because forever is a long time. Just today is enough. Tomorrow, nobody knows."
But she said, "I love you so much that I can say that I will always love you."
I said, "If you want to say these things, you can go on saying, but you don't see that I am a mirror. I can see all the layers within you. Why this insistence that 'I will never betray you. Even if you tell me to resign from the presidentship of the commune, foundation, or any post that I am holding, I will do it immediately'?"
I said to her, "Just wait."
Now she has resigned on her own, and she has taken those idiots she has put in powerful positions.
Vidya is gone with her. She was one of the thickest heads here.
And they all have written letters to me, "Beloved Master...." Still they don't see the point, that now it is better to address them "Mr. Rajneesh." Why "Beloved Master"?
"We love you, and we will always love you, but we are leaving." No reason why they are leaving. And still no sensibility that words like "Beloved Master" do not suit in the context they are, perhaps unconsciously, using them.
And none of them -- neither Sheela nor Vidya -- has given any reason why, because they know if they give the reason why.... They cannot give the real reason, which will be very humiliating. And they cannot give any wrong reason, because I can see what is right and what is wrong. So they decided not to give any reason.
But to see the words "Beloved Master" from these people makes me sick. What they are doing is just the opposite.
These are the mediocre people. Remaining here with me for years, they have not understood what it means to be ordinary, simple human beings. They wanted a hierarchy, they wanted to be on the top, they wanted to have power. It was their political game.
I told Sheela again and again, that the people who have come to the commune have not come just to work; they have come here to meditate, to grow, to come to a realization of their self. But she was not interested in that at all. Her interest was only one: that she should remain on the top.
But it is good that on her own she has taken all the stupid people. A few are still here who have promised her they will leave. I hope they leave soon, because I have better people here, I have better people around the world who can be called.
And the commune does not become just a factory where people are only working, no time for them even to love. This was heavy on my heart for all these years. I cannot see my people just working, and tired and going to sleep.
You are not for the work. Work is for you.
We will work, we will do things, but that does not mean that you don't have any time to dance and sing and compose music and love your woman -- or somebody else's woman.
If you don't have much time left for yourself, you can at the most love your own woman. To love somebody else's woman takes a longer time -- to persuade her, talk all kinds of nonsense. But it is perfectly good just for a change -- good for you, good for the other man's woman. Good for the other man, because he will also be having a chance with somebody else....
Because I was silent I had to keep this heavy load on my heart.
You will not believe it, that many nights I had tears in my eyes for the simple reason that I don't want to reduce my people to living in a slave camp -- at least while I am alive.
I want my people to rejoice in life. Work is part of it, but not the whole of it. We will make houses, and we will make roads, and we will make everything, but for what? Just for the sake of making them?
So necessarily, I had to start speaking. And you will be surprised that all the people who were in power -- Sheela, Vidya, Savita, Krishna Deva, your mayor -- they are all leaving with Sheela. Thank God! -- who does not exist, but in such moments you can use the name.
Now we can put more intelligent, more loving, stronger people, who will be more human and who will understand the needs of the sannyasins.
A commune has to be a place of love, song, dance. Yes, work is needed, because you need food, you need shelter. And to reach the other man's woman you need roads, so we will make them!
But that is not all. You need sometimes to just sit silently in the hills, by the side of the lake.
So I am immensely happy that Sheela has gone with her gang. Now I can give you better people who will take care of more essential things than the nonessentials.
But mediocre people function in that way. They were not ordinary. If they had accepted the ordinariness that I have been continuously talking about, they would not have been in such a trouble. And I know, wherever they are they will be in trouble.
They may be thinking that in Europe they will not be in trouble. They are wrong. I just have to send a message to all the communes that these people should not be listened to anymore.
If they cannot be happy here, then they cannot be happy in any other commune. And those who have left with them will repent.
The remaining ones... for example, Krishna Deva, I think, is still here.
And sometimes I wonder.... Krishna Deva has been guarding me with a gun. Sometimes I think these people who can leave because Sheela is leaving, they were not here for me. Their hands and their guns were dangerous. They may not have known it, but now they can understand that they were not for me. And it is more possible for a guard to shoot me than for anybody else.
But the mediocre mind has no capacity for understanding. It is absolutely retarded. It is stuck somewhere near thirteen years of mental age, or even below it. He may be forty, he may be fifty, seventy -- that does not matter, that is his physical age. He has been growing old, but he has not been growing up. You should keep the distinction. Growing old, every animal does it. Growing up, only a few human beings manage.
And the first step is just to accept your simpleness, humbleness. And how can you be an egoist in such a beautiful, immense, vast, infinite universe? What ego can you have?
Your ego may be just a soap bubble. Maybe for a few seconds it will remain, rising higher in the air. Perhaps for a few seconds it may have a rainbow, but it is only for a few seconds. In this infinite and eternal existence your egos go on bursting every moment. It is better not to have any attachment with soap bubbles.
You can play with them while you are in your bathtub. You can go on bursting those soap bubbles, telling yourself, "This is my ego that I myself am destroying." So when you come out of your bathtub, you are an ordinary man, fresh, humble, clean.
The desire to rule over others, the will to power, is one of the greatest crimes that man has committed. My sannyasins have to be aware of it. Hence, my insistence for being just ordinary. And it is so beautiful, because I am saying it out of my experience.
No egoist in the whole history of humanity has said that ego is beautiful, that it has given him great ecstasies. All the egoists have died in frustration, despair, because the ego knows no limits. So you are always frustrated.
I can tell you from my experience of being just an ordinary human being that it is the ultimate ecstasy. It merges you with existence. There is no barrier. It merges you with the stars, and with the sky, and with the earth. You are no more separate.
Ego separates you.
And the feeling of oneness with this exquisite existence is religion to me.

Question 2
BELOVED MASTER,
CAN YOU SAY SOMETHING ABOUT SINGLE-POINTEDNESS, BEING TOTAL, SPACING OUT, WORK, AND WORSHIP?
There has always been a confusion in people's minds about singlemindedness -- in other words, concentration -- and meditation. They think both are the same.
The reality is just the opposite. When you are single-minded, you are one dimensional. Your mind becomes narrower and narrower and narrower, and remains focused on one point. This is concentration.
If you are learning shooting, the art of archery, and things like that, it will be helpful.
There is a story in ancient Indian scriptures. The great master archer, Dronacharya, asked his disciples to shoot their arrows at a bird sitting on a tree. They were all ready with their bows and arrows, and he said, "Before you shoot, I want to ask a question, and each one has to answer."
He asked the first one. The question was, "What are you seeing?"
He said, "I am seeing everything: the tree, the sky, other trees, the birds flying."
He went on asking the same question to the other disciples. One disciple said, "I can see only the tree on which the bird is sitting."
He was far better, but the other one was even closer. He said, "I can only see the bird."
The master has said that you have to make the target the bird's right eye.
The other said, "I can see both the bird's eyes."
Arjuna was the only one who said, "I don't see anything except the right eye."
This is one-pointedness.
Arjuna became his master's most important disciple, a great archer.
So one-pointedness is needed in many things, but it is not meditation. It is putting your mind together in one narrow dimension -- linear, just in a line.
In science it is useful, but it is not meditation.
Meditation is a state of no-mind.
Meditation means the mind has stopped. Just you are, pure consciousness, simple awareness; all the dimensions are available to you. So it is just the opposite of concentration.
You are asking what it means to space out. You all know it.
When you are doing something and you are not there, that is spacing out. It is against concentration. It is against meditation. It is just a wandering mind.
If you are chopping wood and thinking of a film star, you are spaced out. And it is dangerous: you may chop one of your legs. You are not where you are supposed to be.
Even in such sacred moments when you are making love to your beloved, you are not there. The woman is there, but her mind is also far away. So two bodies are going through a gymnastics. Of course it is not productive of any contentment. You both come out of it frustrated, cheated. Something went wrong.
The man immediately turns to the other side, pulls over the blanket, and goes to sleep. The woman cries, weeps, because such a moment... and nothing comes out of it. The whole day she has been waiting, that her lover will be coming; but when he was making love, she was thinking of Muhammad Ali the Great.
So whenever two persons are making love, there is at least a crowd. The man is thinking of Marilyn Monroe, the woman is thinking of Muhammad Ali, and these pictures in the mind go on changing. And on the margin they are trying to make love.
Why unnecessarily harass each other? If this is the situation in love, what will be the situation in other things?
Spacing out is unhealthy. If you want to think of Muhammad Ali, you can sit silently and think of Muhammad Ali. At least it will be one-pointedness. But people are doing many things at a time, and they think that this is some achievement.
Just in front of my house in India, was one woman I used to see every day. She had a small child. So the child was put in a rocking chair, and she would be sitting in front of the child, and she would go on pushing the rocking chair with her leg, because the child cannot manage that. So the chair would go on rocking, and the child would remain silent.
And she was continuously making something for the child, because the winter was coming: a sweater, socks, a hat. So with her hands she was engaged with the sweater, and with her eyes she was always reading the newspaper. A multipurpose woman!
And I don't think this was all; this was outside so you could see. What was going on in her head nobody knows, because when she can manage three things simultaneously outside, in the mind she can manage three hundred things.
These people go on missing the moment -- its purity, its life, its joy -- because they are not there. And they will never be anywhere if this becomes their habit -- which has become the habit of the whole humanity.
And you ask me what is work and worship.
Work is when you space out. You do the work, but you are not totally there. If you are totally there, it is worship.
Then the work is not only work; then the work takes a new flavor: of silence, of meditativeness, of joy -- just the wind passing by, the sunrays falling on you, you chopping wood, and the perspiration coming to your forehead. And all is in utter silence; you are simply chopping wood. You are not going anywhere; you are here.
One of the emperors of Japan had gone to see a great Zen master, Nan Yin. He asked Nan Yin, "What have you learned that makes you a great master, known all over the country?"
Nan Yin said, "Very simple: when I chop wood, I simply chop wood; and when I carry the water from the well, I simply carry the water from the well."
The emperor said, "I had come to listen to something spiritual. What nonsense are you talking? Chopping wood, you simply chop wood? Everybody does it; what is special in it? Carrying water from the well, you carry the water from the well? I have come a long distance, and I am your country's emperor. You should at least give me some spiritual advice."
Nan Yin said, "That was my spiritual advice, and I want to make it clear to you that everybody is not doing that. It took me years to chop wood without any thoughts: to just be there, chopping.
"And it is tremendously beautiful: the sound in the valley, the chips of the wood flying all over, the wind blowing through the trees, their song, their music. And I am utterly silent, just chopping wood. Carrying water from the well is the same.
"My whole day is the same. I have given you, in short, my basic approach of life. Be where you are. Don't let mind go away."
Work immediately becomes worship -- if you have understood Nan Yin's statement.
Things are not complex, things are very simple. You just have to be a little alert and watch what is happening within you: whether it is singlemindedness, whether it is spacing out, whether it is work, whether it is worship. Just watch.
And your goal should be that everything becomes worship: walking, or sitting, or even doing nothing. If you are there, absolutely there -- nothing is moving in your mind, all movement has stopped -- then your whole life is worship.
Then your whole life is meditation.
Christians go to the church on Sunday. Their religion is Sunday religion. One hour there, listening to the same boring sermon -- but they have to listen to it, because they are afraid of falling in hell. This boring sermon is okay; for a few years you listen to it, and you will go to heaven.
But they don't know that in heaven you will have all the saints for eternity giving you the same sermon. They will bore you so much, because the time is so long. And Sunday is not Sunday there; it is every day, the whole day, and for eternity.
And suicide is not possible in paradise -- at least I have not come across any incident that any saint has been able to commit suicide -- although everybody who is there must be thinking of it. But it does not happen in heaven. They will be wanting to come back to the earth. It is not allowed.
They may be thinking that it would have been better to be in hell, because in hell there are all the colorful people: all poets, painters, singers, dancers, actors, actresses. All the colorful people, juicy people, are in hell.
And people who are just dry bones are in heaven. They are not allowed to visit hell even for the long weekend. Once you enter heaven there is no exit.
Other religions are in the morning -- ten minutes, twenty minutes -- chanting mantras, and thinking that this is all.
I have consideredly given you red clothes, a mala with a locket of a madman, to remind you -- even in sleep -- that your whole life has to become religious; it is not a question of a few minutes, a few hours.
And for me, there is no other paradise. You have to create it here and now. You have to learn how to create paradise.
Meditation is the technology.
Changing work into worship is the secret.
So wherever you are, it doesn't matter. If after death there is heaven and hell, then of course you will all be in hell with me, because hell needs my people immensely.
And there are so many intelligent people; in fact, all intelligent people are there. We can create a really big commune.
And the people who are in hell have been misfits in the world. But we are a commune of misfits, so nobody can be a misfit with us. We are all misfits, and nobody takes note of it. In fact, we respect the misfit person because he has some individuality. The person who simply fits like a cog in the wheel is not worth.... Let him go to heaven. Perhaps he may serve as a cog in some wheel.
If there is any heaven and hell, if we end up by chance in heaven -- accidents happen -- we are going to do the same. We are going to initiate those poor saints into sannyas, and teach them Dynamic Meditation. And they will rejoice immensely, because for centuries they have been sitting there, simply playing on the harp, "Alleluia, alleluia!"
I have heard about a porter in Munich, a German guy, addicted to beer. By mistake -- that's why I say accidents happen -- by mistake, somebody else was to die but the angels of death took the poor porter, because he was lying in the other man's house who was going to die, completely drunk. It was just a mistake. In such a state he could not find his house, so wherever it happened, he fell down there. The man of the house was not at home, so the angels took that man.
When he opened his eyes he could not believe where he was. He was handed a harp.
He said, "What are you doing? I am a porter, I don't play the harp."
They said, "Here you will have to play the harp for eternity and sing, 'Alleluia!' You sit on one of the clouds. Just look at what the other saints are doing."
But the man said, "I am not a saint! I am just a porter in the Munich station. And what about my beer?"
The angels said, "Don't mention such things here. These things are not available. All that you have to do is rejoice and play."
For a few minutes he tried. He said, "What nonsense! I was living such a beautiful life in Munich, earning well as a porter in the station. And then every evening going to the pub, meeting the friends, drinking -- it was such a joy. And where have I landed? I am not a saint at all; I never even went to the church."
He was very angry after a few hours. "This is too much. Just in a few hours I am getting so angry, and it is a question of eternity. Something has to be done!"
He became angry. And a porter is, after all a porter, he is not a professor. His language is not of the cultured, high society. So he would sing, "Alleluia, alleluia," and in between he would say, "Fuck you all!" -- and start again, "Alleluia, alleluia."
The other saints saw that this man was doing really badly. Between "Alleluia, alleluia," he says something which is not mentionable.
They went to God and said, "This man is saying things which have never been said."
God said, "I know. The trouble is you have brought a wrong man. He is not the saint I have sent you to bring. He is a porter in Munich, and naturally he is getting angry. And when he gets angry he will say things like that. You take him back and leave him in Munich so that he can enjoy his life. He is not meant for heaven."
The man was brought down. He was immensely happy. Immediately he went to the pub and he said, "Alleluia! Now bring as much beer as you can." He said, "My God! I had entered into such a bad space. Perhaps I was too drunk and dreamt....
"Only one thing helped me. And everybody condemned me -- 'Don't use that word' -- but only that word helped me. Alleluia did not do anything! Playing on the harp I got tired, but the moment I said to the saints, 'Fuck you all!' they all disappeared from their clouds."
So if by chance we end up in heaven, remember the word. Don't forget it! And when so many people on the harps sing that beautiful word... we are going to change heaven into real heaven.
You just have to know the secret -- and I have told you the secret.
Okay?

============================================================

Question 1
BELOVED MASTER,
I'M AMAZED TO SEE HOW MUCH FEAR AND HOW MANY WOUNDS FROM MY HEART EVAPORATED, LISTENING TO YOU TALKING ABOUT SHEELA AND HER GANG LEAVING THE COMMUNE. NOW NOBODY WILL THROW ME OUT, AWAY FROM YOU.
BELOVED MASTER, I'M SO HAPPY THAT I'M LAUGHING AND CRYING TOGETHER.
PLEASE, JUST TELL ME ONE THING: WHY DID THIS SHEELA-VIDYA GANG HATE YOUR INDIAN SANNYASINS SO MUCH?
I can see you all are immensely happy. I came to know just a little late that you were dancing in the streets; otherwise, I would have joined you. I myself am feeling for the first time at home.
First the question, then a few more things.
I feel sad and sorry for Sheela and her gang. She has a certain hatred for Indians. The reason is she was raped when she was fifteen or sixteen years old by a man who was a friend of her father, and she had always thought of him as her uncle. Then she became pregnant.
And in India, in those days, pregnancy was a great problem. Abortion was not legal, so illegally, somehow, some physician managed the abortion.
That pain, that distrust, that ugly experience, and the trauma has remained as a wound in her. That is the root cause of her hatred for Indians.
Perhaps I am the only person from India whom she did not hate. The reason is clear, that I may have been born in India, but I am not an Indian. I don't belong to any tradition, any religion, any race, any color. The moment she saw me, heard me, she felt tremendous joy, that at least in the whole of India, of eight hundred million people, she can love one Indian.
The same phenomenon has caused in her mind a deep hatred for men too. Because of that old man she has been taking revenge on all men.
You may have observed that around her there were only homosexuals. Homosexuals are not men, homosexuals are not women. You cannot categorize them as men or women.
First I was thinking, why does she continue to be surrounded by homosexuals? Then I saw the point, that instead of men she would like homosexuals to be around her. They have dropped out of manhood. They are no longer polar opposites to the woman.
In India, she was consistently, for nine years, persuading me to come to America. I would have never come to America, but my physical health was bad. And her persuasion was right, that perhaps in the clean air, in a dry and cool place, my health will recover.
But in her own mind, the basic reason for me to leave India was the rape that had happened there. She hated the whole country. Her excuse to bring me out of India was perfectly right, but behind the excuse was her psychology. She did not want to live in India herself. She did not want me to live in India. She did not want my people to live in India.
She still carried the same antagonism, and she found excuses to throw away Indians. Many Indians had come to the commune, and had gone back to India with tears in their eyes.
India is a poor country. To make arrangements to come to America, and then to be refused by the commune, is simply inhuman. These people had come by selling their houses, their lands, all their belongings -- and they were not accepted.
But because I was in silence, I never came to know what was going on. She had sent away many Indian sannyasins in a very ugly way.
Now everybody can come, because nobody has raped me, nor have I raped anybody. I don't have any antagonism for anybody in the whole world. In fact, it was because of Sheela that Oregon became so hostile to the commune. I was silent. For five years I did not read any newspapers, did not listen to the radio, did not read any books.
It is all finished. I am keeping my eyes open only for you, just to see you and let you see in my eyes is enough. Whatever I had to achieve, I have achieved. I have loved enormously. I have been loved by millions of men and women. There is not any experience which was worth having that I have not passed through.
If death comes in this moment I will be going rejoicing, because it is not taking anything away from me. My life has been a complete contentment and fulfillment.
If I am still breathing, I am breathing for you, because before I leave I would like you to be in the same space in which I have lived.
So now nobody will be thrown out of the commune, and anybody who knocks on our doors has to be accepted.
Now there is no need for Oregonians to be hostile to us. Our hands will be always waiting for their hands, and our hearts will be always waiting for their hearts.
Sheela created this ugly situation because her life has been misery, anger, hatred. She created an unnecessary hostility.
But now I am speaking again. That hostility will disappear just like a dewdrop on a lotus leaf disappears in the early morning sun.
We are Oregonians. Now it is for Oregonians to become red! Why should those poor people choose to be dead rather than be red? We will change the whole situation. The whole world is ours -- Oregon included. They are simple human beings reacting in simple human ways. There was no need to create what Sheela did.
It is past history and we have to erase it.
Just the other day I came to know that Sheela, and the whole gang that has escaped from here, were trying to kill three people who are very close to me: Devaraj, my physician; Devageet, who was my dentist in India; and Vivek, who has taken care of me for all these fifteen years as lovingly as no other woman is capable of. Twenty-four hours a day she has been just like a shadow to me, thinking of such small things -- about my dress, about my bath, about my food.
You will not have seen any kitchen where a doctor is sitting and weighing calories of everything. They are very miserly; they don't allow me more than three thousand calories per day. And I have to speak five hours, just on three thousand calories!
But they love me, and they don't want me to leave my body before my people are ready.
I may have died without Vivek, Devaraj, Devageet, anytime. They have taken every care to keep me alive as long as possible.
Now Sheela is gone and the whole gang is gone. Things were repressed out of fear. People who knew could not say, because saying meant they would be thrown out of the commune, and they did not want to leave me. Just to be with me they had to carry wounds in their hearts.
One sannyasin came immensely happy and told Vivek that there was a meeting a few months before.... Vivek, Devaraj and Devageet -- all three should be killed by slow poisoning. And she could not understand, so she left the meeting. So she does not know what decision they came to.
But they must have decided to, because Vivek got one dose of slow poison and her heartbeat went absolutely berserk. It took three hours for doctors, medicine, to bring her heartbeat back to normal. This has never happened before. She had taken only one cup of tea at Jesus Grove, and immediately this happened.
In the meeting here, in the last ceremony, Devaraj was injected with poison. He is a doctor, has the highest qualifications from Britain. He immediately understood what had been done. He felt the prick. It happened when Shanti B. was by the side of him, telling him something, one hand on his shoulder, another hand near his body on the floor.
He immediately started saying that he had been poisoned, he had been injected. Nobody could believe it, but his situation was... he became pale as if he was dying. He had to be sent to Bend Hospital.
Hasya was there to take care of him. The doctors who were looking after him told Hasya that there seemed to be no reason for his sudden sickness, except that some poisoning had been done. They also said that the same case had happened with the attorney of Jefferson County last year, and they suspect it was exactly the same case of poisoning.
Now this gang was making it instead of a meditation camp, a concentration camp. And why did these three people have to be removed, to be killed? Just because they were close to me.
Sheela never wanted anybody to be close to me, for a simple reason: so I am never able to know what she is doing outside, what she is saying outside, in my name.
And you will be surprised and shocked, that even my room, my sitting room, my bedroom -- they were all bugged. On the surface they were all saying that they love me and they are ready to die for me. What could be the reason to bug my room? And Vivek suspected it, because her room was also bugged. Hasya's house was bugged, and every telephone call was taped. Now, my people are not talking politics on telephones -- perhaps with a friend, with a lover.
And when I suspected this, I asked her. She said, "No. We are simply tapping the phones of people whom we suspect are planted by the government."
I said, "In four years, how much information have you got? You show me."
They had not a single piece of information. So I said, "What is the point? For four years those thirty people were not phoning at all?"
And this is simply an excuse to listen to other people's conversations. And it is ugly, inhuman, undemocratic. It is a crime. It is interference in people's privacy.
I was not aware that they were even bugging my room. It will be difficult for you to believe -- yesterday we discovered and disconnected a bugging device.
She was continuously insisting that my room should have a buzzer, an emergency buzzer, so that the guards know immediately if anything is wrong.
I said, "From inside what can be wrong? Guards are outside. If anything wrong is going to happen to me, it will come from outside. They should have a buzzer to inform me. I am living isolated. Nobody can even see me from the outside, and I cannot see anybody outside. The buzzer is pointless."
What she insisted was: in some emergency it may be needed. I said, "Okay, if you are so intent, it does me no harm." But the point was -- just yesterday we came to know -- when the buzzer was removed, there was a microphone. It was a bugging device.
I was seeing a few people once in a while. She never wanted for me to see anybody. But I said, "This is not possible. I have a certain message for somebody, certain instruction for somebody. And I don't think you are capable of doing it. So the person has to be called."
So that was the reason for bugging my room -- what am I saying to people whom I have called?
She had created almost a fascist state. It was ugly. It was criminal. And the whole bunch has escaped. Knowing that once Sheela and the main people are gone, the others will be in trouble because soon these things will be discovered....
But we are not going to leave these criminals in the world. They will destroy other communes, other people. I am going to inform the government; I am going to inform the international police force; I am going to inform all the communes; I am going to inform the press media. These people should be treated as criminals.
One of our old sannyasins, Shunyo, has donated three hundred thousand dollars, after an attack on my life was made, to purchase a bulletproof car. Those three hundred thousand dollars were simply swallowed up by Sheela and her brother, Bipin. They went on saying, "The money will be returned, it will be returned within a month." Now almost eight years have passed, and not a single dollar has been returned to the commune. And I heard yesterday that, although Sheela and her whole gang has left, Bipin is still in Jesus house.
Geeta has proved a jewel. She was the secretary of Sheela. Sheela wanted her also to go with them; Geeta refused. She has seen the working of Sheela closely, and she did not want to be part of that criminal gang. She informed me that this Bipin is in the house. I told her, "Tell him to leave immediately -- he has nothing to do here -- because he may do more mischief."
These people could do all this harm, and much more about which we are not aware. But rumors are coming and soon people will start finding what else they have done.
It is just a rumor that they tried to poison the whole of The Dalles city by poisoning their water system. It is just a rumor right now. They did not succeed, but they made the attempt.
I am trying to make you absolutely apolitical, with no desire for power; and these people were using you and your strength for their own ambitions.
I have heard that some government office in The Dalles was burned, and it was the work of this group. These people could have done anything.
They could have killed me. Perhaps, after killing those three people who are taking care of my health, they would have started slowly poisoning me, so they become absolute dictators in the commune.
So it really feels fresh. The air seems to be totally different, and we are fortunate that they left by themselves. Perhaps they suspected that the time has come when they may be exposed.
Perhaps they have taken away money from the commune... because they have left the commune with a fifty-five-million-dollar debt. And strangely enough, three days before they left I asked Savita -- because she was looking after the finances -- "How much debt do you have?"
She said, "Nearabout two and a half million."
Just three days before, two and a half million. They became experts in lying. The night she was leaving, I asked her, "You tell me exactly how much debt, because anybody who is going to run the commune will have to take care of the debt."
She said, "It must be thirty to thirty-five million."
I said, "Strange. Just within two days, from two and a half million, to thirty to thirty-five million? What happened in these two days?"
She said, "I was not aware of the whole thing. Because you asked me, I looked into it."
I said, "But I have heard that you are leaving a fifty-five-million-dollar debt. And you are still saying thirty-five. Be true!"
Hearing the figure fifty-five million dollars, she said, "Perhaps it is fifty-five million dollars." Suddenly from thirty-five it becomes fifty-five -- just there within two minutes. These people were lying to me. These people were lying to you.
Your letters were not reaching exactly -- only those letters they wanted were coming. My answers were not reaching to you exactly as I had dictated them. They were edited. They managed the answers according to their ideas.
One thing has to be remembered, that such a thing should never happen again in this commune. For that reason, I am not going to be in silence again. Even if I die, just because of old habit I will go on speaking. Habits die hard; man dies very easily. But I am not going into silence. I have to keep completely acquainted with what is happening, so never again such a fascist thing happens to my people.
I love you so much. I could not conceive that anybody would do such criminal acts against you. And you have shown a great quality of trust, even in that group which was not trustworthy. I appreciate your trust. I condemn their acts, but I appreciate your trust.
But it is not going to happen again. And you all have to be aware that it should not happen again. And if you see anything like it happen -- even the beginning of it -- now I will be available to you directly.

Question 2
BELOVED MASTER,
SINCE YOU STARTED SPEAKING AGAIN LAST YEAR, I HEARD YOU SEVERAL TIMES QUOTING THE STORY OF ADAM AND EVE LONGING FOR THE TREE OF KNOWLEDGE, ALWAYS IN THE SENSE THAT THEY DID A GREAT JOB FOR MANKIND. BUT, ACCORDING TO THE BIBLE, IT WAS NOT JUST THE TREE OF KNOWLEDGE, BUT THE TREE OF DETERMINATION OF GOOD AND BAD. WASN'T IT THIS DESIRE OF THE MIND FOR JUDGMENT AND SPLITTING INTO DUALITIES THAT CAUSED MAN'S LOSS OF INNOCENCE AND PARADISE THAT IS DESCRIBED IN THIS SYMBOLIC STORY?
For the moment, just for argument's sake, I will accept what you are saying -- the story is about the tree of knowledge -- but if you call it the tree of the determination of good and bad, it comes to mean the same thing.
What is it that determines, discriminates the good from the bad? It is awareness. It is your consciousness. So what name you give to the tree will not make much difference.
And don't try to befool yourself by saying that when man fell into a state of sin, he lost his innocence.
Let me ask you a question: Does your God knows what is good and what is bad? If your God does not know what is good and what is bad, then he must be a buffalo. And if God knows what is good and bad, then to know good and bad is a divine quality.
Do you mean to say -- you must have a very fanatic Christian upbringing -- do you want to say that your God has fallen into sin, because he knows what is good and what is bad?
Both the ways are open to you. Either you have to accept that he is just a buffalo chewing grass, not knowing what is good, what is bad.... That, of course, you cannot accept, because on the day of judgment how will he discriminate who is good and who is bad? How will he send his saints to heaven and the sinners to hell? He must have the discriminating power. He must be able to see what is white and what is black.
And if God is not committing sin, then what is the fear -- why prevent Adam and Eve from knowing good from bad, discriminating? Because that is the only way to follow the good.
And what you call innocence... think twice. You are calling ignorance innocence. Ignorance looks like innocence; it is not innocence.
For example, it is said that the man who is awakened again becomes just like a child -- innocent. Mind the words, just like a child -- not a child, because the child is not innocent, he is simply ignorant.
That's why the child can be exploited by you, by your society, by your priests, by your politicians, by everybody. He is ignorant. He knows nothing of what is right and what is wrong. So in every society, every religion, he is given ideas.
For example, Christians don't think alcohol is wrong. In fact, on their holy days they drink alcohol -- and from the same glass. Just think of AIDS. AIDS has disturbed all your Christian ceremonies.
Mohammedans eat off one plate; that is a sign of friendship, love. But what about AIDS? Now it is not friendship to eat from the same plate. Nothing can be more inimical.
What is good and what is bad?
In ignorant children you can enforce any idea that "This is good." For example, in Jainism, the Jaina monk cannot use a simple thing like a razor blade, because that is using technology -- high technology. He has to pull out his hair. And every year thousands of people come to see the monk pull out his hair. It is painful, stupid, but those people... you should see the crowd; they are crying with respect: "Now this man is doing something great. This is what a saint should be." They have conditioned their children that this is what it means to be a saint.
Unfortunately, I was born in this religion -- Jainism. But it was going to be "unfortunately" anywhere I was to be born, because to be a Christian or a Jew or a Hindu or a Mohammedan does not matter.
In this matter, a child cannot yet find parents who will not condition him. A child cannot say, "I am born, fortunately, to parents who have not conditioned me, who have given me freedom, who have given me as sharp an intellect as possible, who have taught me how to doubt, how to be skeptical, how to be an agnostic, how to inquire and never believe unless I come to know myself."
In my childhood I have seen many Jaina monks pulling out their hair, and I used to say to my father, "I don't see anything good in it. It is not doing any good to humanity, it is not something creative. It is not making life more beautiful. In fact, that man is a masochist."
And my father would say, "You keep quiet. If you cannot keep quiet, go home, but don't say such things. A masochist?"
I said, "I cannot be quiet, and I cannot go away from here. I have to see the whole show of this masochism."
It is a known fact that mad people in madhouses pluck their hair. And you may know women -- because they cannot do any other harm to the man they love, they start pulling out their own hair.
So this Jaina monk is doing something feminine too; he is not really a male. Pulling out your hair... I don't see any beauty, any grace in it. Look at his face: it is distorted with pain. But he is doing it because thousands of people are applauding. His ego is fulfilled. For his ego he is ready to suffer. In Jainism it is thought to be great, a good quality. What do you think? Is it great, a good quality?
This is what you have done to ignorant children. Their ignorance looks like innocence, but remember, ignorance is negative. It simply means they don't know. Innocence is positive. It has known everything and dropped it -- it was not worth knowing.
You cannot corrupt an innocent person. Innocence is the highest peak of growth. The child cannot be innocent, that's why it is said "just like a child." The saint does not become a child -- just like a child. It is only an example, to make you understand.
God wanted Adam and Eve to remain always ignorant? not to know what is good and what is bad? And when you don't know what is good and what is bad, there is every possibility you may be bad, a fifty-fifty chance. And you may not feel that you are doing anything bad. You may murder somebody and you will not feel that you are doing anything bad.
No, whatever you call the tree, this God will not change me. You can call the tree anything.
It is just an idiotic story, because there is no forbidden fruit. It is supposed to be the apple -- it was an apple tree. And just because it was an apple tree, I used to eat as many apples in the day as possible so that I would not remain ignorant. But I found that apples have no quality, no chemicals to make you more alert, more aware. What fruit can make you more aware, more discriminating, more knowing what is good and what is bad?
So you can play and change the name of the tree, but whatever name you put on it, I will hit on it without any difficulty. It does not matter. To me, what really matters is that God has not punished man for eating the fruit from the tree of knowledge, or from the tree of determining what is good and bad. He punished them because they disobeyed. Disobedience is sin.
Not always. If all the Germans had disobeyed Adolf Hitler, would you call it sin? Ten million people would not have died if Germans had eaten from the tree of discrimination of what is good and what is bad. It seems in Germany the tree does not grow. They obeyed a madman. And according to this obedience they followed whatever was said to them.
Do you think obedience is always a virtue and disobedience always a sin? No, there are moments when disobedience is a virtue, and obedience is a sin. In fact, in the sick society in which you are living, you will find more occasions for disobedience -- if you want to be pure, innocent -- than you will find moments for obedience.
And you seem to be offended because I am saying that it was something great, a great blessing for humanity. I repeat it again: it was the greatest blessing for humanity that Adam and Eve disobeyed your phony God. Otherwise, remember, you would have still been in the Garden of Eden chewing grass, not knowing what is right and what is wrong.
God wanted you to remain animals.
It is by the great revolutionary serpent -- he is the first revolutionary in the world; whoever he was, he was the beginning of humanity -- animals were transformed into human beings.
But you go on falling back into obedience, so I have to do the work of the serpent: to teach you doubt, to teach you disobedience, to teach you inquiry and to never be satisfied unless you know. And eat as many fruits from the apple tree -- they are good.
It is said, "An apple a day keeps the doctor away." Such a good fruit that keeps the doctor away -- just one fruit.
The story is symbolic. All stories are symbolic, they are not historical facts, but they indicate something tremendously beautiful: the God who imposed obedience was just a fascist. He wanted them to be always just animals under his rule. But if man became aware of what is good and what is bad, what was the problem for God? Was man wrong?
The devil, they say, came in the form of the serpent. Strange. One who is bad would like people not to be able to discriminate between good and bad. One who is good would like people to discriminate between good and bad, so they can always do good.
If you look at the story without your Christian eyes, you will be surprised. The devil seems to be good and God seems to be bad, because the devil is for awareness, knowledge, discrimination, and God is not for freedom or disobedience. This God must be a fascist.
Humanity owes much to the serpent. Whatever we have attained, whatever has been our civilization, culture, art, literature, music, our creativity, science... you have to be in immense debt which cannot be paid -- to the serpent, or to the devil.
If there was no devil, there would have been no humanity, no Shakespeare, no Goethe, no Michelangelo, no Albert Einstein, no Moses, no Jesus, no Buddha. There would have been nothing, just animals moving around looking for grass or water.
Have you thought of the alternative?
Every credit goes to the devil. If you want to worship somebody, worship the devil. He is your real creator.
God has made you just out of mud, that's why you are called human. The word "human" comes from humus. Humus means mud.
Not a very good job, not very respectful to human beings. God could have made you with something better -- with gold, with diamonds, with emeralds, with rubies -- nothing is impossible for God. Why make you out of humus?
And I always think that the humus was taken from the Big Muddy Ranch; otherwise, how could you create such a Big Muddy Ranch?
You were not really created, man and woman, by God. He created only animals. The transformation came through the devil. And you have to know that the word "devil" is not bad. It comes from the same Sanskrit root as divine. Devil means divine. Nobody knows what God means.
I was reading the book, WAITING FOR GODOT, and I thought "Godot" looks like "God" -- but in what language is God called Godot? So I inquired of Haridas, because I suspected it must be German. And Haridas said, "No. In German we call God, 'Gott!'"
Strange, nobody has got him, and Germans call him Gott! He has never been found anywhere. But Germans are strange people. They may have "gott" him. That's why nobody else can get him. And if ever they got him, they must have put him with the Jews in the gas chamber, because God is a Jew! The biblical God is bound to be a Jew.
So now I know. He is no more there, just holy smoke.
Okay?

============================================================

Question 1
BELOVED MASTER,
WHEN I LOOKED AROUND ME TODAY AT THE PEOPLE IN THIS COMMUNITY I SAW ONLY INNOCENCE AND LOVELINESS. BUT IF THE UGLINESS YOU SPOKE OF FLOURISHED IN THE HEART OF THIS COMMUNITY, THEN WHAT STRENGTH IS THERE IN INNOCENCE AND LOVINGNESS?
It is one of the most significant questions about life. The roseflower is beautiful, full of fragrance. The rock is almost just the opposite, but the rock can kill the roseflower very easily.
So one thing has to be understood: the higher you go into silence, love, beauty, the more delicate you become, more fragile. The lower you go -- violent, murderous, criminal -- the harder you become.
Your heart has both the possibilities: to become the rock or to become a roseflower.
The second thing to be understood is: the rock has a certain kind of strength, but that strength is of death. It is not in the service of life; it is in the service of destruction and death. The roseflower also has a certain strength, but it is in the service of life, love and beauty. These are different kinds of strength.
Certainly, you cannot make bullets from roseflowers. That does not mean bullets become more important. You cannot kill somebody with a roseflower. That does not mean the arrow -- a poisonous arrow -- is more powerful than a rose. But it appears so.
The arrow is dead; hence you cannot kill it anymore. Do you think that is strength? Then all the people who are in the grave are stronger than you; they will never die again. You will be dying.
Would you like to change places with the people in the graves? They are, in a way, stronger than you, because death cannot happen to them. But they are dead. What is the point of their strength?
Life is fragile. The higher you go, the more fragile. The tree is not so fragile as the flower. The fragrance is even more fragile than the flower -- just a small breeze can take it away.
This is true, that you see innocence and lovingness all over the place in this commune. Naturally, the question has arisen in your mind that why did something like a fascist calamity happen to you?
Innocence can be taken advantage of. Lovingness can be exploited.
But no harm has been done to you! Fragrance may be fragile; it may exist only for a moment, but that moment is eternity. The rock may exist for eternity, but that eternity is not even equal to a single moment of fragrance.
The people who tried to exploit your innocence and love, your trust, have not destroyed you; they have destroyed themselves.
This is the beauty of the power of love, the power of trust, the power of innocence.
What harm has been done to you? No harm can be done to you. Even if you are killed, your loving being and your trusting being and your inner innocence are eternal. And you have seen the whole drama, that the people who were powerful but in the service of destructiveness had to escape finally.
Love is victorious.
And wherever they will go, a deep feeling of guilt, of inhumanity, of having taken advantage of trusting people, will follow them. They will not have a single night of peaceful sleep.
This is a fundamental law of life: your every action is followed by its result automatically.
The flower releases fragrance. These people have released poison, but the poison has not affected you at all. It has poisoned their own beings, their own growth. They have missed a great opportunity, and perhaps they will have to wait for lives to find it again.
I hope they come to understand what they have done. They have done such ugly things that you cannot believe.
Just this morning, more information came from a sannyasin. When the Share-a-Home people had come here, a certain drug was purchased in a big quantity by this fascist gang of Sheela's. They were injecting that drug into the Share-a-Home people so they remained calm and quiet. Otherwise, they were street people; they have lived in a totally different way -- rowdy, ever ready to fight and kill.
But they overdosed one man and he died. I have been informed that they took the man and threw him out of Rancho Rajneesh.
To treat a man like that is disgusting. It simply proves only one thing: that this group of Sheela's had no heart at all. I would not have believed it, but seeing all the other information that is coming... and people are ready to witness for it in the courts.
The pharmacist of the commune was puzzled. He was very much against bringing in that much poison. "What is the reason?" They managed to bring the poison in, in some other roundabout way.
First to invite people here to share your home, and then you share death? If you cannot be loving to people, why have you called them here?
I was in silence. I was told it was "because there is more money from the festival than we need, and this will be good, humanitarian work." I said, "If it is something humanitarian you must do it." But it was not humanitarian. Now people are reporting to me that they were certainly brought here for voting.
For my whole life I have been teaching my sannyasins to be apolitical. Politics is for inferior minds. It is for those who are suffering from an inferiority complex. It is the inferiority complex that forces them to prove to themselves that they are not inferior -- they are governors, they are prime ministers, they are presidents.
But even if you are a president it does not change your inferiority, it does not make you superior. That's why people like Nixon, becoming president, behave like criminals. In fact, your whole history is full of people who came to power and behaved like great criminals.
Your history is the history of criminology. It is worth burning completely, so your children never hear the names Genghis Khan, Tamerlane, Nadirshah, Alexander the Great, Napoleon Bonaparte, Ivan the Terrible, Joseph Stalin, Adolf Hitler, Benito Mussolini. It will be better if your children never hear these names. These names are contaminated. Don't poison poor children.
All these people were not violent before they came into power. Neither were Sheela and her group. They were simply as human as you are, as beautiful as you are, as loving as you are. Then what happens when people come into power? Power certainly makes a great change. Whatever these people have been carrying in their unconscious, now they have the opportunity to materialize it.
So from this experience, you have to learn one thing: somewhere deep down you may be also carrying Sheela, Puja, Vidya, and the whole gang. Your lovingness, your friendliness, may be just superficial. The only way to know whether it is really there, is to give you power. And that's what I am going to do now.
I have chosen Hasya. She is the beginning of my experiment. So be aware.
Everybody has to go through the power-trip. We have to make power just like a rotary club. For a few months somebody is the president, then somebody else, then somebody else -- give everybody a chance to look into his unconscious.
Power is of immense importance. It is a revolution. Something hidden and dormant becomes active, and something that was active goes to sleep. And each of you has to remember that power is not going to corrupt you.
Lord Acton's famous quotation I have used many times: "Power corrupts, and absolute power corrupts absolutely." But I don't agree with him. It is not the power that corrupts. Corruption is in you. Power simply gives you an opportunity to show your real face. So power is not your enemy; it is a mirror.
You don't know. You may be carrying a Genghis Khan within you, a Tamerlane within you, a Nadirshah within you. Power gives you the insight to become aware of it all.
I am not against power. All that is needed is that you should remain aware, more aware than before. Powerless you can afford to be unaware, but when you have power you cannot afford to be unaware. And then power can be of immense help -- to help you to destroy the Nadirshah within you, the Adolf Hitler within you. And if you can come out of power unscratched, then you will have an abundance of love, compassion, beauty, truth.
They have their own strength, but it is of a totally different dimension.
So I am not disappointed. Whatever happened, we are going to turn it into a golden opportunity. That's what I teach to you -- to turn everything into a golden opportunity.
Sheela and her gang have done a great service to you. They have destroyed themselves, but they have given you an insight. Now keep awake. Don't fall asleep.

Question 2
BELOVED MASTER,
YOU HAVE OFTEN REFERRED TO THE QUOTE, "POWER CORRUPTS AND ABSOLUTE POWER CORRUPTS ABSOLUTELY." HOW CAN THIS BE PREVENTED FROM HAPPENING AGAIN? IS THE HORIZONTAL HIERARCHY REALLY POSSIBLE? ALLELUIA FOR THIS NEW DAY! ALLELUIA!
But I have answered your question before you have asked it.

Question 3
BELOVED MASTER,
I DON'T KNOW WHAT MAGIC HAPPENS DURING DARSHAN, BUT FALLING INTO THE DEEP, DEEP SILENCE THAT YOUR PRESENCE CREATES, I FIND IT HARD TO IMAGINE HOW IT IS POSSIBLE TO RECREATE THIS BEAUTIFUL SPACE IN YOUR ABSENCE. AND STRANGELY, A PART OF ME DOES NOT WANT TO BELIEVE IT IS POSSIBLE.
WHY IS THIS?
First, it is such a big event, such a great ecstasy, that you cannot believe it is really happening. You have been brought up by parents, teachers, society, schools, colleges, universities, religions. On one single point they all agree, that you are unworthy, and you have to deserve to be worthy. You have to prove that you are worthy.
And how do you have to prove it? By becoming someone else.
A Christian is trying to become Christ. A Buddhist is trying to become a Buddha.
Now there is a great problem: nature never repeats itself -- that's its beauty and its creativity. Human beings are not produced on an assembly line like Ford cars, where every minute one car comes out just the same. The predecessor was the same, the successor is going to be the same. Machines can be the same; man cannot be.
My opposition to communism is based on the fact that equality of human beings is a psychological impossibility. It is just like if somebody is tall and somebody is short, and you start creating people of equal size. So somebody's head is cut off, and somebody is put on a traction machine to pull his legs. What you will create will be a crippled world, not equal. I am against communism because it is psychologically absurd.
Every man is unique, and there is no way for anybody to become Christ again. Two thousand years are enough proof. Hundreds of popes but not a single Christ. Thousands of monks but not a single Christ. Twenty-five centuries are proof enough: millions of Buddhist monks all over Asia and not a single Gautam Buddha is born.
But a calamity happened instead. The person who tries to become Gautam Buddha or Jesus Christ, cannot become Jesus Christ and cannot become Gautam Buddha. The natural law does not allow any carbon copies. It believes in the original.
So they could not become Buddhas and Christs, but by trying to become Buddha and Christ they also missed what they could have become. And this is the frustration of the whole humanity.
You never ask, Who was Jesus trying to become? Who was Gautam Buddha trying to become? If you are really understanding, one thing is clear: Gautam Buddha, Mahavira, Jesus Christ, or Moses, or Lao Tzu, Chuang Tzu -- they were not trying to become anybody else. That is the basic reason why they could become what was their own potential.
If you have to learn something from their lives, this is the most fundamental thing: never try to become somebody else. But from your very childhood you are being conditioned that you are unworthy as you are; prove yourself by becoming somebody else.
In my childhood I was never an obedient child, and I have remained the same. Just now nobody is giving me orders, so my disobedience has no way to express itself.
Once in a while my mother comes while I am taking my lunch, and she forgets, and she starts saying, "Mix this with that. With this vegetable, curd would have been good."
And I say, "You have known me for my whole life. If you say so, I am not going to do it. Still you go on doing the same thing."
She even tries to corrupt the minds of my kitchen people. I have told them, "Listen to her respectfully, but don't follow what she says."
I want to eat my food my way. Nobody is going to instruct me. Tastes differ, likes differ, individualities differ.
In my childhood there was a boy living just by the side of my house, my neighbor's son, and my father used to say, "Look at that boy." He was not my class fellow, he was two years ahead of me. "He always comes first. Why don't you try?"
I said, "Until you stop telling me, I am not going to try. In a way, I am also first -- from backwards. If there are thirty boys, I am the thirtieth. It is only a question from where you start counting. I can be first also, but I am not going to follow that idiot."
My father said, "He always comes first, and you call him an idiot."
I said, "Yes, I call him an idiot. He comes first because all the people in his class are just third-rate. Once in a while I have talked with him. He is just stupid. He can't answer a single question; he can't argue. The moment he sees me he tries to escape, afraid that I will catch hold of him and put him in a confusion."
Finally my father stopped saying these things. The year he stopped, I came first in the class.
He said, "You are something! What have you been doing to come thirtieth in the class?"
I said, "I have been giving wrong answers knowingly. If you had said to me, 'You have to pass,' I would have failed. It was good of you that you were only trying to bring me first. Remember, I am not going to be anybody's copy, and nobody is a model. I am just going to be myself; first or last does not matter."
And since that time I went on being first every year, in every class, until my master's degree. I topped the whole university.
My father could not believe it. "You are simply crazy. You yourself were writing wrong answers."
I said, "I had to, to stop you trying to model me according to somebody else. This much is certain: I am going to be myself, so don't impose any ideas on me. Leave me alone, so that I can find my own self-nature."
You feel doubt because here there are five thousand people sitting by my side, so silently, so peacefully, as if there is no one. You feel immense peace, silence, joy, but you cannot believe it because you are a miserable person. Suffering is your fate. You are a sinner, born in sin -- a Christian. You have committed so many sins in millions of lives -- a Hindu. How can this be possible for you?
It may be possible for anybody else, but not for you. Your parents have never respected you, your teachers have never respected you. Everybody was advising, everybody was telling you to change. You were always wrong; they were always right. Naturally, you have accepted their ideas. You have been very obedient. And to be obedient is self-destructive.
I am not saying be disobedient to everything. Try to use your intelligence. If it is worth obeying, if it is according to your intelligence, your feelings, your heart, then you are not obeying anybody else; you are doing your thing.
If it is against your reason, your intelligence, your being, then whatever the cost, disobey it.
Obeying others, you have started thinking of yourself as just a miserable creature. You are not a Jesus Christ, you are not a Gautam Buddha, you are not a Chuang Tzu. What are you? Just nothing?
When I entered the university, first I went to see the vice-chancellor. I knocked on the door, asked him, "May I come in?" He said, "Yes." I went in, I remained standing.
He said, "Why don't you sit?"
I said, "It is better to stand in a place where even the vice-chancellor does not know how to respect a human being. Unless you stand up and receive me, I am going to stand here. And remember, unless you respect me, don't expect any respect from me. It is a mutual thing."
The man looked at me. He was simply shocked. He could not believe that a student would do that.
I said, "You can take your time and you can think."
A few moments passed in silence, and then he decided to stand up.
I said, "Now, this looks more human. Now if you come into my room in the hostel, I will stand up and receive you with love and respect. And it is not only for me that I am saying so. Do it with everybody. Continuously in your speeches you are saying that students are not respectful to the teachers -- and this is the reason why students are not respectful to the teachers. They should not be!"
Teachers or students makes no difference. Both have a human soul, unique, and they should be respectful. If the teachers are respectful to the students, I don't think any student can be disrespectful to the teachers. But you go on receiving their humiliation, and slowly slowly you get accustomed to being humiliated.
That's why you find it unbelievable even though it is happening; you experience it. What a tragedy! You experience it every day, and later on you start suspecting: perhaps you were imagining or dreaming, or perhaps it was some kind of hypnosis. "What happened? I was feeling so ecstatic and so silent and so peaceful and so loving."
A window just opens, and the moment you leave me, the window closes. You close it, because it goes against your whole past, which is heavy.
Secondly, I have nothing to do with what is happening here.
You love me. It is your doing.
You trust me. It is your doing.
Whenever you love, whenever you trust, you will feel doors opening into the unknown, new dimensions opening. You are afraid, perhaps in my absence it will not happen. Don't be afraid. I am already absent. I died the day I became enlightened. There is only silence and peace, there is no "I." I have to use that ugly word, for the simple reason that in language you have to follow the language and its grammar -- howsoever absurd.
One of the Hindus' masters, Swami Ramateertha, who had come to America, tried to change this language. He never used the word "I"; instead he used his name. He would say, "Rama is feeling thirsty," not, "I am feeling thirsty." It looked very odd, "Rama is feeling thirsty," "Rama wants to go for a walk."
In India his followers used to understand it, but in America people started asking, "What kind of language are you using? Why use 'Rama' again and again when you can simply say 'I want to go for a walk'?"
He said, "There is no 'I' in me, so I am using Rama just the way you use a name; it's arbitrary."
But it will make language ugly, and there is no point because Ramateertha's own life proved it. He was highly respected in America and Europe, so coming back to India, naturally he thought that first he should go to Varanasi, the holy city of the Hindus -- perhaps the most ancient city in the world. And if he has been honored so much around the world, certainly Varanasi and its council of Hindu scholars will receive him.
He was invited by the council, but before the proceedings began, one Hindu priest stood up and said, "I want to ask a few things. First, do you know Sanskrit?"
Ramateertha was born in Punjab, so he was educated in Persian and Urdu. He had read Hindu scriptures in Persian and Urdu, not in Sanskrit. Naturally, he had to say, "I don't know Sanskrit, but I have read Sanskrit scriptures in Persian and Urdu."
The whole council of scholars laughed. They said, "If you don't know Sanskrit, you know nothing. First start to learn Sanskrit. Even your orange clothes do not suit you. A man who does not know Sanskrit, the holy language of the Hindus, has no right to pretend to be a Hindu saint."
And you will be surprised: Ramateertha went to the Himalayas, changed his clothes and started learning Sanskrit.
Now, who is being hurt?
If I was in his place, I would have laughed. I would have said, "Who bothers to be a Hindu saint? To know oneself, one does not need to know Sanskrit or Urdu or Persian. Knowing oneself needs silence, meditation."
And no language is holy, because Mohammedans say Arabic is holy, Jews say Hebrew is holy, Buddhists say Pali is holy, Jainas say Prakrit is holy -- and there is no criterion to decide who is right. There are three hundred languages in the world, and to the people who speak them they are holy.
I would have simply told that conference of Hindu scholars, "You are idiots and nothing else. You don't know that to know oneself you need no language. In fact, you need to drop all language, all words, the whole mind itself."
So that was only a gimmick, using Rama instead of "I." The "I" was there, very much there.
His disciple, Sardar Purnasingh, has written in his autobiography that one day Ramateertha's wife came to see him, poor woman, because he left her, renounced, became a Hindu monk, and the poor woman was somehow managing, working, cleaning, just to get food, shelter, clothes.
Knowing that Ramateertha has come back, she came just to see him, just to touch his feet -- he was a holy saint. There was no idea in her mind that he is her husband. But when Ramateertha looked from the window and saw his wife coming, he told Purnasingh, "Close the doors and tell that woman that I don't want to see her."
Purnasingh was a very sensitive man, a man of poetic and aesthetic abilities. He has produced tremendously beautiful literature. He could not believe it. He said, "You have been seeing women all over the world. Why particularly are you refusing this woman?"
Ramateertha said, "You don't know. She is my wife."
Purnasingh said, "Still? After renouncing that woman for twenty years, leaving her in utter poverty, you are still afraid of her? You still think of her as your wife? You have not renounced anything, and all your saintliness is just hocus-pocus. If you don't see her, I am going to leave you."
Just by changing language, nothing changes. By changing clothes, nothing changes.
Remember, that whatever is happening here to you, I am just a catalytic agent. You love me, you trust me, that's why you become silent.
Just try it, sitting by the side of a tree with the same love for the tree, with the same trust for the tree, with the same joy with the tree. And you will be surprised: the same serenity, the same silence will come over you.
Looking at a sunset, feel it. It is our existence; we are part of it. Watching a sunset or sunrise, or listening to the sound of a waterfall with the same attitude as you have towards me -- you will find it anywhere.
Just a bird on the wing, and the whole sky and the freedom -- watch it. Feel the joy of the bird. Feel the freedom of its wings, and you will find the same ecstasy there.
And once you start finding it in different situations, then there is no need for situations at all. Just close your eyes and be loving, be trusting to the whole existence. And you will find that there is only breathing, and everything else has stopped. The mind is no more functioning.
This is what ecstasy is.
I don't want you to be dependent on me. That will be a crime. I don't want to commit any crime. All the religious prophets and messiahs have committed that crime.
Jesus says to you, "I am your savior." I do not say so. You are your own savior.
I can show you the way I saved myself. You need not follow it in detail, but just the idea that a human being just like you, with all the frailties, with all the weaknesses that human beings are prone to....
I am not a messiah, I am not a prophet, I am not an incarnation of God. All that nonsense is just to make you dependent. I feel really sick when Jesus says, "I am the shepherd and you are my sheep." I cannot believe that people did not object to it. This is humiliating.
No, I am not anybody's shepherd, and nobody is a sheep.
You have to learn to be utterly independent, and that will be my joy and my reward. If I can make you utterly free, independent -- a savior unto yourself -- then my blessings will know no bounds.
You can make me immensely rejoicing and dancing. Any human being becoming independent from conditionings, from religions, scriptures, prophets, messiahs, has arrived home. He has found the treasure which was hidden in his own being.
So this is just to give you a glimpse. Now you have to experiment on your own in different situations whether the glimpse happens or not. It happens! If it can happen to me, why not to you?
I am not special.
All these people were trying to prove they are special. Jesus is special; he is the only begotten son of God, and who are you? Everybody is a bastard. The only begotten son of God is Jesus Christ. And very strange... God did not do anything when the only begotten son of God was being crucified.
It is said about Buddha that he was born when his mother was standing. Now, this is really unique. He was born standing -- and not only that, he walked seven steps and declared that "I am the suprememost awakened person in the whole universe." And there have been idiots who have been believing it.
Jesus' virgin birth -- and there are idiots who are believing it.
It was impossible, because the Pill was not invented yet. And what about poor Joseph? Nobody thinks about the father of Jesus, that this is such an insult to poor Joseph. Nobody bothers about the man. On the contrary, the Holy Ghost made Mary pregnant and he is still the Holy Ghost. This was a rape. At least now he should be called Unholy Ghost. But something special....
Jainas say that Mahavira never perspired. Impossible, unless instead of skin he was covered with plastic. And plastic was not discovered at that time.
And perspiration is a very natural and useful process for the body. Every pore of your body breathes, and behind every pore there is a small gland which contains water, for a special reason: to keep your body temperature constant. You may go under the hot sun and it will start perspiring. The perspiration is the strategy of the body to befool the sun. The sun and its heat become involved with the perspiration and evaporate it. The heat does not enter within you and raise your temperature.
If you don't perspire, then.... Your life range is not very big -- from ninety-eight degrees to only one hundred and ten degrees, a twelve degrees' span. If you don't perspire you will burst with heat.
And Mahavira used to live naked. I think he must have perspired more than anybody else in the whole world.
This much I can say, that I don't perspire because I never go under the sun. I don't like heat. From one air-conditioned place to another air-conditioned place, in an air-conditioned limousine. Just for seconds I am not in an air-conditioned space. That much does not make any difference. I don't perspire.
But Mahavira? I cannot believe it. And you will be surprised: to make him special they say he does not urinate, because that looks bad. For a prophet to urinate -- a pissing prophet, mm? -- does not look right.
He does not defecate. But where does the food and water that he takes disappear? Neither does he perspire, nor does he urinate, nor does he defecate. Then where do the food and the water that he drinks disappear to? And he was one of the healthiest men.
If all the food goes on accumulating inside him, I don't see what will happen to him. He lived for eighty-two years. Just a little arithmetic and you will say that he will be almost as big as our commune's whole property -- one hundred and twenty-six square miles!
But they were trying to make these people special, so that you can be humiliated, made dependent, converted to Hinduism, to Jainism, to Buddhism, to Christianity.
I am not converting you. Or perhaps, if you understand the basic meaning of the word "convert," I am really converting you -- not to Christianity, not to Mohammedanism, not to Hinduism, but to yourself. And that is true conversion.
These meetings with me are simply small glimpses, that a human being exactly like you, with no speciality, with no claim, is capable of reaching, so why can't you reach?
My being here is a challenge to you. So whatsoever is happening to you in silent moments with me, allow it. It will happen when I am not there.
First, move slowly. A beautiful tree... just sit touching the tree, feeling the tree. It is alive and full of juice -- and it is not Christian, and it is not Hindu. It is just a beautiful tree with no denomination. Feel its beauty, its life, its greenery, its flowers. Just be there as if there is nothing else to do in the world, and suddenly you will see the same things happening.
Use anything, and then stop using things. Just close your eyes and in your total aloneness experience the same things. That will be a day of great joy for you. It is your inheritance; something you had forgotten is remembered.

Question 4
BELOVED MASTER,
IS MATURATION AN ONGOING PROCESS?
HOW IS MATURATION RELATED TO AWARENESS?
PLEASE EXPLAIN.
Yes. Maturation is an ongoing process. There is no full stop, not even a semicolon anywhere... it goes on and on. The universe is infinite. So is the possibility of your maturing.
You can become so huge.... Your consciousness is not confined to your body. It can spread all over existence and all the stars can be within you. And there is no place where you will find a plate that says, "Here ends the universe." It is just not possible. It never begins; it never ends.
And you are part of it. You have been here always and you will be here always. Only forms change, and forms don't matter. What matters is the content. So remember that particularly in America, containers matter more than the content. Who cares about the content? The container has to be beautiful.
Remember, the container is not you. You are the content. Forms change, your being remains the same. And it goes on growing, maturing, goes on becoming more enriched.
And you ask, "What is the relationship between awareness and maturity?"
Awareness is the method; maturation is the result. Become more aware and you will have more maturity; hence, I teach you awareness and don't talk about maturity. It is going to happen if you are aware.
There are three steps of awareness.
First, become aware of your body -- walking, chopping wood or carrying water from the well. Be watchful, be alert, aware, conscious. Don't go on doing things like a zombie, like a somnambulist, a sleepwalker.
When you have become aware of your body and its actions, then move deeper -- to your mind and its activity, thoughts, imagination, projections. When you have become deeply aware of the mind, you will be surprised.
When you become aware of your bodily processes, you will be surprised there too. I can move my hand mechanically, I can move it with full awareness. When I move it with full awareness, there is grace, there is beauty.
I can speak without awareness. There are orators, speakers.... I don't know any oratory; I have never learned the art of speaking, because to me it looks foolish. If I have something to say, that is enough. But I am speaking to you with full awareness, each word, each pause... I am not an orator, not a speaker.
But when you are aware of speaking, it starts becoming art. It takes on the nuances of poetry and music.
One man, a Western journalist, wrote a book, THE NEW MYSTICS. His name is Aubrey Menen. He introduced me to the West. He has covered other mystics, but I was on his front cover. And the things he said, I could not believe myself.
He said that he has listened to Adolf Hitler, who was a tremendous orator. He has listened to Jawaharlal Nehru, the first prime minister of India, who could hold millions of people while he was speaking. He mentioned Kennedy -- President Kennedy, who was a great speaker.
But I was surprised: he said that listening to me, he felt a tremendous difference. "Certainly this man is not trained in oratory or speaking, but whatever he is saying is reaching directly to people's hearts. It was not the case with Adolf Hitler, Jawaharlal Nehru or President Kennedy; they were just repeating words like parrots."
This is bound to happen if you speak with awareness. Then every gesture, every word has a beauty of its own. There is grace.
When you become aware of the mind, you are in for a greater surprise. The more you become aware, the less thoughts move on the track. If you have one hundred percent thoughts, there is no awareness. If you have one percent awareness, there are only ninety-nine percent thoughts -- in exact proportion. When you have ninety-nine percent awareness, there is only one percent thought, because it is the same energy.
As you become more aware there is no energy available for thoughts; they die out. When you are one hundred percent aware, the mind becomes absolutely silent. That is the time to move still deeper.
The third step: to become aware of feelings, moods, emotions. In other words, first the body -- its action; second, the mind -- its activity; third, the heart and its functions.
When you move to the heart and bring your awareness there, again a new surprise. All that is good grows, and all that is bad starts disappearing. Love grows, hate disappears. Compassion grows, anger disappears. Sharing grows, greed disappears.
When your awareness of the heart is complete, the last surprise, and the greatest surprise: you don't have to take any step. A quantum leap happens on its own accord. From the heart, you suddenly find yourself in your being, at the very center.
There you are aware only of awareness, conscious only of consciousness. There is nothing else to be aware of, or to be conscious of. And this is the ultimate purity. This is what I call enlightenment.
And this is your birthright! If you miss, only you are responsible. You cannot dump the responsibility on anybody else.
And it is so simple and natural, that you just have to begin.
Only the first step is difficult. The whole journey is simple. There is a saying that the first step is almost the whole journey.
Okay?

============================================================

Question 1
BELOVED MASTER,
FOR THE FIRST FEW DAYS AFTER SHEELA AND HER GANG ESCAPED, EVERYONE FELT GREATLY RELIEVED. NOW, AS THE HORROR STORIES UNFOLD, PEOPLE ARE REACTING BY NOT COMING TO WORK/WORSHIP, OR WORKING WITHOUT BEING THERE.
THERE IS SUSPICION, ANGER, RESENTMENT, AND MISTRUST OF THOSE WHO WERE ASSOCIATED WITH SHEELA AND WHO HAVE REMAINED.
WHERE DO WE GO FROM HERE?
Nowhere! We are going to be here. It is a significant question. It represents many sannyasins' minds.
Basically, this is how mind functions. When you get rid of something which was binding you, enslaving you, which was a fascist thing, you feel relieved, ecstatic. The moment you heard that Sheela and her gang had left, you danced throughout the city's streets.
But I knew that the second part would be coming soon -- because for three and a half years Sheela and her gang were taking every responsibility, were taking every care, and you were, in a way, unburdened.
Now that you are free, a question of responsibility arises, and that shakes you. You have been dependent, and now you are independent. It will take a little time for you to change yourself from dependence to independence. You will have to pass through this trauma.
This is simply a trauma.
You are worried because many of the people who were part of Sheela's group are still here. You should not be worried. They are here because they have revolted against Sheela and her group. They have done more than you have done. You should be respectful to them.
Sheela had asked all of them to go with her. They refused. They wanted to be here with me and with you and the commune. They had not come here for Sheela; they had come here for me. One of the sannyasins, Ava, even went with Sheela, but came back -- not even reaching the goal -- the Black Forest in Germany, where they are hiding like criminals.
They are no more wearing sannyasin dress, so they cannot be recognized. And they are hiding in a small village, afraid -- because they are going to be caught. Whatever they have done, they have to be rewarded for it.
Ava returned from the middle of the journey because, even being with them a few hours, she started feeling sick. The whole group was pathetic. She phoned here, and I told her it is her home, she can come back. These people were corrupted, led into things by Sheela, Puja, Shanti Bhadra, and they were as innocent as you are. They did whatever was told to them. Won't you give them a chance to change? Don't you have any love for your own people?
Even if Sheela, Puja, Savita, Shanti Bhadra -- who have all committed crimes of the first degree -- if they ask to come back, I will welcome them, because their very asking to come back means they have understood, and they won't be the same again. And whatever they did, good or bad, their intention was never bad. They were doing it for you. Their end was never bad, their means may have been.
And a commune of loving people should be forgiving too. Love knows no resentment. Love only knows how to give opportunities for transformation.
So please drop any ideas of the people who belonged to the group and have remained here. To be suspicious of them, or to keep away from them, is ugly on your part. They need more love to regain their dignity. They need more love to be transformed.
And always remember one thing very fundamental to my way of life: anything a person does is just a mere act. It does not qualify and color his whole being. Being is vast.
I will not punish even a murderer, because the murder happened in the past. Nobody has the right to destroy this man's future, because in the future he may turn into a poet, a painter, a scientist, a musician, a dancer. One thing is certain: he has energy. He misused it. All that you have to do is treat him psychologically, to make it clear to him that something is wrong in his mind, to make him aware of how to drop it and how to change the direction of his energies. What is destructive can become creative.
I am against all punishment, particularly the death sentence. It is inhuman, resentful, revengeful, and without any consideration of the person -- in his situation even you would have done the same. And past is past. Why distort the future of a person? Any individual is worthy of respect. Your respect will help him to change. Your trust will help him to change.
So the people who have remained here need more love, more respect, need to be more sheltered, protected, so they can drop their fear. And now we have a totally new regime. They will be working under it, and they can be of immense help, because they have worked for four years. We need a few experienced people. So anybody who is here, and anybody who wants to come back, is welcome.
This is not an ordinary society. You have to prove that it is extraordinary, that you are capable of trusting even those people who deceived you. That will make them feel ashamed, and that is the only way for their transformation.
And, whatever they did, once you accept them we will not need to find out and discover and investigate -- they themselves will reveal all.
Trust creates such a space, and love gives such courage.
If a person can see, can say to the court, yes, he has murdered, and he is sorry for it, and he wants to be changed.... He does not know why he murdered. There must be something in his psychology which is wrong, which is destructive. But in the ordinary world outside he will be sentenced to death, or to remain in jail for his whole life, which is worse.
Naturally, the murderer cannot be changed by your courts, by your laws. And for thousands of years your laws have gone on growing, your courts go on becoming bigger, and you have more judges. But do you know, your murders are not less. They are increasing far more rapidly than your judges. Strange -- there is something basically wrong.
Anything that is done should not be taken in the spirit of revenge, punishment; but the outside society lives only with greed and fear. Give respectability to a person who is obedient to the rotten society, and give punishment to anybody who does anything against the society. This society is not for transformation.
But my people should behave differently. You are to prepare the ground for the new man and for a new human existence. And these are the chances, opportunities.
Sheela has given you a great opportunity to learn the power of love and forgiveness, and to see that there is no alchemy which can transform a man other than love.
So if these people come back -- and also those who have remained here -- they should be specially treated, with love and great joy and dance and rejoicing that they have come home. And I promise you, your love will change them. There is no other way to change a person.
So don't unnecessarily get worried, seeing the same people still holding power posts. I know about it, but I know that they have revolted in favor of you, against Sheela -- and now you are misbehaving with them. They should be rewarded. And they are the people who will bring out everything that has been done; they are the authentic witnesses.
But if you are behaving badly with them, you will not be able to win their hearts. And five thousand people, trusting, loving, cannot win the hearts of a dozen people? Then love is useless; trust is useless.
You are just functioning with your old, conditioned mind that you have carried from the outside world.
And you are feeling another thing which you have to be reminded of, because if you are not reminded, you will create another fascist regime.
Freedom does not mean license.
In Magdalena restaurant, people are not ready to prepare food. They are free. They want to meditate. Then what is going to happen to five thousand people?
People are not working the way they were working under Sheela. That means you need Sheela. You should be working more -- to prove that Sheela's fascism was unnecessary. People are not coming to their work, and even if they come they don't work. Do you see the implication of it?
Five thousand people have to live self-sufficiently. You have to produce your food, your houses, your vegetables, your milk products -- everything. And if you are not working, because you think that's what freedom means, then you are behaving stupidly.
You should do just the opposite. You should work more, not as a slave, but out of your freedom and love for the whole commune, and you will prove that Sheela was wrong. And that will be the guarantee that nobody ever again takes any fascist steps. But if you act this way, then perhaps another Sheela will be needed; otherwise you cannot survive. It is simple arithmetic.
In Soviet Russia, when the country became independent from the czarist rule in 1917, in the Moscow main street a woman was found walking in the middle of the road. And when she was told by the policeman, "Walking in the middle of the road is not allowed"....
There are two possibilities: if the country decides, then keep to the left or keep to the right. But no country in the whole world has the idea to keep in the middle. Traffic will become impossible. Accidents will increase a thousandfold. Just think, traffic in the middle! from both sides cars and buses and people walking! It will be a tragedy.
But the woman said, "Then what is the meaning of freedom, if I still have to keep the old rule?"
Don't be so idiotic, like that woman. Nobody should impose any rule over you. If you are responsible, intelligent, you will create a life of discipline on your own.
So remember, you can choose. If you want Sheela back, I can call her and her whole gang, and give the commune to her. If you don't want anybody to be dictatorial to you, then take responsibility. Then work, and work more sincerely, honestly. The need simply disappears.
And you are a group of very intelligent people, but this is the trouble with intelligent people. They always try to misuse freedom.
I would like to remind you that Germany is one of the most intellectual countries in the world. It has given to the world people like Kant, Hegel, Feuerbach, Karl Marx, Sigmund Freud, Martin Heidegger -- great philosophers, great psychologists. And still a third-class crackpot, Adolf Hitler, managed to get all the intelligentsia of the country to follow him.
And I don't think humanity has learned anything out of it. If you don't learn, then history repeats. If you learn, then you can stop history repeating again.
Martin Heidegger was perhaps one of the most significant philosophers of the century, and he was a contemporary of Adolf Hitler. He supported Adolf Hitler -- inconceivable! The whole youth, which is the cream of the society, its intelligence, all the universities' vice-chancellors, professors -- they all supported Adolf Hitler, a man who was uneducated, a man who was refused from the school of art, who was refused from the school of architecture, because he had no intelligence.
This man became the leader of the most intelligent country in the world, and he created the greatest fascist regime. He killed almost ten million people, and still people were supporting him. It has to be psychoanalyzed.
What was the reason? The reason was, Germany was defeated in the first world war. And the intellectuals tend to fight among themselves. They argue, rationalize, philosophize; they are not physically active people. And they are egoists. They think they have found the secret of life, every one of them.
After its defeat in the first world war, Germany was in a chaos. The chaos created Adolf Hitler, because he promised, and he fulfilled the promise, "I can make this country again united, again strong, so strong that it can rule over the whole world."
It was something that was immensely needed. People were not working, people were not being creative. Somebody was needed to make the country again creative, disciplined. And Adolf Hitler filled the gap. Within ten years Germany was again a world power.
Strange -- if you give people freedom, they become lazy, they don't want to work. But if you give them a fascist order, they work to their very potential; they create, they are united, they become strong.
Germany went on winning for five years. That proved that the people of Germany had chosen the right person -- the whole world on one side, and he alone was enough.
He gave the intelligentsia their ego as nobody had given them before. He said to them that the Nordic German race is the purest Aryan race, and it is its destiny to rule over the world, because all others are subhuman. It was tremendously gratifying. The intellectual ego was very much fulfilled, and even a man like Martin Heidegger fell into the trap.
Only after Hitler was defeated and Germany was almost destroyed, then people started looking back at what they had done, what kind of man they were supporting: a monster, a murderer who has killed millions of people -- perhaps the greatest murderer in the whole history.
So remember one thing: freedom is not license. Freedom is responsibility. And if you cannot take your responsibility yourself, then somebody is going to take the responsibility on your behalf. And then you are enslaved.
People have been asking me how it happened that five thousand people, almost all university graduates, having the best qualifications from the best universities of the world, could not see for four years.
The reason is, Sheela was not only doing something ugly and fascist, she was also creating the commune. She was also making the desert into an oasis. She was making the commune comfortable in every way. Every coin has two sides.
So you looked at the light side. And you were surrounded -- which Sheela and her group created -- with hostility in Oregon. That is a simple political strategy.
Adolf Hitler, in his autobiography MY STRUGGLE, says that if you want a nation to be strong, create enemies all around it; otherwise, people relax. Keep them continuously in paranoia, fearing that there is danger all around.
And Sheela created that. She created the hostility of the Oregon government. She created the hostility of Americans in general. That made you come close to each other, become strong: "Be ready so that nobody can harm you."
So if you don't take the responsibility, something like that is bound to happen again. History certainly repeats, because man does not learn.
Now I want no hostility with anybody. We have been here for four years. Others may have been for four generations -- that makes no difference. If in four years you cannot be Americans, you cannot be Americans in four hundred years either. Years don't count.
We love this land, and we are pouring our perspiration into this desert to make it an oasis. We have fallen in love with this desert.
And to me, America is perhaps the only hope for humanity, because the American Constitution is the only constitution which is authentically democratic. That is creating a trouble for American politicians, because those politicians are not democratic. So they go on continuously against their own Constitution.
We will fight for the Constitution of America against those Americans who are prostituting it. But there is no question of hostility. We are part of this country, and we are going to be part of this country forever.
And we are withdrawing everything that Sheela and her group created -- fear, paranoia. I would like the City of Rajneesh to change its name back to Antelope. There was no need to change the name -- Antelope is so beautiful a name -- and why hurt people?
And I would like that the people of Antelope who have sold their properties to us should take them back. We have improved on their properties, we have renovated their dilapidated houses, and anyway, prices in four years have gone high. But I don't want -- because it is not a question of profit.... I would give them back at the same price as we had purchased them. And if they can take all the properties back.... We have such a big land here, why should our people live anywhere else?
We have three times more land than New York. We can create three New Yorks here. We have one hundred and twenty-six square miles. But we are not going to make those ugly structures, skyscrapers, against nature, against aesthetics. We will make small cottages which mix with nature, and we will make this place lush green. We need greenery, because the red becomes very great when there is greenery all around. Even trees understand it. Green trees and red flowers.... These are two basic colors.
And we want the government of Oregon to understand that we are Oregonians.
Governor Atiyeh has come from Lebanon. His father may have come, that does not matter. If he can be an Oregonian, why cannot you be an Oregonian? In fact, everybody in America is a foreigner except the Red Indians. Others have invaded the country. They have entered the country without any visa. They have exploited the poor people of the country. Their forefathers had no green cards.
We have not invaded. We have given more money for this land than anybody else was ready to give. This land was for sale for fifty years, and nobody came to purchase it. The greatest offer was three and a half million. We have given six million dollars for the land.
You should compare it. The forefathers of Americans who had come here purchased New York for thirty dollars. Just a little arithmetic: thirty dollars for the whole of New York? -- then we should pay only ninety dollars for this whole land. Why six million dollars? But we want to be just and fair.
These people who have come, without a visa, with no green card, no American passport, are asking us.... They should feel a little ashamed.
We have come into the country legally, and I have chosen the place because I am in tremendous love with the American Constitution. It is far more holy than THE HOLY BIBLE, because it gives you all the democratic values of life: individuality, individual property, freedom of speech, freedom of information. It gives you everything that individual growth needs.
We are for the Constitution, but the politicians are just corrupting it, in every way. You will be surprised to know that half of Oregon is owned by the federal government. This is not right; this is not according to the Constitution.
Government should not nationalize anything. This is underground communism. The property should belong to individuals -- what does the government have to do with it?
And they had ideas to own the whole of Oregon. That's why they are against us -- because now they know they can never have the whole of Oregon. Rajneeshpuram is here and cannot be purchased. So they have been doing everything illegal, persecuting. But there is no fear. We have the Constitution in our favor, and we will win in every court, so there is no question of fear.
And as far as the general masses of Oregon and America are concerned, we love them for one reason: that this is the only place which does not have a very loaded past.
For example, India has at least ten thousand years of conditioning. To change the Indian mind is an Himalayan task. But to change the American mind, to transform the American is simple. America does not have any past -- three hundred years only. Compared to countries like India or Europe, it has no past; it has only future. Its past is so small, it can be deprogrammed very easily.
My whole religion consists in deprogramming.
I don't have any program to give to you; and I don't want to give any program to you, because that is against humanity. I simply want to deprogram you -- clean, fresh, unburdened, just a bird on the wing in the sky. And you have to find yourself out of your freedom.
But freedom brings great responsibility. And I am trying to make you free, not only from fascist types of structures. I am trying to free you from Christianity, Hinduism, Buddhism, Mohammedanism, all religions. They are all fascist, because their basic idea is belief.
They destroy your reason, they destroy your inquiry, they destroy your intelligence. They give you borrowed, centuries-old rubbish and call it knowledge. You call the BIBLE holy and every day you worship it, with great respect, without knowing that this is the most pornographic book in the whole world. If the Supreme Court of America is really fair, the BIBLE should be X-rated. But the same is the situation of other religious scriptures. All are pornography.
I want you to be free from any ideology so that you can be yourself and you can search and you can go into the unknown. That inquiry into the unknown is such an ecstasy, such a great excitement -- the only pilgrimage. There is no need to go to Israel, no need to go to the Kremlin, no need to go to Varanasi. These are not real pilgrimages.
The only pilgrimage is the move from the known into the unknown, and from the unknown into the unknowable.
I am not even giving you a God, because the whole idea of God is again fascist. God created you, so what are you? -- just puppets. And he could not find anything better, he created you with mud. Humus means mud; that's why you are called human beings -- from the Big Muddy Ranch.
And he was even more unfair to women, as if all the mud was exhausted in creating one Adam. But just to create inferiority -- this God is a male chauvinist -- he created the woman out of a rib of man.
He was not a qualified surgeon, still he did surgery -- a criminal act. And I have heard a story that because he created Eve from one of Adam's ribs, each night when Adam goes to sleep, Eve will count his ribs. She has been counting since then.
But to accept a God is to accept a bigger Adolf Hitler, supreme-most, omnipotent, omniscient, omnipresent. He can do anything. You are just puppets in his hands. He created you; he can de-create you any moment.
And the guy seems to be whimsical. According to Christianity he created you four thousand and four years before Jesus Christ, and I am always puzzled, what has he been doing for the whole eternity? Six thousand years old, and what was the fellow doing all along? He has a company: a holy ghost, a son. The company is gay -- and AIDS is the result.
At least one woman would not have been bad. There would have been a little excitement, a little gossiping, love affairs, fights -- some story. But these three queens, what were they doing for the whole eternity? I have asked Christian theologians, "You have to answer me: What were they doing?"
I have rejected this unholy trinity completely. Existence has always been here. Nobody has created it.
And Friedrich Nietzsche is right at least on this point: that God is dead and man is free. Those two things together -- God is dead and man is free -- are very significant.
If God is alive, man cannot be free. He is always there, and he is everywhere.
I have heard about a nun who would not take her clothes off even while taking a bath in a closed bathroom. Other nuns said, "This seems to be a little crazy. Why don't you take your clothes off?"
She said, "How can I? God is everywhere. And he is all powerful and he can do anything, any stupid thing -- he can send the Holy Ghost to rape a virgin girl, Mary."
No, with God, man's freedom is not possible. God is a dictatorial idea. Communists may accept it.... Although they don't accept it, it would fit perfectly with them, with their ideology. But any democratic mind cannot accept God.
So my whole work here is to deprogram you -- from God, from hell and heaven, from all religions, from all political ideologies, which are nothing but exploitations of you.
Why has man been so much interested in heaven and hell? Poor man needs a promise; otherwise living will be impossible. Hope is his opium. He knows here there is nothing possible, only after death. That's why all the religions go on giving hope to the poor -- after death you will be rewarded. "Blessed are the poor for they shall inherit the kingdom of God."
I don't see any point in poverty, any virtue in poverty -- that they should inherit the kingdom of God. If being poor is virtue, then where is your pope, who is the richest man in the whole world, going to end up? All your popes will be found in hell. They are not poor people.
But it is a consolation, and it is also preventive of any revolution against the rich. The BIBLE says that a camel can pass through the eye of a needle, but the rich man cannot enter into the gates of heaven. At least rich people should throw out this BIBLE; this is not for them. But they go on worshipping, they go on making more churches, more cathedrals.
They go on donating, making trusts, because they know that this is simply a consolation for the poor. They are going to inherit the kingdom of God. They are already enjoying something of paradise -- and experience counts. The poor man will not be able to enjoy paradise. He will be so unacquainted with any comfort, with any luxury. He is accustomed to poverty. Hell will suit him better.
The rich man knows perfectly well that he is going to be in paradise. For the rich man the paradise is his greed: more and more and more. For the poor man it is a consolation: to live with less and less and less.
I want you to be freed completely from heaven and hell.
Hell is your fear projected.
Heaven is your greed projected.
And when we can create paradise here, why bother with something which nobody knows exists or not, because nobody has ever come after death to inform us.
Strange -- the story is that Lazarus died. He was a poor man, so he must have got into paradise. Jesus revived him, but in the BIBLE there is no reference at all -- because he has been for four days in paradise -- Lazarus does not give any information. The only man who has come back does not give any information about paradise.
The reality is he was a friend of Jesus, and this whole thing was fake. Many people must have died in Jesus' time. If the man was capable of reviving people then why only Lazarus? This seems unkind. Other people are dying. You can revive them just by touching them or by calling them, "Come back." Such a small effort on your part and you give them life back. He never did that.
My own understanding is that Lazarus played the part; it was a trick. He was not dead. He was placed in a cave, and his two sisters, who were also followers of Jesus, waited for him. Messengers were sent. He came and he simply called from outside the cave, "Lazarus, get up!" And he got up. He was not even asleep. And he says nothing about paradise, or anything about what happened in those four days.
I want you to be freed from all this nonsense. Try to live here, now, as totally as possible.
And the paradise is now here. If there is a paradise after death, certainly you will inherit it, because you will have already practiced for it.
And don't be worried even if you are thrown into hell -- because you have been with me. I will be with you there, and we can create a great commune in hell.
And in hell there are all the colorful people. In heaven there are only sad, long faces, saints, dry bones, no juice, nothing. In paradise there is not even a single newspaper, no movie, no film actors, no poets, no painters. All the geniuses are in hell. So if we end up in hell, we are going to have a great time.
If we end up in paradise, we are still going to have a great time, teasing those idiotic saints, teaching them how to dance, how to sing.... Because for eternity, what are you going to do? Teach them how to make love, because all those monks must have been homosexuals.
All the monasteries are full of homosexuals. All the nunneries are full of lesbians. That's why I call AIDS a religious disease. It is the greatest contribution of all your religions to humanity.
It is death and nothing else. It is not a disease, because it has no cure. There is only one thing that has no cure, and that is death.
We are trying to live a different kind of life than in the outside world. So there are only two ways: either the way of Sheela or my way. I had chosen Sheela to be my secretary to give you a little taste of what fascism means. Now, live my way. Be responsible, so that there is no need for anybody to dictate to you.
Every individual should contribute to the commune. It is not an ordinary society. There are no families, it is an organic whole. Contribute... because I have been hearing that since Sheela has left, many people are saying, "I don't want to do this, I don't want to do that," and they were doing it for four years.
You can change your job if you feel like changing, you can do something else. But just because nobody is going to force you, don't let the commune become crippled. It has to become more healthy. It has to prove the truth of independence.

Question 2
BELOVED MASTER,
YOU HAVE SAID THAT SOME OF SHEELA'S SECURITY MEASURES CAME OUT OF PARANOIA. I FEEL VERY UNCOMFORTABLE ABOUT THE GUNS WE HAVE IN RAJNEESH MANDIR RIGHT NOW, AND ELSEWHERE ON THE RANCH.
BELOVED MASTER, THESE GUNS FREEZE MY HEART. PLEASE, CAN WE GET RID OF THE GUNS? DO WE NEED THEM?
We will get rid of the guns, but you are a mouse, not a man.
How did you get initiated into sannyas? Those guns have done no harm to anybody, and those guns are not to do harm to anybody. Those guns are here so that no harm is done to you.
The whole world is full of guns, nuclear weapons, atomic bombs. It is perfectly right to have your own defense system.
It has nothing to do with Sheela's paranoia.
Just a simple understanding.... If you don't have guns, and tomorrow the fanatic religious groups which are there, they come on their motorbikes and start destroying your things, what are you going to do?
I am a nonviolent man, but that does not mean that I will allow anybody to practice violence on me. We will never do any harm to anybody, but those guns are perfectly right.
Even big countries like America cannot drown their nuclear weapons in the ocean, for the simple reason that if they stop creating more nuclear weapons and the Soviet Union invades, they will be helpless. The same is the situation in the Soviet Union. They cannot stop.
But one thing is certain, and tremendously good, good news: America and the Soviet Union are so full of nuclear weapons that a third world war is impossible. Both the countries have enough nuclear energy to destroy humanity seven hundred times, and there is no Jesus Christ around to make the dead alive seven hundred times.
Jesus had promised to come, but one time was enough. The way you treated him, that ugly cross, and he was thirsty and he was asking for water.... A man of miracles could not manage a small cloud to shower on him. He was asking for water; he died thirsty. That experience was enough. He had promised his disciples he would be coming soon, but to stretch "soon" for two thousand years is too much. Even I cannot do that.
Both the countries are aware that now a third world war is not going to happen, for the simple reason that both have so much power that they will destroy the whole planet, all living things on the planet. So what is the point? War has meaning if you can be victorious, if you can defeat somebody. But there will be no victory, no one victorious, no one defeated, simply all dead.
So it is good that nuclear weapons have come to a point where war is impossible. It is not impossible because of the politicians; it is impossible because of the nuclear weapons.
A few security guards are here. There is no question of any paranoia; I have been poisoned twice. Many attempts have been made on my life. The last one was made before I came here, and it is something that has to be understood -- in what a dirty political world we are living.
Ten thousand sannyasins were listening to a morning discourse, as you are listening. Suddenly twenty police officers, topmost police officers, came running in and informed me that they have been anonymously phoned by somebody saying that "A fanatic Hindu group -- the same group that assassinated Mahatma Gandhi -- wants to assassinate you this morning."
So we told them to sit and listen to the discourse, and certainly one man stood up and threw a knife, trying to kill me. The most amazing part of the story is that with ten thousand eye witnesses -- it is very rare to find ten thousand witnesses for any attempted murder -- twenty topmost police officers, the knife, and the man caught red-handed, still he was released as if he had not done anything.
We did not bother. I told my people, "It is a police case; let them try it -- because the police were present, they have caught the person, they have taken the knife; now let them try the case. It is a police case. If they want our witnesses, then ten thousand sannyasins are here."
They did not accept their own police officers, they did not accept any witnesses. Simply the case was dismissed, as if the knife was never thrown at me, as if the man was innocent.
Do you want such a thing to happen here? And it is more possible in America than anywhere else, because in India to carry a weapon is not easy; in America you can purchase any weapon.
If you are willing to see me assassinated, it will be a great experience. Those guards can be removed.
I would like you to raise your hands. Do you want the guards to be here? Then raise both of your hands.
And where is the mouse?
Okay?

============================================================

Question 1
BELOVED MASTER,
YOU SAID BEFORE THAT MEDITATIVE PEOPLE CANNOT BE CORRUPTED BY POWER, BUT HOW COME SHEELA AND HER GANG WERE CORRUPTED BY POWER?
PLEASE SAY SOMETHING ABOUT THE ORGANIZATION OF THE MEDITATIVE PEOPLE.
Meditative people cannot be corrupted -- ever. If somebody is corrupted, that only means he was not meditative. And about Sheela, I can tell you certainly: she had no interest in meditation, in my way of life, my philosophy. Her interests were totally different.
She had come first to me because her husband was suffering from cancer, and the doctors in America had said that he cannot live more than two years. She was desperately in search of someone who could help.
Her husband, Chinmaya, was a beautiful man. He remained with me, and it almost always happens, when you are facing death meditation is easy. You cannot postpone it, because tomorrow you may not be here to meditate.
So Chinmaya tried hard to meditate, and that helped him to live. All the medical experts were agreed. They could not believe what had happened to him, because two years was the maximum limit for his disease.
But he lived almost ten years, and lived happily in spite of cancer, and died happily. Just a few years more and he would have been enlightened. But he reached to the point that in the next life the remaining small part can be done. His next life will be the last life.
Sheela had to remain with him, so it was just accidental, her coming to me, her remaining with me. And when Chinmaya started going beyond the two-year limit, she started behaving in an ugly way towards him.
Naturally, he was sick, had cancer... he was not so much interested in sexuality. All that he needed was womanly warmth.
So Sheela started having lovers. That was a great wound in Chinmaya. And my feeling is, he would have lived a little longer, but these wounds were becoming more and more. And Sheela was constantly fighting with him.
Before he died, Sheela had divided the room in two parts, and she was living with her new boyfriend and Chinmaya was left alone.
Cancer.... And he had passed eight years beyond medical speculation. When he came to be examined by the doctors they could not believe it. They said, "This is nothing but a miracle."
I do not do any miracles, and I do not believe in any miracles. But he meditated. There was nothing left for him -- only cancer and death.
But this wound, that at these last moments of his life Sheela would divide the room -- and he could hear her laughter, joy with her new boyfriend -- perhaps that was too much. Perhaps the will to live disappeared.
In a way, he was killed by Sheela.
Sheela never meditated. Not only that, you must have observed, she never even listened. While I was speaking she was sleeping. All the years in India, the time of my discourse was the time for her to sleep. Perhaps she was saving that time for the night with the boyfriend.
As far as I am concerned, I accept all types of people. I don't make conditions. Whoever comes to me, he is welcome.
Even if Sheela comes back -- as a person, as an individual -- she will have my trust and love just the same. I will not support her actions, her illegal and criminal actions. For that she will have to go to the court, go to the police.
And my suggestion will be that it will be better to come and confess everything before the court, and say to the court, "These are my acts and I am ready for the consequences. And don't be soft towards me. Be as hard as I have been with these poor people." That will give her dignity, respect. You will start feeling proud of her.
Rather than hiding in the Black Forest like a criminal -- and how long can she hide? My sannyasins are all over the world. They have already reached the place where she is hiding. They have informed us that the people who are with her are almost in a sick state -- guilty. They have committed a crime against those who had loved them.
Their guilt will kill them. At least, it will keep them unhealthy psychologically. They may go mad.
My suggestion is they should come back. Our love is unconditional.
And I would like to make one point clear: that a person can act in a wrong way; that does not mean that the person becomes wrong. Action is a small thing. A person is a tremendous reality. And the action is already past, and the person has a pure future in front of him.
If he hides the action he destroys his own future, because that action will go on and on in his mind as guilt. If he confesses it and is willing to take whatever punishment is needed for it, he will clean himself completely. His future will become pure.
Confessing to the court, she will get the most lenient punishment. And I would like to tell to the court that no criminal needs punishment; all criminals need treatment.
For centuries criminals have been punished and you have not been able to change anything. Criminals go on growing; then you grow more courts, more advocates. It is an unnecessary burden.
And the criminals -- even if you imprison them, you are doing an absolutely irrational act, because living five years or ten years in jail means living in the university of criminology, where all the real masters of crime are. You will learn more, and you will learn one thing from all great criminals: that to commit a crime is not illegal, but to be caught is illegal.
So all that you have to do is not to be caught; you have to be more clever, more cunning. Crime is not the problem. The problem is being caught.
So anybody who is sent to a prison comes out a bigger criminal. When he went into the prison, perhaps he was just an amateur -- that's why he was so easily caught. When he comes out, he comes out as a professional, expert. Now it will be difficult to catch him.
So my suggestion to the courts of the whole world is that up to now what you have been doing with the criminals is not right. A criminal has something wrong in his psychology. He needs psychiatric treatment.
Instead of making prisons, make places where he can be given psychiatric treatment, where he can meditate, study, become more intelligent. And give him all the respect that is due to a human being. His acts do not count; what counts is his being.
I had chosen Sheela to be my secretary, not because she was meditative, not because she understood my approach towards problems. My reason for choosing her was totally different.
She had a very practical mind, very pragmatic. She was intelligent. And thirdly, because she had no idea of my total vision; just necessary instructions she could repeat like a parrot. And I needed a parrot.
I was in silence. I had no need of a very articulate man, because the articulate man will hear me but his mind will constantly be changing it, making it more sophisticated, more polished. He will edit, he will add. It will not be pure. I needed a parrot who knows nothing of philosophy, knows nothing of religion, knows nothing of the ultimate problems of life. Sheela was perfect. She could only repeat what I was saying to her.
These were the basic reasons in the beginning that I had chosen my secretary.
Another point to be understood, which is significant.... Many questions have come that, "You are an enlightened being. How could you choose wrong people?"
Those questions are out of a misunderstanding. An enlightened person can see you in the moment in your totality, but your future is unpredictable. And there are only two possibilities: if your future is freedom, it has to be unpredictable. If your future is not freedom, then it can be predicted.
Almost all the religions have chosen a predictable future, but the implication is that man becomes a machine. Only machines are predictable.
If Mahavira, Buddha and others can see the whole future of humanity, that means everything is already determined. So what you are doing is simply being a robot. The idea of freedom becomes an illusion.
But to me, freedom is the highest value. To save freedom, I am ready to kill God. If God is there, no freedom is possible, because God is omnipotent, omnipresent, omniscient, he knows all, he is present everywhere, and he is all powerful.
Under such a despot -- Adolf Hitler millions of times magnified is your God -- how can small human beings have the taste of freedom? It is impossible.
I would like to repeat the sentence of Friedrich Nietzsche, who once in a while used to have tremendous insights. He said, "God is dead and man is now free."
Putting these two together is a tremendous insight. God is dead -- that has been said by many atheists in different ways, that is not new. What is new is the other part: and from now on man is free.
God's death becomes the freedom of man. God's life becomes the death of man. The choice is very clear. If you choose God, then you have chosen to be a robot, a machine who is destined to do something and there is no way to change.
The murderer will be a murderer.
The thief will be a thief.
The sinner will be a sinner.
The saint will be a saint.
And I am amazed that all over the world, our magistrates, judges, all the courts -- from the smallest court to the Supreme Court of any nation -- are filled with religious people. They all believe in God, and still they punish the sinners. Can you see the contradiction?
If God determines everybody's life -- before you are born your life is written already, what you are going to be, what is going to be your whole flavor of character -- if this is true, then no sinner should be punished. That is against religion. He was simply fulfilling a destiny that God has given him.
If you want to punish, punish God!
Then no saint should be praised, because whatever he is doing, he is in the same boat as the sinner. There is no difference. He is not holier than the sinner. Both are mechanical robots. One is manufactured to be a saint, another is manufactured to be a sinner. Neither the sinner is to be condemned, nor the saint is to be praised.
But strange things go on happening. People go on believing in God, and yet they go on insisting that whatever you do, you are responsible for it.
But responsibility needs freedom. Without freedom it is not possible for me to be responsible for my acts.
A puppet is not responsible for the dance, because the strings are in the hands of the puppeteer who is hiding behind the curtain. He is responsible. He can make the puppet dance, he can make the puppet fight, he can make the puppet sit cross-legged in meditation. But the puppet is not responsible for good or bad. If there is God, then there is no good, no bad.
These are simple implications.
God creates man, and God creates his destiny.
Nietzsche is a madman, but once in a while mad people have tremendous insights. Your sane people have no insight at all. This is something of supreme value when he says God is dead and, from now on, man is free. But freedom means responsibility.
So don't unnecessarily waste your time writing letters to me. I can see your present moment.
You can stand before a mirror. The mirror can see you the way you are in the present moment. The mirror cannot see that tomorrow you will be a murderer.
The tomorrow is open. All the dimensions are open. You can choose anything, and there are instances where murderers have changed and become great saints. This proves the freedom of man.
So when I had chosen Sheela to be my secretary, my reasons were: the secretary has to be pragmatic, practical in worldly affairs, because she will be taking care of the commune. And she will have to manage the commune amidst a world... she has to be alert and aware about worldly ways.
She was not very educated, she had no university degree -- she has been a waitress in a hotel in America -- but I did not want a very intellectual person to be my secretary, because the intellectual person will destroy my messages by his intellect. And I wanted just a parrot -- and she was good at doing it.
But the future is open.
I went into silence. The direct communication between me and you stopped; she became the only communication. She saw the opportunity, the great opportunity that you love me so much and you trust me so much that whatever message she brings from me you believe it.
That gave her a clue that you can be exploited, that she can bring any message to you which I have not given. She can change the message and you will trust totally and do it accordingly. That's why for three and a half years you simply remained unaware of what she was doing. And power has a strange quality. It brings all your hidden desires to the surface. That's why power corrupts.
It is not power that really corrupts, it only brings all the corrupted ideas in you to the surface, because power gives you an opportunity to give those ideas a reality. Those dreams can be transformed and materialized.
And everybody is full of so many unconscious desires, of which he himself is not aware. Only power will show. And it has been happening all through history.
When Indira Gandhi came to power in India she was innocent, intelligent, not political at all. She had not come from the lowest political levels, fighting, struggling and reaching to the top. That way one becomes very cunning, clever, experienced. She had just got the power because she was the daughter of the first prime minister of India. So she never moved through the power struggle. She had never dreamed about it, she had never thought about it. Her father had never mentioned it.
But the committee, who was to decide, was in a very difficult position. There was Morarji Desai -- who was strong, adamant, stubborn and a perfect idiot. Once he gets into power, he is not going even to listen to the committee who appoints him. And he will do all kinds of stupidities, and there will be no way to prevent him.
And there were others, but they were all provincial leaders. Only Morarji's and Indira's names were national names -- Indira's because she was the daughter of Jawaharlal, and had followed Jawaharlal his whole life, taken care of her father because her mother died very early. And she sacrificed everything for the father. She sacrificed her own husband, abandoned her own husband, because she could not serve these two masters.
So it was thought that Indira will be good. She is innocent, not political, has never shown any political lust, has never tried to take advantage of her father's position. It will be good to put her against Morarji Desai, because her father had so much respect and love that certainly she will be chosen.
And she was chosen. But once she got into power, things started changing. She became almost a dictator at one point.
She imposed an emergency on the whole country. She forced all the political people into jail. She did whatever she wanted. She dissolved the parliament. She went on postponing the elections. And this was the natural result of all her dictatorial methods -- that she has been assassinated by her bodyguards.
But nobody had any idea that a woman could turn into an Adolf Hitler.
The same happened in this small commune. You were engaged in creating an oasis in the desert, I was living in isolation and silence -- and she had the gap between the two. You were engaged in the work so much, and I was out of contact with you.
I have never been in any power position in my whole life, and I will never be, because I know something bigger than power. I know something more powerful than power.
I know love.
I know trust.
And I love unconditionally, and I trust unconditionally. And I love and trust even those who are strangers, even those who have done things against me.
Just the other day Deeksha phoned. Knowing that now Sheela is gone, she wants to come back. And I told her that she is welcome. She has been giving to the INS and their agents all kinds of false stories. She has been giving them absolute lies about me. But that does not matter. Perhaps she was angry, and in anger a person can do anything.
But my doors can never be closed. So I have informed her, "You can come."
Hundreds of people are informing that they want to come; they were rejected by Sheela.
A few of them were intimate friends of Sheela in India, and they were rejected for the simple fact that here she never wanted anybody to be so close as to be a friend.
Politicians don't want friends. They keep a gap. For example, no man was able to put his hand on the shoulders of Adolf Hitler in a friendly way, or hug him.
You don't hug gods. You don't put your hand on the shoulder of God. The people who are thinking they have become great powers will not allow you that much intimacy and friendship, because you become dangerous. Being so close, you can do anything.
Champa was one of Sheela's close friends in India, but she never came here. A great intelligent step, knowing that here Sheela will not like to treat her in the same way, the same friendly way -- gossiping, sitting playing cards. Here she will be the fascist leader and you have to be just the followers.
Just a few days before Sheela left -- I have heard the story yesterday from a person who was present in the meeting -- she told a few people who were in some way part of her criminal strategies, "You have to surrender to me totally. Whatever I say you have to do."
Two persons, Siddha, the vice-chancellor of the meditation university here, and Prabodhi, one of the close workers in Sheela's group, simply disappeared.
We have been searching for them, they both were useful. Siddha was certainly one of the best psychiatrists you can find, had all the highest qualifications, has been for twelve years the head of an army psychiatric hospital. Prabodhi was very accurate in her work.
Both simply disappeared. And I inquired of Sheela what happened to them, Why? If they had to go, nobody is prevented, they could go -- but why so suddenly and without giving any reason, and without giving any address? And now we have been phoning their families. They have not heard anything about them.
These two persons remained silent when Sheela said, "You have to give your total surrender to me. Whatever I say you have to say yes. The word no does not exist anymore for you."
Amitabh, the chancellor of the meditation university, did not come back here. He had gone for three days just to relax in Hawaii, and from there he informed that "I am not coming back." Now, he has been associated with me for a long time, and he was the only certified psychoanalyst, perfectly insured, and he had the qualifications for being a chancellor of the university.
He had been coming to India every year for six, nine months; only in hot summer he could not tolerate it there, so he had to come back.
But without any reason -- just so that they should not come back -- it seems Sheela had created fear in these people, that coming back can be dangerous. And they were in powerful positions, they must be knowing many secrets. If they were not totally surrendered to Sheela, then they could be dangerous.
Power has the capacity to bring out the worst in you. It has never been known in the whole history that power has brought out the best in you.
Your question is significant, that meditation cannot be corrupted.
Yes, it cannot be corrupted. On the contrary, if a person is meditative, loving, power can bring the best out of him. And I would like that experiment to happen here.
The worst has always come out of power. But meditation can change the whole situation, the whole alchemy. And now I am suggesting people for power who are meditative, intelligent, loving. And I hope that we will be able to manage something new.
Use power to bring the best out of man.
And anyway, nothing like Sheela is going to happen, because now I am not going to stop speaking and being in direct contact with you.
I don't have any power, but I have love, which is far more powerful than any power. I cannot dictate to you -- but I need not dictate. Just a gesture of love is enough. Just my fingers pointing to the moon, and your eyes will turn towards the moon without any order, commandment.
So don't feel afraid at all, but remember your responsibility, which has become bigger, because Sheela was forcing you to do the work. Now you will have to do it out of your own spontaneous joy.
Your responsibility has become far greater. For example, last night it happened that the journalists who were here for a press conference also wanted to go to the funeral of the beautiful sannyasin Lazarus.
They were feeling hungry, and Isabel became very disturbed because all the restaurants were closed by eighty thirty, and all the people from the restaurants, disco, everywhere, had gone to the funeral procession.
Now, this is not being responsible. It had never happened in Sheela's time. So do you need a Sheela to keep you on the right track?
The journalists were hungry and they wanted to attend the funeral, but before attending the funeral they wanted to eat something. Somehow Anuradha arranged some food for them.
But this is not right. When nobody is dictating to you, that does not mean that you become lazy. Your output should be better than it was in Sheela's time. That will prove that the fascism that she was imposing on you was absolutely meaningless. But if your output falls down, then you know you are supporting Sheela. Then you are saying that without Sheela you cannot work, you need a whip.
I don't want anybody to whip you. There is no need. You can see the point that a skeleton crew should have been there in every place. That has always been the case; any gathering of the whole commune, there was always a skeleton crew available for essential things. Now, by closing restaurants completely you showed your love towards Lazarus, but you did not show responsibility. And you forgot that these are the things which help fascists to revive, because that seems to be the only way that works, otherwise things start falling apart.
I am giving you total responsibility and an opportunity. You have to prove that you don't need any dictatorial regime to run the commune. You will remain alert, and you will remain aware of your responsibility.
Freedom and responsibility go together. More freedom, more responsibility. Total freedom, total responsibility. I hope nothing like this will happen again.

Question 2
BELOVED MASTER,
WHAT ARE THE RESPONSIBILITIES AND LIMITS OF A LEADER? AND WHAT ARE THE RESPONSIBILITIES AND DUTIES OF THOSE WHO ARE RULED?
You must be crazy. I am not a leader. A lover can never be a leader. All the leaders are loveless; their whole being is directed to one goal -- to be on the top, and whatever means are needed they will use to reach the end. They don't care about good means, they only care about their end.
A leader is a political phenomenon, and all politicians -- without any exception -- suffer from an inferiority complex. And the people who suffer from an inferiority complex are bound to get into politics, into leadership, so that they can prove to themselves and to the world that they are not inferior, they are superior.
But whatever power you can attain, it cannot destroy your inferiority. It has nothing to do with your inferiority; it is a projection to cover it up.
Inferiority disappears only in deep meditative silence. Then you know such a uniqueness that you don't want to be anybody else other than who you are. Just to be yourself is such a bliss. Who wants to be a leader?
You are asking, "What are the responsibilities of a leader?"
Ask the leaders. I am not a leader, so of course I don't have any experience of the responsibilities of a leader.
I know love, and I know the response of love.
And you are not the ruled. Here in this commune nobody is a ruler and nobody is ruled. That's the whole point of creating this commune and other communes around the world, where people can live as individuals without being divided into classes of the rulers and the ruled.
This is not the Soviet Union. In the Soviet Union they were trying to create a classless society, but they were not aware of a simple fact, that to force the society to become classless, they will have to create new classes -- the ruler and the ruled.
Yes, the capitalist and the poor have disappeared, but the ruler and the ruled have appeared. And a strange thing came about.
When I say the capitalists and the poor have disappeared, I mean the capitalists have disappeared and poverty has been distributed equally, so now nobody feels poorer than anybody else. The Soviet Union is still a poor country -- even the middle class people in America are far richer -- just the names have changed. The bourgeois and the proletariat are no more there.
But an even more dangerous thing has happened, because a capitalist can go bankrupt and become poor. A poor man -- if he is intelligent -- can become the richest man. There is mobility, movement in a capitalist society. People are continuously changing: from middle class to super-rich, from super-rich to middle class, from middle class to lower class, from lower class to middle class -- everywhere the change goes on.
But in Russia this is not possible; there is no mobility. The rulers are rulers and the ruled are ruled. For sixty years the same gang has been ruling, and the whole country is in the same position of being ruled, dictated.
Remember, here there is no leader, no led, no ruler, no ruled.
Even the people who are presidents of the foundation, commune, investment corporation and other corporate bodies, are not different from you. They don't have any more special powers than you have.
And they are not rulers. They are servants of the commune. They have put themselves in a humbler position -- because they have the capacity, generosity, love for the commune -- that they are ready to be servants of the commune.
To serve out of love is beautiful.
To rule is ugly, and I want my people to be the most beautiful people about everything.
Beauty has many dimensions. I want my people to be beautiful in all dimensions: graceful, humble, humane, loving, trusting, responsible individuals, intelligent, meditative. But not rulers and ruled.
So I don't know, because I have never been a ruler and I have never been one who is ruled.
I have never accepted anybody above me -- not even God -- and I have never accepted anybody below me, not even the devil.
To me, both are friends.

Question 3
BELOVED MASTER,
WHAT IF YOU ARE NOT THE REAL MASTER? WOULD IT STILL BE GOOD FOR ME TO BE WITH YOU?
You are asking about a real master. I am not even a master, so the question of being real or unreal does not arise. This is the same game in different ways -- the rulers, the ruled, the exploiters, the exploited; and in the spiritual world, the masters and the disciples, the saints and the sinners. But the division goes on and on.
Can't you live without division? Is there any necessity to divide? I am not a master, and I have never been a disciple either.
I have matured and centered and meditated, searched and found myself on my own accord. I have never followed anybody, and I don't want you to follow anybody -- me included.
I am just a man who has awakened, and you are still asleep. The difference is not much. You can be shocked, shaken and awakened -- just a little cold water on your eyes and you will be awakened.
I don't do such drastic things, because I don't want to interfere in your beautiful dreams. Even to interfere in anybody's dreams, to me, is violence. You can be pulled out of the bed and given a good slap on the face and you will be awake.
But I don't want to do such drastic things. It is transgressing, trespassing in your individual world. If you want to decide to sleep a little more, what is the harm? I have never heard that anybody has done any harm while he is asleep.
In fact, there is a story about Nadirshah, one of the most ugly monsters who has happened on this earth. He was really and absolutely inhuman.
Once, while he was invading India, a very beautiful prostitute was brought in the night to give him some entertainment, and while she was going back, she said she was afraid: "It is dark, and I have to go seven miles."
Nadirshah said, "You don't understand that you have been a guest of Nadirshah. You will not go in the darkness; you will go in light."
The woman said, "But how can I go in light? It is the middle of the night."
Nadirshah told his soldiers, "Put fire to all the villages on the way, all the forests on the way, so the prostitute can go in light to her place."
Many villages were put on fire, the forests were put on fire. The prostitute could not believe that this can be a way to go in light.
This man, Nadirshah, heard about a great wise man in India, and he asked him to come. The wise man said, "To come to you will be enough proof that I am not wise, so the thing will be useless. You will have to come to the well."
Nadirshah felt intrigued and excited too. He had never seen anybody disobey him. This man must have some guts. He went to the man and he felt some strange aura and energy around him.
He said, "I have come. I want to ask you: it is said in the scriptures that to sleep too much is bad, but I love to sleep. In fact, I drink too much, and then to get up becomes difficult. The hangover... and then it is better to have more to drink and go to sleep again. What is your suggestion? Should I stop it?"
The old man said, "No. Whatever the scriptures say means nothing. They were not written for you. They had no idea that a man like you will take instructions from the books. I would suggest you should sleep twenty-four hours, you should sleep forever. There is no need to wake up."
Nadirshah said, "This is strange advice. Twenty-four hours? Forever?"
The old man said, "Yes. Although it is against all the scriptures, but I say on my own authority that people like you need twenty-four hours of sleep, because whenever you are awake you will do some mischief. Asleep, much violence, much war, much trouble to the world will be stopped."
So there is not much wrong. And I never trespass, I just persuade from the outside of your bedroom. I don't even get in your bedroom, because to get in your bedroom without your permission is not right. And how to ask a sleeping man, "May I come in, sir?" So my whole work takes place outside your bedroom.
I create devices outside your bedroom. For example, I may scream suddenly that the house is on fire. I have not done anything to you. And hearing that the house is on fire -- even in sleep people hear that.
It is strange. They will not hear great advice in sleep, but if you say, "The house is on fire!" they will immediately hear it, and they will run out of the house.
That is up to you. It is not my responsibility. One thing I know: when you come out and you see the sunrise and the birds singing and the beautiful sky so colorful, and the flowers, you will be grateful to me -- although the house is not on fire.
But I can lie. I don't think this lie harms anybody.
And all enlightened people have to lie, because truth cannot be said to you. You won't understand it; you are fast asleep, snoring. Secondly, truth cannot be said in language. The moment you put the experience of truth in language, it becomes untrue.
So, rather than distorting the truth and making it untrue, it is far better to create a device -- which is a lie. But it works!
I have brought many people out of their bedroom, asking "Where is the fire?"
And I say, "I don't know. Just once in a while I get this urge to call 'The house is on fire!'"
I don't know the responsibility of the leader; I don't know the responsibility of the led.
I know the responsibility of love. I know the responsibility of the beloved. When love calls you, listen to it. That's the only responsibility. When love says something to you, let it enter into the deepest core of your being.
When love knocks on your door, open the door.
The real beloved, in fact, does not close the door at all, but waits at the door for the lover to come, so that he need not even knock.
Sannyas is a love affair. It has nothing to do with ruled and the rulers, leaders and the led. It has certainly to do with love and lovers.
And the beauty of love is: it does not create hierarchy.
I may be enlightened, you may not be enlightened, but because I love you, I am not holier than you. Because I love you, I declare that you have every capacity, ability, potentiality to be enlightened. It is just a question of your decision.
But I cannot impose the decision on you. At the most, love persuades. And love has many ways to persuade. It is only hate that imposes.
Just looking into your eyes is a persuasion, is a message.
Just the gesture of my hand is to touch your heart.
The silence that I love -- and I speak only to give you these few small pauses of silence. Just look at this silence, and we all have become one. All divisions are lost and there is an immense peace, a tremendous feeling of joy arising in you.
I want to give you the taste of enlightenment in as many ways as possible, so one day finally you say, "Okay. I am going to wake up now."

Question 4
BELOVED MASTER,
IS IT TRUE THAT POWER-ORIENTED PEOPLE WERE NEEDED TO CREATE THIS COMMUNE? IS IT ALSO TRUE THAT MEDITATIVE AND LOVING PEOPLE CANNOT CREATE SUCH BEAUTIFUL AND RICH COMMUNES?
PLEASE COMMENT.
Power-oriented people can create much, but their creation is basically criminal. And sooner or later, it is going to fall apart.
Meditative people, loving people, can create higher things, better things. And whatever they create is never in the service of death and destruction. Whatever they create is basically godliness. Whatever they create remains forever; it is eternal.
Adolf Hitler used to say that the regime that he is creating is going to last for one thousand years.
I want you to know, what we are creating is going to last forever.
Love is immortal. Love knows no death. Meditation leads you within yourself to eternity.
So don't think that I had put Sheela and her group to create the commune. They turned out to be power-oriented. Perhaps any one of you would have turned out to be the same. You all carry the same desire to be somebody special.
What has happened was bound to happen. It is a tremendously good experience that it happened so soon, just in four years. And now we have learned a lesson and we will not allow it to happen again.
The whole fault was mine, that I was silent. I had my reasons to be silent. I wanted to be silent forever, because words don't convey... it is not real communion that happens through words. I wanted to communicate through silence.
So my reason was there to be silent, but I cannot say that it was not my fault. I knew that something like that is possible, but I also knew that I can start speaking any moment when I see that things have come to a peak and they have to be stopped.
And no harm has happened to you. In fact, you have become more mature through the experience. It will make you more responsible, less dependent on authorities, more responsible on your own towards the whole commune.
We will turn this fascist nightmare we have passed through, into something beautiful. It is always in our hands to change things.
I have started changing the same nightmare into a beautiful experience that will help you along the way, and you will not fall in the same hole again.
Sheela has done a great service to you, and you should feel gratitude to her and her gang.

Question 5
BELOVED MASTER,
HOW CAN TRUST AND DOUBT GO TOGETHER?
There is no difficulty.
Just trust in doubt.
Okay?

============================================================

Question 1
BELOVED MASTER,
HOW DID WE WHO LOVE YOU LET THIS UGLINESS HAPPEN TO YOUR VISION AND TO OURSELVES? I SAW THINGS I THOUGHT WERE UGLY. I'D TELL MYSELF, "THE MASTER MUST WANT IT THIS WAY. I DON'T SEE THE WHOLE PICTURE. I DON'T WANT TO BE NEGATIVE."
WHAT IS THE BLINDNESS IN US?
First, you should all forgive me for being twenty minutes late. This has happened because of you. You do not understand the meaning of the word "responsibility."
And if you do not understand the meaning of that word, you are going to create another Sheela, another fascist regime again. And this time I will not be against it.
People are not turning up to their worship. They are not doing their work as well as they were doing before. They leave their work earlier -- as if they needed some dictatorship to do the necessary work.
Responsibility means that you do your best, so that there is no need for anybody to dictate to you.
Everybody wants to decide what should be done and what should not be done. If five thousand people decide that way, do you think anything can be done?
Poor Hasya is continuously pestered by many of you, that the work should be done this way, or it should be done that way. To whom is she going to listen?
People are approaching her, that about everything votes should be taken. Do you want the whole time -- day in, day out -- for each and every thing, voting? Is it a voting club?
Don't be stupid, otherwise.... You created Sheela before, and you will create Sheela again.
Last time I interfered and destroyed the whole fascist structure. Next time, perhaps I will not do that. What is the point, if you are going to create it again and again? Then the old is gold -- more efficient.
You have not looked at this side. Sheela was only one side of the coin; you are the other side. Without you, she could not have been, and done ugly, criminal things.
And now you are starting to be the tower of Babel. Everybody is arguing, discussing, giving his opinion, and that opinion should be followed. Now there are five thousand people -- and what opinion can you give? You are blind, you are in darkness, you live in unconsciousness. If I had not told you what Sheela was doing, you would have completely lived under Sheela without any problem.
You have to recognize it, that your opinion carries no value. Unless you are enlightened, your vote is just stupidity.
It is your votes that make Adolf Hitlers, Joseph Stalins, Benito Mussolinis. It is your votes that create Nixon. Your votes don't mean anything.
And your opinions? What opinions do you have? Are you here to express your opinions? Or to come to a point of silence, meditativeness, where all opinions disappear -- just a clarity, a vision to see. Opinion belongs to the blind. It is mere opinion; it has no solidity in it. The man of clarity has no opinions. He has the truth. And in my commune only truth has the right to decide. If you want to be decisive, become enlightened first; otherwise, you will simply create a suicide for the commune.
From the morning till twelve o'clock in the night, I am engaged in unnecessary things. That's why I am twenty minutes late. You are responsible for it. I have never been twenty minutes late, ever.
But if you don't allow me to sleep, you don't give me a chance to rest, then it is going to happen. So before I start answering the question, the question of questions is: From today, can you start working on your own, as fully, as totally, as intensively as possible?
You have to prove to Sheela and all those who think in fascist terms, that a loving commune can be more creative, can be more productive, can be a more joyous phenomenon.
If you cannot prove that, then Sheela is right. Perhaps you drove her into being a dictator.
Samya was there last night, tired. I have never seen her so tired before -- she is always laughing, joyous -- because the whole day you have been torturing her. One sannyasin will not leave her office, because he wants to see all the books -- what has happened, what is going to happen. He wants to give his opinion on every matter.
Do you think this man is behaving in any other way than dictatorial? He has been persuaded three times to leave, and he will come back again -- he will not leave unless all his answers are being accepted, and all his questions are being answered.
Is this the way of love? Is this the way that you can prove dictatorship is not the right way? This is proving that dictatorship is the right way. This man never tortured Sheela. Where has he been for these four years, with all his opinions? For four years he was a mouse, and now suddenly he has become a lion.
And five thousand lions cannot live together.
Then the only way is to reduce the lions back to mice, and they will be happy. Only I will be unhappy that my people are not capable enough to be lions.
So from today, everybody has to do better than he was doing before. Everybody has to reach to his worship. These excuses won't do -- that "I did not feel like it; I wanted to sleep a little longer." But what about the last four years? -- four years you always did feel to go, and now suddenly a great transformation has happened to you. If Sheela wanted you to work fourteen hours a day, you worked.
Samya and Hasya are trying in every possible way to reduce your work hours, but not the quality of the work, not the outcome of the work.
You were listening to me only on alternate days, and you were happy. Hasya immediately changed that, and you are listening to me every day. You have not thanked her.
Your complaint has been that your letters were not reaching to me -- that's true -- that you were not certain whether my answers were my answers or Sheela's own inventions. That is also true.
She has done every criminal act. You will be surprised: even in my videotapes -- in the originals she has changed everything that will go against her. There was no way for me to know what they were doing. The editors would get the edited version of my lecture. The videotapes around the world were reaching, not as I had delivered them; they have taken out sentences, passages. And you were perfectly happy with Sheela.
Now I have made an arrangement that all the heads of the corporations, whenever they want, can come to me when Hasya comes to see me. So it is not only Hasya who listens to what I say, other people will also be present there. They will be witnesses to whether Hasya has brought all your letters or not.
But remember, your letters are ninety-nine percent bullshit, and I don't want to be drowned in bullshit. So write only that which you feel is absolutely meaningful, essential, and write it in as small a way as possible, because I don't want to hear your opinions for five hours a day, every day. I am already crazy; what do you want? So you have to be careful. Your letters will reach, your response will be given to you; but you also have to learn something.
I receive files of letters which are not possible for me to go through. Don't make it impossible. Then naturally I have to leave it to Hasya to look through those letters, and mark only the important passages, and bring only the important letters.
So just your writing is not enough that it should reach to me. You have to make it significant enough, carrying some meaning, for it to reach to me.
But everything will reach, so you need not be afraid and worried. And whatever people are now in place of the old fascist regime, they have been chosen by different councils on my advice. They will take care that no democratic value is destroyed. Finally they are just servants of the commune.
And you have to learn to behave in a democratic way too. Democracy cannot exist only because a few people are in power who are democratic. If you are accustomed to being dictated to, ordered, then the whole commune will fall apart.
You have to learn that if they advise you to do something, do it. Do it to your best. And now I am available, and I am going to speak to my very last breath. But don't become a burden. You have to make the people who are managing unburdened, light, joyous, so they can feel happy with you. Don't torture them.
There have been sannyasins at my house, and they were forcing their way against the guards. Now, if five thousand people come to see me every day, I will have to escape from this place. I am accustomed to living in isolation and silence. I don't want you to disturb me. Everything that is a problem to you should come through the proper people. I don't hold any post. I cannot do anything right away, immediately. I have no power.
Even if you reach me with a demand, the demand has to go to Hasya, Anuradha, John -- the people who will be running the commune. So why bother me? Why should you not take your demand directly to them? And your demand has to be rational, legitimate.
I had said that the people who are suffering from AIDS -- we have isolated them -- should be given whatever we can give to them: respect, love. They should not be treated as criminals or condemned people. They are victims. And you listened and you followed it.
But they started becoming dictators. They started asking for Havana cigars, Mexican cigars, champagne. They thought that I have allowed them -- as if by bringing AIDS here, they have brought a great contribution to the commune. I was trying to respect their humanity, but they were not only AIDS patients, they were idiots too.
By the way, Sheela and her group's crimes go on growing every day more and more. Two of those people who were found with AIDS have been checked again; their results were negative, they were forced there. But Puja was culturing all kinds of viruses, and she managed to make their results come out positive. This is so ugly -- and from a woman! And what was the reason for all this?
Those people had refused to participate in certain crimes that the group wanted. This was a punishment. Neither of them is an AIDS patient. But what a punishment! Man can be so inhuman to other men that it is almost inconceivable. This was one reason.
The second reason was that they wanted -- they had already created a housing complex in the City of Rajneesh for five hundred people, with separate attached bathrooms -- they wanted to make an AIDS home. They never said that to me.
To me they said they wanted to make it for people who are recovering, people who are old and their families don't want them, people who are suffering from diseases and need treatment, and our medical corporation can take charge of those people. I said, "That's perfectly good."
But finally, when they wanted to open the AIDS home, at the last moment they wanted me to be in the press conference to declare it. I said, "But this was never told to me."
I immediately canceled the press conference, because to bring AIDS people, five hundred people, is endangering not only our commune; it is endangering all the people around the City of Rajneesh, in fact, endangering the whole of Oregon.
That was their way to take revenge on the Oregonians -- clever, but ugly, inhuman, disgusting. They have spent almost two million dollars on the housing complex, and now it is lying empty.
No sannyasin wants to go and live there. In fact, the people they had forced to live in Antelope don't want to go there. Remember it: for four years you were going there without any complaint. Just a little longer, on your own responsibility... because the harm that you have done to Antelope, the wounds that you have given to the people of Antelope, you have to heal them.
So just for a few days more continue to live there. Before you leave Antelope completely -- because we don't need it, we have enough land, enough houses -- before you leave Antelope, first change its name from City of Rajneesh back to Antelope. We have our city; why force a name on people who will detest it? Don't you understand simple psychology? You want my name to be unnecessarily condemned?
So before you leave Antelope you have to change the name. Before you leave Antelope we have to sell all the properties of Antelope. If the people of Antelope want their city back, they have to take their houses back, they have to purchase them.
We have given them enough money for it. We will not ask for payment for all the developments that we have done in their dilapidated houses. In four years prices have gone much higher. We will ask only the same amount that we have paid to them, and we are giving them renovated, better houses.
They have to take all those houses, and then you can move. But it will take a few days -- and I have heard that you have been saying that you don't want to go there at all.
If you had this much courage, then why for four years were you going there, living there? Now, out of sheer responsibility for the commune, because the commune has invested money there, which has to be taken out.... The people of Antelope will be very happy that you simply leave their houses, and they move in their houses free, without giving any money for them. That will be harming the commune.
Sheela has left the commune fifty-five million dollars in debt. We will make it; there is not much problem. But if you start behaving this way, you will be creating more debt.
So first change the name back to Antelope. And the Oregonians who are so much in sympathy with Antelope, they should help them. The government of Oregon should help them, give them loans, purchase the properties. Right now we have almost two-thirds of the properties of Antelope.
So whatever you have been doing under dictatorship, now you have to do on your own responsibility. You have to understand the implications of everything.
Sheela and her group have created a hostility between the commune and Oregonians. We have to destroy that hostility.
The first step will be for Antelope to be given back to the people who have lived there for hundreds of years. We don't have any political aspirations.
The second step will be, anybody who has committed crimes against the law, we will help the state to find the person, to hold him responsible for the crime.
Now a totally new situation has arisen. The state government of Oregon and the commune here have a common enemy: the fascist group that Sheela was leading. The enemy of the enemy is a friend. This can become a great bridge, and we should make as much use of it as possible.
Except the poor Red Indians, everybody in America is a foreigner. It does not matter whether you came a hundred years ago, or three hundred years ago. And we came only four years ago: the other foreigners should not treat us as if they are native Americans. That's what they are doing.
And what they have done, we are not doing to America. They have invaded the country. We have not come here invading the country.
Most of the sannyasins here are Americans. There may be a few Italians, a few Germans, a few Dutch, but these same people have come before as invaders. They are now the owners of the whole continent, and there is no possibility that the Red Indians will again be able to have their land back. For the Red Indians there seems to be no possibility to attain freedom.
America has the most beautiful Constitution. If it really follows its own Constitution, America should be ruled by the Red Indians, not by Ronald Reagan.
But Red Indians are put in reservation camps, in forests, in isolated places. "Reservation" is simply the American translation for the German word "concentration camp" -- without wires around it, because America is more sophisticated.
They don't put barbed wire around the camps; they have found a better method. They give pensions to all the Red Indians so they need not work. When somebody gets money and has no work, what is he going to do? Drink alcohol, gamble, go to prostitutes -- he has to do something; he has money and no work -- and remain continuously drugged.
The Red Indians never think of freedom, cannot think, they are so drugged. The barbed wire around the concentration camps in Germany was nothing. The American politicians have placed barbed wire inside the human psychology of the Red Indians. They have almost lost everything.
These people, who have the best Constitution in the world, behave most unconstitutionally, for the simple reason that the Constitution is so full of great ideals that the third-rate dirty politicians cannot rise to that height. There is such a gap that they have to do things against the Constitution. They are doing things against the Constitution to us.
The Constitution wants human dignity, respect for individuality, all other democratic values, but the Constitution does not seem to apply to us.
We have done no harm. We have really contributed something, created an oasis out of a desert, and if the government was helpful, fair, we would have changed this whole land into a luscious, green land full of many lakes, the best holiday resort in the whole country.
And we could have created great economic help to Oregon -- which needs it, because it is millions of dollars in debt to the federal government. We could have created a place for the tourists from all over the world. Already, thousands of sannyasins are coming. If it becomes a beautiful resort place, nonsannyasins will also be coming.
We can help the economy of Oregon. What are the Oregon politicians doing? Half of the land of Oregon they have given to the federal government. They still have to pay perhaps two hundred million dollars in debt. All that they can do is give the rest of Oregon also to the federal government. This is really underground communism.
The basic principle of freedom is that property should belong to the individuals, that the state should not own anything. Nationalization is against democracy, but that is going on underground everywhere.
Why are they so much against us? They know now that these one hundred and twenty-six square miles can never become the property of the government. And why have they wanted the whole of Oregon to become federal property? This is a good desert to experiment with nuclear weapons. Now we are in the middle of it. Our presence is dangerous for them. We are going to be here, and we will not allow this beautiful land to become a factory for death.
That's why I said it is a strange situation. We have nothing against anybody, and I have tremendous respect for the American Constitution. That is the only Constitution in the whole world which has some possibility for the future of humanity. It should be saved at any cost.
And I want it to be known all over America that we will fight for the American Constitution against the Americans who are trying to prostitute it. They have to be told it is a Constitution, it is not prostitution.
Now your question:
"Beloved Master, how did we who love you, let this ugliness happen to your vision and to ourselves? I saw things I thought were ugly. I'd tell myself, 'The master must want it this way. I don't see the whole picture. I don't want to be negative.'
"What is the blindness in us?"
The blindness is in every person who has been brought up to be dependent on a father figure -- God is doing everything. You are not responsible for anything. If you are poor, God must be wanting it this way. If you are sick, God must be wanting it this way.
The whole of humanity has been reduced to a helpless child, dependent on a father figure who does not exist anywhere.
So you go on changing your father figures. Nothing changes by that. The Christian becomes Hindu; he changes his gods, but his psychology is the same. The Hindu becomes Christian; he changes his God, but the psychology is the same. There are three hundred religions in the world, but the psychology of all the religions is exactly the same. And the psychology is: keep man dependent, irresponsible, always hoping, praying to someone who does not exist. This has created the whole tragedy.
Whatever was done here, your reason was saying to you, "This is not right." But you thought, "The master must be wanting it this way."
When have I told you to think on these lines? I have been teaching reasoning, doubt, skepticism, inquiry, independence, and you are doing just the opposite. That's why Sheela never wanted me to speak again. That's why they have tampered with my tapes -- the original tapes. Now there is no way to find out what they have changed.
But they don't know.... I am still alive, and what I had said ten years ago -- I will say something more outrageous today, because ten years' experience will be added to it.
They never wanted me to speak to you. Sheela was persuading me that my health will suffer if I start speaking. I said, "But what will I do with my health? Just remaining healthy and waiting for death?" I started speaking against her will.
Just the other day I have been informed that my milk was poisoned, slow poisoning, so that I become sick -- if not dead, at least not able to talk to you, so she remains the representative.
Or perhaps the poison was just to make my tongue dead so I cannot speak. They have been experimenting with it. I have come to know about one doctor who took a cup of tea and she found that for the whole day she could not speak. Her tongue was almost paralyzed.
Sheela was telling you that total surrender was needed.
I am telling you total responsibility is needed.
And you have to prove that what total surrender can do, total responsibility can do a hundred times better!
I was teaching you doubt; she was teaching you to believe. Because I insisted on speaking, her gang and their activities became exposed. If I had remained silent you would have continued to think, "Perhaps the master wants it this way."
It means you have never listened to me. You have not tried to understand me at all. I never want you to do anything against your reason, against your own dignity.
I want to give you back your pride of being the highest expression of evolution.
So from now on, remember, even if I go on speaking for my whole life, one day I will have to leave the body. Somebody cunning, clever, political, can again make you into a fascist group. Don't let this happen.
But that does not mean that you become a nuisance in the commune. You have to learn a balance. You know only two things: either you will be a slave or a nuisance. Can't you find a middle course? -- where you are sensible, not nuisance, just sense, and where you are not a slave but pure freedom.
Act out of your sensitivity, your freedom, your love -- and I don't think there is any problem: you can manage it.
I love you so much, I trust you so much. I have such high evaluation of your intelligence, that I can say you can make the impossible possible.

Question 2
BELOVED MASTER,
YESTERDAY I WAS SAD WHEN YOU SAID, "I TAKE THE BLAME FOR EVERYTHING THAT HAS HAPPENED."
WHY SHOULD YOU BE BLAMED? EVERY MOMENT YOU ARE TRYING TO MAKE US LOVING, MEDITATIVE AND CELEBRATIVE. IF THERE IS ANY BLAME, WE ARE ALL RESPONSIBLE. WE ARE NOT LOVING, MEDITATIVE AND ALERT, AND THAT IS WHY SHEELA AND HER GANG COULD DARE TO DO SUCH EVIL ACTIONS.
PLEASE TELL US HOW TO BECOME MORE MEDITATIVE, LOVING AND RESPONSIBLE.
That's why I have said that I am responsible for whatever happened -- because you are fast asleep. You are not alert, aware; you live like a somnambulist, walking in your sleep. How can you say that you are responsible for it all?
Neither can I say Sheela and her group are responsible. They belong to the same category as you. They just had power and in their sleep they did whatever sleep allows you to do. You had no power, you followed them, because what can a sleeper do?
So the whole responsibility is basically mine. I should not have gone into silence and isolation.
But it has been a great experiment, and a great experience that a man like me should not leave you alone in the hands of people who are just like you.
The law, perhaps, may not allow it, but this is my deepest longing: that Sheela and her group should be forgiven, and if any punishment is needed they should give it to me.
Only I am responsible, because I went into silence. I had never thought that silence can lead to such calamity.

Question 3
BELOVED MASTER,
NOW THE TIME OF THE "MOMS AND KIDS" IS GONE. THE WORSHIP IS HAPPENING WITH FAR MORE RESPONSIBILITY. I CAN SEE THAT WE ALL FEEL FREE TO EXPRESS OUR THOUGHTS, IDEAS AND FEELINGS. BUT IT HURTS TO SEE THAT THIS INCLUDES PEOPLE'S NEGATIVITY AND NEED TO ACT OUT THEIR OWN FEELINGS -- ESPECIALLY IF THEY HAVE NEVER HAD AN OPPORTUNITY BEFORE.
HOW DOES THE COORDINATOR GET INVOLVED IN THIS? HOW DO WE ALL TAKE CARE OF THIS?
WHAT IS THE RESPONSIBILITY OF A COORDINATOR?
One thing you all have to understand. For four years you have repressed your ideas, your opinions, so you must be carrying a great load and you all would like to throw that load on poor Hasya.
You should at least be this much alert: that Hasya has not forced you, repressed you. The people who had repressed you have gone.
But you can go into the mountains and express yourself as loudly as you can -- just to unburden. It helps, it helps immensely. It is a psychological treatment, so just try. Go in the mountains, find a good place, and say everything that you always wanted to say. But don't bring your opinions and expressions into the commune, because that will just create a wastage of energy.
The coordinator is just to look after so many people: that their work does not conflict with each other, that the people are not doing the same work -- unnecessarily duplicating. The coordinator is just to watch that everybody is in his position, not sleepy, and not doing unnecessary work.
And he is a link between you and the president of your corporation, so any problems that you have, he can take them to the corporation. He is responsible to you that no harm happens to you, that in no way are you placed where you don't want to be, that you are not mistreated. The coordinator has to be aware of all these things.
He is not under the service of the federation, corporation, foundation, or any other body. He is in the service of the people of whom he is the coordinator. His responsibility is that his people should remain healthy, happy, rejoicing, and they should not suffer on any account through bureaucracy.
Your responsibility to the coordinator is to listen to him, to do what is needed by the commune. The coordinator is a link. His work is double. He takes your needs to the president and he brings the president's messages of what is needed to be done, what the commune needs right now. He is just a messenger.
I have heard that many people are very much disturbed with a few coordinators who have been in with Sheela and her gang. Certainly you feel resentful, but that is not right. These people have not left. They revolted against Sheela and the criminal group -- you should think of it -- and you resent them.
Sheela and the people with her will hate them, and you resent them. They don't have any shelter anywhere. They understand that they belonged to a wrong group, but they were as innocent as you are. They also thought, "This is what the master wants us to do."
And the proof is that they revolted. Even the secretary of Sheela revolted against her, which was really courageous. She proved to be a real jewel. Sheela was very much afraid of her because she knew everything; she was Sheela's secretary, so every paper had passed through her. She knows all that they have done. Sheela wanted to take her with her. She even tried to poison the poor girl. If she cannot take her, then it is better to kill her. It seems killing people became to them just a very simple thing.
But Geeta has remained, and she will be of immense help. She is, because most of the stories that have come to exposure are because of Geeta, because she knows the right person who will tell the story. If you feel resentful towards Geeta that will not be in any way nice. That will not show your love, your heart. That will simply show a very stupid reaction.
Hasya was asking me, "Should we remove all these people? -- Geeta, Padma, Ava, and others?"
I said, "No. They have revolted against Sheela. They should be rewarded, not punished. And they will be of immense help to you, because this thing is going to become a bigger Watergate than Nixon could manage."
Don't feel resentful. I can understand your mind. Seeing the same faces in the same places, you feel angry. But you should be a little more understanding. I want them to be in the same places, because in the same places they can be of help to you.
The case is going to be one of a serious kind. It is going to be international news. Already what has happened is being talked about around the earth.
Now Sheela is in London and the whole group has disappeared -- perhaps separately into different places. They are hiding like criminals, but they all will be caught. The earth is small, and my sannyasins are all the way around the earth. They may deceive Interpol, but they cannot deceive my sannyasins. And all of my sannyasins have suffered -- not only you. Sannyasins in other communes have also suffered.
They cannot deceive this army of one million sannyasins. We will get hold of them. And Ava, Padma, Patipada, Geeta -- these will be the people, key people who will be of immense help.
For example, Geeta just informed me that before Sheela left, she has taken twenty-five letterheads of each corporation. That means she is still thinking of doing more crime. We have to report it to the police, that she has taken blank forms from each corporation. Now she can write anything on those blank forms, make the whole corporation responsible, and in that way disrupt the whole commune.
So please, just do me a favor. These people are not your enemies; they were as much deceived as you were deceived. And I cannot tolerate it that they should be punished in any way, removed from their places.
Yes, I would like them to change their behavior and attitude. For four years they have been trained in a wrong discipline. They should drop that completely and start from the very scratch. And they have to deliver everything that they know, whatever the cost, to help the commune.
So you drop any antagonism. Your antagonism will keep them closed. They will not be able to expose everything that they know. You don't know what more must have been happening.
Sheela has asked.... This is information from Geeta. Geeta was typing so she knows that this is absolutely correct; otherwise it would be difficult for me to get this information. Now we can find the person and verify it. The person is here, one of our great scientists. She asked him, "Can a machine be made with death rays?"
That is being experimented with by the American government, by the Russian government. All over the world scientists are thinking of death rays. And you will be surprised, our sannyasin is capable of making it.
The moment he became aware that this was going to be used, he asked, "I can make it. There are certain sounds -- you will not hear those sounds, but the machine will create those sounds, and they will kill you. I am capable of making it, but if it is going to kill humans I will not."
Now, without Geeta it would have been impossible to know about this. Now we can ask the scientist and the scientist can give his testimony to the court that he was asked for this and he had refused.
Be kind to these people -- a little more kind than you are to others. And kindness costs nothing. Be loving to these people, so they can feel at home, so they can feel that they are not suspected, that they are not doubted, that everybody is not watching them as enemies. Otherwise, it will be difficult for them to open their mouths, and they may be carrying immensely important information.
So I will not change them from their positions. I would rather like you to change your attitude. Your attitude is wrong. If you are antagonistic to them, you are forcing them to go with Sheela's group. If these four people, five people who are here.... Ava had gone with Sheela, but returned from Seattle, feeling that she was going with a criminal group. Now you should appreciate her courage.
These four, five people will be able to encourage others who are hiding as criminals that there is no need to be afraid in the commune. "Even if we have done something wrong, the commune has a large heart that can forgive and forget, and allow us to live a new way of life." These people will be the proof for others that they can also come and they will be welcomed.
I know that there was Sheela, Puja, Shanti Bhadra -- the most criminal out of the whole group, they were the main criminals. Others simply followed, perhaps in the same way as you followed. If all those people return to the commune, you will be strengthened in the court, before the law, in every way. You will have actual witnesses, and that is what is needed.
So these people should receive your respect and love. Even go out of the way to show your respect and love to them, and tell them, "You have come home. The past is past and the future is free. You can change, and you can help the commune."

Question 4
BELOVED MASTER,
ALL THIS IS REALLY REMINDING ME WHY I'M HERE. OUR CIRCUS/CAMP/COMMUNE IS THE PERFECT OPPORTUNITY TO FIND OUT WHO WE ARE. WITNESSING THROUGH ACTIONS THE TRUTH COMES OUT AND OUR HEARTS CAN SING WITH JOY AND LOVE.
That is not a question.

Question 5
BELOVED MASTER,
OUT OF THIS MUD, THE LOTUS PARADISE.
That's certainly true.
Lotuses grow only out of mud, and Sheela and her group have done the basic work: they have created mud. Now you do the second part!
Okay?

============================================================

Question 1
BELOVED MASTER,
LAST MONTH I WAS FACED WITH A RECOGNITION THAT WHERE THERE IS LIGHT THERE IS ALSO A SHADOW SIDE OF DARKNESS. YET UNTIL THE LAST FEW DAYS I STILL CLUNG TO THE ILLUSION OF SOME SEPARATION BETWEEN THEM, IN PARTICULAR THAT HERE ON THE RANCH WITH YOU THERE WAS LIGHT, AND OUTSIDE THERE WAS DARKNESS.
NOW I'M EXPERIENCING THE INSEPARABILITY OF LIGHT AND DARKNESS, BOTH WITHIN MYSELF AND WITHIN THE COMMUNE. ARE LIGHT AND DARKNESS ALSO INSEPARABLE WITHIN YOU? IS THIS A REALITY WE HAVE TO FACE TO LET OUR LOVE GROW DEEPER?
The existence consists not of contradictions, but of complementaries. Light and darkness are neither separable nor inseparable; they are one.
Darkness simply means less light.
Light means less darkness.
The difference is only of degrees.
There are animals, birds, who see only in darkness. Your day is their night. Their night is your day. And what you see is a very small fraction of the immense phenomenon of lightdarkness. I am using it as a single word, not even with a hyphen between the two.
You don't see X-rays. Your vision has a limited capacity. Below it there is infinity, above it there is infinity. So you have to drop the Aristotelian logic from your mind.
Aristotle has dominated the human mind, particularly the Western mind, for almost two thousand years. But now it is possible to get rid of the old man.
Aristotle's basic strategy was to divide things into contradictions: right and wrong, good and bad, life and death, man and woman. Within these past fifty years, all have proved to be only complementaries, not contradictions at all. Nobody has proved so wrong as Aristotle. I myself call him not Aristotle, but Aristotle-itis, a very dangerous disease, undetected for two thousand years. It has crippled your thinking, your comprehension of the wholeness of life.
And he himself did not have a scientific mind in any sense. He says in his books that women have less teeth than men. Obviously man is superior, and the woman is inferior in every way; how can she have the same number of teeth?
But very strange.... Aristotle had two wives; he could have counted their teeth before he wrote his book -- this is simple, very simple scientific methodology -- and he would have found the truth, that man or woman, it does not matter, they all have the same number of teeth.
And you will be surprised: before Aristotle it was believed; Aristotle believed in it, and after Aristotle for almost fifteen hundred years it was believed. Doctors believed it. No dentist had the courage to say, "This is all rubbish," because to speak against Aristotle was not possible. He was the father of Western logic. You've got a very funny father for Western logic!
Your mind is still dominated by Aristotle. For you, it seems, Albert Einstein has not happened yet. The greatest contribution of Albert Einstein is that in existence everything is relative, and the differences are only of degrees. There are no absolute contradictions.
You are, perhaps, not even aware of Carl Gustav Jung's contribution, because he discovered -- it will be better to say REdiscovered, because in the East it has been known for five thousand years -- that man is half man and half woman, and that woman is half woman and half man.
It seems to be very simple. Because a child is born by the meeting of man and woman, both contribute to the child's life. Naturally, the child will have something of man and something of woman. It is only two sides of one coin. On one side is the figure of a woman, on the other side the figure of a man. If somebody is man, that means his side which has the figure of man is in his conscious, and his woman is in his unconscious.
You get surprised when you hear that some man wants to become a woman. Now, through plastic surgery, it is possible.
We have here one of the best plastic surgeons who changes sexes, Leeladhar. He hates the work, but I told him, "It is immensely beneficial. You should not hate it. If a man can have both the experiences in life -- for thirty years he remains a man, and then becomes a woman -- he will be more enriched in his experience."
At least he will not say, like the poets have been saying for centuries, that the woman is a mystery. He will know nothing is a mystery, it is only a question of hormones, and a very simple difference.
The woman's genitalia are like your pockets. If you have to search for something, you have to put your hand inside. And the function of the surgeon is to pull the pocket out so the pocket hangs out. That is man's genitalia. You don't have to search anything, it is already hanging out like Jesus Christ on the cross.
That's why even an old woman can keep her charm, beauty, attraction. In fact, after her menopause she becomes more interested in sex than she has ever been. That is nearabout the age forty-eight, and that is the time when man becomes tired, finished, spent. That is a good time for a sex change.
And Leeladhar is doing a great service to humanity. In the future, I don't think there will be anybody who has not experienced both the sides. And then you will not say that men and women are opposites. They are not; they are one -- just complementaries.
The same is true about darkness and light, and about every contradiction that you can conceive of. There are no contradictions anywhere in the world.
Just the other night one very intelligent journalist from Germany was asking me, "Can you tell me which of these two statements is from Sheela?"
One statement was: "I love Bhagwan totally."
The second statement was: "Bhagwan is the most corrupted man."
The journalist was thinking that these are contradictory, so I will have to choose one. I could see his face and his eyes in a shock and daze when I said both the statements are from Sheela. I don't know where she made those statements, but one thing is certain: I can be absolutely certain both came from Sheela -- because your love is always carrying behind it, hate. Your hate is always carrying behind it, love.
Unless you become enlightened and you know the oneness of love and hate, you transcend to a new vision of existence where things are one, your ordinary love disappears, your ordinary hate disappears.... Gautam Buddha has called that state compassion.
And his second question was for me: "I ask you, do you still love Sheela?"
I said, "There is no problem. My love is not of the category of love and hate, my love is of the category of compassion."
Compassion does not depend on the person, the object. Compassion is unconditional. Love is not. Love is so conditional that it is bound to turn into hate sooner or later, because nobody can fulfill anybody else's conditions. That is an impossibility.
Each individual is so unique.... How can you fulfill all the conditions that your husband is imposing on you, or your wife is imposing on you? Soon the honeymoon is over, and you are standing like enemies -- of course, intimate enemies living together in a kind of coexistence; once in a while making love, once in a while throwing pillows and things at each other.... And this game of love and hate goes on all around the earth, twenty-four hours. Millions of couples go on doing it.
Have you observed it? Whenever you fight with your wife and she screams and throws pillows, and you scream and the whole drama... strangely enough, it ends in making love. There must be a deep relationship between both. They are not separate things.
My compassion does not depend on you. That's why I don't impose anything on you.
I don't convert anybody. The word "missionary" to me is a four-letter word. It is something disgusting. It is interfering into the other person's being.
The sannyasins who have come to me, have come out of their own freedom, and their freedom has not been tampered with in any way by me. And they are free at any moment to love. They are free to fall in love; they are free to fall in hate. My compassion remains in its place. Whether you love me or you hate me does not make any difference.
He asked me, "If Sheela and her gang come back would you accept them?"
I said, "Certainly, I will welcome them."
He was puzzled. A German mind is easily puzzled. A German mind is not flexible, it is made more of steel than of human fibers.
He said, "You will welcome her?"
I said, "Certainly."
He said, "But she has committed crimes! What are you going to do with her crimes?"
I said, "I will send her to my therapists. And we have all kinds of therapies possible. So she will have to move through all those therapies, which will cleanse her mind, make it clearer, more perceptive, so that she recognizes that what she did was something in the unconscious of her own mind. And once you recognize something as your own unconscious -- this is a law of nature -- it loses control over you."
Not only to Sheela, this is my approach to all crime. For five thousand years we have been punishing criminals, and the whole story is simply hilarious.
A man tries to commit suicide but is caught red-handed, so he could not commit it. Now, the court in many countries gives him death as punishment.
Strange world. Strange laws made by great men.
You support the man. He was committing suicide -- that was a crime. You caught him, and now you kill him and that is punishment. In fact, you are fulfilling his desire which he has not been able to fulfill.
Somebody commits a murder -- certainly the greatest crime. But the question is: the murder is committed in the past, the man has a long future ahead; who gives you the authority to hang this man and destroy his future? For one thing, killing him will not bring life to the man who is murdered.
Killing him is not justice but only revenge. You are doing the same that the man had done. But he is a criminal because he is powerless, alone, and you have the power of the government, the power of the law, the power of the army, so naturally you can justify your crime as law. But murder in any way is unlawful.
Can any court give life to any man? If the courts cannot give life to any man, then no court has the authority to destroy any man's life. And, in fact, it is not needed at all. That the man committed murder simply means something is wrong with his psychology. It is not a crime; it is a disease. It has to be treated, not punished.
And for a single act you condemn the whole man. That too, is not justified. You can condemn the act, but you cannot condemn the individual. The individual has to be respected, just as he was respected before. All that can be done is, he should be sent respectfully into a psychiatric nursing home, treated, helped, so the wound in his psychology which created the crime disappears.
Your jails are nothing but universities for criminology. A man goes into your jail for two years' confinement. He was just an amateur, obviously; otherwise it would not have been so easy to catch hold of him. But in the jail he finds great thieves, master thieves, experts of crime who have come many times to the jail and treat the jail as their home. They are called jailbirds.
Outside, they don't like it very much. You leave them and soon they will commit a crime and will be back again. And all the criminals in the jail know one thing: that they have been punished not because they committed the crime; they have been punished because they were CAUGHT... because they know people who have committed the same crime on a far greater scale and are respectable citizens, are receiving Nobel Prizes. They have not been caught.
So the real crime is to be caught. Crime itself is not crime. And once this enters into the mind of a person, you have spoiled his psychology forever.
This is the history of five thousand years. Courts go on growing, criminals go on growing on a greater scale, bigger scale. Your courts, your laws, your jails have not prevented the criminals. After five thousand years it is time to have a look: What is the achievement?
So not only with Sheela.... She has committed crimes of all sorts.
Just the other day we received information from California, from one of the sannyasins who used to be Sheela's secretary in India. She informs us that Sheela had a bank account in Switzerland. The bank account is in the name of Sheela and Savita -- and the account is not small, it is forty-three million dollars. They have been siphoning money from the European communes into this bank account.
The information came once before also, when I was silent. Sheela simply mentioned that some woman had informed the government that "Savita and I have a bank balance, but we are having that bank balance for you. In case you have to leave America we will need it to create a commune in Switzerland."
I said, "The bank account is for me and I am not aware of it? You never told me. At least let me know how much money is in the account."
They never told me. She said, "I will find out."
I asked Savita just two days before she left. She said, "I will find out."
You don't forget forty-three million dollars!
And now the account will be used by all this criminal gang. The money belongs to European communes; it was meant to come here for the construction of the commune.
I said in the press conference that we are left by Sheela and her gang with a fifty-five million dollar debt. About forty-three million of the mystery is solved. Now it is only a question of a twelve million dollar debt, and that too will be solved! It will just take time to figure out their books -- here, and all over the world.
Perhaps this forty-three million was from the time this sannyasin was Sheela's secretary. But that was four years ago. In these four years she may have accumulated more money. And the excuse she must have been giving to people is that it is needed for the master.
I was not even aware that I am so rich.
I am the poorest man on the earth -- nothing belongs to me. From my shoes up to my hat, everything belongs to the commune. If I have to leave the commune, I have to leave naked! There is no other way. And I wonder how I am going to get a ticket back to India. I don't have a single dollar. For twenty years I have not seen money. My people have loved me so much, they have taken care of me. There was no need for me.... I have not yet seen, in four years, what the dollar bill looks like. And anyway I will not touch it; it may be carrying AIDS!
Now, if the government is sensitive and has any feeling for people's lives, all dollars which move from hand to hand should be stopped. People should be given credit cards. And this is now possible with computers. In the commune it is possible. We don't have any currency, we don't use any dollars; we use only a credit card which remains your personal possession, it does not move in other people's hands.
Sheela has committed every kind of crime conceivable. Every day information is coming from different sources, from the sannyasins who have been afraid to tell it while she was here.
One sannyasin has informed us that they were looking at the possibility of putting poison on postal stamps, because people have the habit when they put the postal stamps on the envelope, to use their tongue and their saliva. And if the postal stamp is already poisoned, it can kill them and nobody can be caught.
They were inquiring about these things from people -- "Is this possible? Is that possible?" They had all kinds of literature on poison -- how to poison; how big a dose is needed if you want to kill the person immediately, or if you want to kill the person slowly within six months, eight months, so you are not caught.
The two persons they had forced to live in Desiderata, telling them that they have been found with AIDS, have been checked again. Neither of them has AIDS. The two persons are back in the commune.
Sheela's accomplice in all the medical crimes was Puja, who was culturing all kinds of viruses. They had made a clandestine lab in their house, where they had all kinds of poisons, viruses. Perhaps they mixed AIDS virus in the samples of the blood of these two persons, so the results came positive.
Now, this is so ugly, inconceivable. But there must be some reason why these two persons were forced to live there. Perhaps they had refused to do some crime. Perhaps Sheela and Puja wanted them to kill somebody, or destroy a Wasco County building, and they refused and this was the punishment.
And if they had not gone, they may have injected them with the virus, just as they polluted their blood samples which went out for examination, for testing. They may have injected those people under any excuse and killed them.
Still I say I will accept them, because everybody in his deep unconscious carries the criminal. The difference is only that they got the opportunity for their criminal to surface. And they have given you a good insight -- that when power is in your hands, be very mindful that your unconscious will try to exploit and take advantage of the situation. Beware of yourself, because you are so unconscious and so asleep.
Your question is that you have been thinking up to now that in the commune there is all light, and outside the commune there is all darkness. This is not something new. This is as ancient as humanity.
In Adolf Hitler's time, Germans thought only Germany has the light and the whole world is full of darkness.
In England, mothers used to create fear in their children, "Don't go out! Adolf Hitler is coming!" And that was enough, not only to frighten the children, it was enough to frighten anybody. He was the devil. England, America, and their allies, were divine powers.
But you don't see the situation. America was a divine power because it was fighting against the darkness and the devil. And the same America destroyed Nagasaki and Hiroshima without any reason or excuse.
The war was going to end anyway. Germany had already accepted defeat. Japan could not go on fighting on its own strength. The forces against Japan were moving deeper into Japan and destroying their whole strength. In at the most one or two weeks Japan would have been on its knees just with ordinary weapons. The atom bombs were not needed at all.
But the president of America, whose name you have to change.... His name was Harry Truman, and he is nothing but Harry unTruman. I will use the new name, not the old. Harry unTruman, president of America, killed innocent civilians in two cities in Japan, who had done nothing wrong against anybody -- for the simple reason that they wanted to experiment whether the atom bomb is really reliable or not.
In Hiroshima, one hundred and twenty thousand people died -- just for an experiment, just to be convinced that their scientists have succeeded.
But history will never call Harry unTruman a criminal. He has become a hero. Your whole history is full of criminals whom you have been told and taught are heroes.
In India, the ancient story of the Hindu religion is that Rama, their incarnation of God, was fighting against Ravana, who ruled over Sri Lanka, Ceylon, and was nothing but the devil incarnate. And this is absolutely false. He was one of the most learned men the world has known. And if he was against Rama, he had valid reasons for it.
In India, it was a custom, when a princess was going to be married, then all the kings who wanted to marry her would be invited, and they would be given some task to do. The princess would accept the one who could do the task and garland him as her husband.
One beautiful princess, Sita, was going to be married. All the kings were invited; Rama was invited, Ravana was invited, and it was absolutely certain that the task was such that perhaps only Ravana would be able to fulfill it.
There was a very big bow of Shiva, so heavy that you could not move it even, and the task was to take it up and break it into two pieces just with your bare hands. It was as solid as steel.
Many kings tried; they could not even lift it up. The question of breaking it would not arise. There were a few who could not even move it on the ground.
Ravana was a very mighty king -- physically a King Kong -- so there was every fear... and Rama was just a boy. So the only way was somehow to take Ravana out of the competition.
So a conspiracy was done by Rama. A messenger, a false messenger, was sent who informed Ravana, just as he was standing up, "Lord, your capital in Sri Lanka is on fire." And he had made his capital perhaps the most beautiful capital of those days. It it said his capital was made completely out of gold.
Naturally, he rushed. And you will be surprised, because from Ayodhya, India, Ceylon is thousands of miles away. But Indian scriptures have every description, detailed descriptions of airplanes -- he went in his airplane immediately, but found that it was a false report. And in the meantime, Rama broke the bow, married Sita, and this was the reason why finally Ravana stole Sita from Rama's hands. So Hindus think that Ravana was a devil, and the kingdom of Ceylon was the kingdom of devils.
It is always easy to keep yourself divine, full of light, and to describe anybody who is hostile to you as devils, as darkness. But even the idea, to describe others as devils, darkness, and think of yourself as light, is ugly.
And you are asking me, "What is the case with you?"
I am neither light nor darkness. I have transcended the duality in all the dimensions. I look at life as an organic whole. So either you can say I am both light and darkness, or you can say I am neither.
But you have to understand the fact that both are possible as plausible descriptions of me, because I am only a witness.
Light comes: I see. Darkness comes: I see.
A saint comes: I see. A sinner comes: I see.
I am just a mirror, so whatever is in front of me is reflected. But the mirror is not a film plate; the moment you have moved, the mirror is empty again.
In my room I am sitting empty. Most of my day is just a mirror, mirroring nothing. Only when I come to you, or to some interview, to the press, the media, then my mirror reflects. Whatever I say is not prepared. I don't know myself what my mirror is going to reflect, because it depends on you, your question.
I am transcendental, and that's what I want you to be. Meditation takes you beyond the opposites, the contradictions, and makes you a pure witness. And to be a pure witness is the ultimate goal of consciousness. There is nothing beyond it, because whatever will be happening, you will remain the witness. Even if God comes in front of you, you will be only a witness.
Witnessing is the highest point of the evolution of consciousness. That's why I have dropped God, paradise, hell, heaven. What is the point of all this paraphernalia?
Stick to the basic essential, and that is: be a witness.
Right now, you are!
Are you not witnessing this silence?
Try to keep this flavor as long as you can. Slowly slowly it becomes your very existence. It is -- you just have to discover it.

Question 2
BELOVED MASTER,
IN THE STORY YOU TELL OF BODHIDHARMA HANDING OVER HIS KEY TO A DISCIPLE, THIS DISCIPLE CUTS OFF HIS HAND AS A WAY OF DEMONSTRATING HIS SURRENDER, HIS READINESS TO DO WHATSOEVER THE MASTER WISHES HIM TO DO.
IS THERE A DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THIS AVAILABILITY TO A MASTER AND BEING THE PERFECT PARROT AS YOU HAVE RECENTLY DESCRIBED SHEELA?
You are also a parrot. You have not understood the story that I have told. You have not even heard it. In your sleep you have managed to convince yourself that you have heard the story, that you have understood the story.
First, let me repeat the story.
It was not a question of surrender.
Bodhidharma is one of the greatest enlightened men who has ever existed, and one of the most unique amongst all the enlightened men. In many ways he surpasses his own master, Gautam Buddha.
Gautam Buddha was a man of manners, son of a king, well educated in etiquette, in language, literature, music, archery -- in whatsoever was available there in those days, he was educated.
Bodhidharma was an uneducated person. So there are bound to be differences. But he was a very straightforward man, no sophistication, no way of being nice. He was just a sword, really sharp to cut off any head.
He went to China. His fame had reached before him. The emperor of China, Wu, who ruled over all China -- which is one-fourth of the world -- was one of the greatest emperors. He came to receive Bodhidharma, because he had heard so many strange stories about him. And he had already become converted to Buddhism by other Buddhist monks who had reached before Bodhidharma.
Emperor Wu asked Bodhidharma, "I have made thousands of statues of Buddha, thousands of temples in China. I am financially supporting hundreds of monasteries where thousands of Buddhist monks are living. What is going to be my reward? I am doing everything which is virtuous."
That's what the other monks were telling him. That's what the other priests of other religions have been telling rich people: donate to the church, donate to the religion, and you will be rewarded immensely in paradise.
I also say to you, Donate if you want to go to hell with me, because I don't like heaven at all. All those idiotic saints who do not even drink tea, who have never sung a song, who have never danced, who have never loved a woman -- just dry bones. Heaven must be a graveyard, a long graveyard filled with skeletons moving all around, carrying their harps and playing on the harp, "Alleluia." I cannot tolerate that kind of nonsense. Once in a while it is okay, but for eternity?
And you are not going to meet any beautiful people in heaven, people with juice, people with color -- poets, painters, dancers, film actors and actresses, philosophers, atheists, scientists -- all the people who had genius of some kind, talented people.
You will not find Michelangelo there, or Leonardo da Vinci, or Kant, or Socrates. No, that is impossible. All these people are in hell, and I would love to take you all to hell, because hell must be a tremendously beautiful place where all these geniuses have gathered. And once we reach there, we are going to make it a really great oasis. It is not Oregon. You will not have to face idiotic hostility. You will be received with great joy.
But all other religions have been telling you, "Donate; that is the greatest virtue." The money goes to the priest. The money goes to the bishop, to the cardinal, and finally it reaches to the Vatican.
Now, my suggestion is that the Vatican should be turned into an AIDS home, because they are responsible for homosexuality. They should be forced to accept their criminal act. To teach people celibacy, to teach that monks cannot have any love relationship with a woman, and nuns cannot have any contact with men, you are preparing the ground for homosexuality. And AIDS is the ultimate outcome of this homosexuality. That's why I call AIDS a very virtuous disease, immensely religious.
There used to be a saying that "All roads lead to Rome." I would like to say to you: all roads still lead to Rome, but not for everybody -- only for people who are suffering from AIDS. People suffering from AIDS from all over the world should start moving towards the Vatican.
The pope is the richest man in the world. He controls more riches than any Rockefeller, he has more power than any king or queen. In fact, there is only one queen in the whole world, and that is in England. Four other queens are in playing cards, but all five have the same power.
The pope has the grip over six hundred million Catholics, and money goes on pouring into the Vatican.
So the Emperor Wu asks the first question to Bodhidharma, "I have donated so much. What is going to be my reward?"
He was not aware that Bodhidharma was a very straightforward man. He said, "Nothing. Instead, you should be punished."
The emperor could not believe it. He said, "But all the monks have been telling me, 'Donate. Make temples. Make caravanserais. Make hospitals, schools. Give in charity to the monasteries.' And you are making just the opposite statement."
Bodhidharma said, "In the first place, from where did you get all this money? For that you will be punished. Secondly, these people have been exploiting you, and you are a just an idiot. No virtue in it, only stupidity."
To talk to the emperor of such a big empire in this way you need real guts. And Bodhidharma is the strongest man in the whole of history. The emperor wanted to change the subject. Bodhidharma said, "Nothing doing. I am not entering your capital. I am not interested in being your guest. I am going to the hills in the Himalayas. I have found a cave while I was coming here. It is really beautiful." There the story happened that you are mentioning.
Bodhidharma sat in that cave facing the wall. That too, only Bodhidharma can do. A few people came -- impressed because he has put the emperor into his right place. That man was exploiting the whole country. The whole country was suffering in poverty because of him, and nobody had the courage to say it. And this man did it in a single sentence, and refused to be a guest of a criminal.
So a few people came there, but he would not turn towards them. He said, "I will turn only when I see that somebody who has guts has come; otherwise, whether to face towards the wall or towards your faces makes no difference."
Finally this young man came, who said to Bodhidharma, "You have to turn now! I, for whom you have been waiting, have come. Do you want some proof?"
And before Bodhidharma could say anything, with his sword the man cut off his hand and placed it at Bodhidharma's feet. And he said, "If you want me to cut off my head, I can do that too; otherwise, turn towards me!"
It was not a question of surrender. How have you managed to hear surrender? This man has not cut off the hand to show his surrender. He has really shown his unique individuality, not surrender. Just the opposite!
He is not surrendering to Bodhidharma; he is forcing Bodhidharma, "Now you cannot go against your promise; otherwise, I am going to cut off my head too."
And Bodhidharma turned immediately. He had to. He said, "This is too much. There was no need to cut off the hand."
The man said, "The hand does not matter, neither does the head. I have lived with this hand and with this head for fifty years, and there is no ecstasy, no blissfulness. The whole life has been just a long story of misery, suffering, pain. It has been just a tragedy. Seeing you, a man of steel, I thought perhaps here is the man who knows the secret.
"So if I have to live, I have to live with you. And you have to teach me; otherwise, there is no point in living."
It was not a question of surrender. In fact, he forced Bodhidharma to accept him as his disciple, and he proved worthy.
Such people have disappeared from the world.
And you think you surrendered to Sheela? Don't hide your cowardliness -- because I have not been teaching you to surrender. I have been teaching you to be individual, and to take responsibility, to do everything that you can do for yourself and the commune. But do it out of love, not out of fear. Surrender is fear.
Love is not surrender. Love does not ask you to surrender. Love does not ask for anything. Love simply gives. And the miracle is, that when you give out of love the whole existence returns it a thousandfold, as if, from all over around you, roses start showering on you. You cannot imagine, cannot conceive of it, unless you experience it. But give it a try. You will not be losing anything.
Love is not something like a commodity, that if you give it you will have less of it. It is not money, that you had ten dollars and five you have given; now you have only five dollars left.
Love is not a commodity. It is not a quantity; it is a quality.
Give it, and you will be surprised that from unknown sources, from everywhere, love is flowing towards you.
Give it unconditionally, and once you have known the taste and the joy of giving unconditionally, you will also know that the existence is very generous.
But it gives only to the givers, and you are always begging. That's why I am against prayer, because all prayer is begging. "Give me this. Lord, give me today's bread." What nonsense! You cannot even create today's bread?
And Jesus is thought to do miracles -- turning stones into bread, walking on water, making dead people alive. And he also goes on asking, "Lord, give us our bread for today."
What about small, simple human beings, who cannot walk on water, and cannot make bread out of stones, and cannot revive dead people? Naturally, they will be simply beggars.
All the religions of the world have turned humanity into beggars, and they have all praised poverty to make you really beggars.
I am against poverty, and I am against begging. You have intelligence, you have physical strength; you can create. And if you cannot even create enough bread for yourself, then what is the point of going on living, dragging?
I believe in creativity, and I want every human being to be a creator. And we can create as much wealth as is needed. There is no need to be like the Soviet Union -- to distribute poverty. We can create so much wealth that nobody needs to hoard it. There is no need, because it is available, and you are capable of creating it.
Love will give you the secret key, the golden key, the master key.
Love unconditionally, and flowers will be showering on you from all the directions. And once you have known the generosity of existence you will never feel miserable.
You are part of such an opulent, luxurious abundance. Can't you see existence is luxurious?
To create one child, the male releases millions of sperms. This I call luxury! Existence is not miserly. Only one out of millions will become a child, and that too, once in a while.
And that too, only if you are still listening to the idiots -- Ayatollah Khomeiniac, Pope the Polack, Shankaracharya the Idiot -- if you are listening to these people, only then. Otherwise, the Pill will prevent even that invading army, one million people -- just a small pill.
This is a real miracle, not making one dead man alive. This is a miracle: a small pill preventing millions of people.
But as far as existence is concerned, it is really opulent in every way. It goes on flowering. How many flowers? And how many species of flowers? How many animals? And how many species of animals? How many birds? And how many species of birds?
In everything, existence creates luxuriously. It is not miserly.
Giving love unconditionally you will understand, and that understanding will be a transformation of you. It will make you a new man.
Okay?

============================================================

Question 1
BELOVED MASTER,
IS CHRISTIANITY THE ONLY RELIGION THAT HAS CAUSED SEX PERVERSION?
WHAT DO YOU SAY ABOUT HINDUISM?
Christianity is certainly one of the most perverted of all religions, but it is nothing compared with Hinduism. Hinduism is the oldest religion in the world, and it has caused in its own way many perversions. All those perversions that Christianity has created, Hinduism has been doing long before Christianity was born. In fact, there are many Hindu scholars who believe that Christ never existed; he is only another name for Krishna, the Hindu perfect incarnation of God.
Krishna in Bengali is called Christo. Then you can see it is not very difficult that the name Krishna can become Christ. If it can become Christo, then Christ is not very far. And whatever teachings are there in the name of Christ are all borrowed from Hinduism. Perhaps that is the reason why Jews never accepted Christianity: it was a foreign teaching.
For example, Jews have never believed in celibacy. Even their rabbis are married. Jesus advocated celibacy -- which is basically a Hindu concept. And from Hinduism it has reached to Jainism, to Buddhism, and perhaps to Christianity too.
The Hindu monk, for ten thousand years at least, has been insistently trying to prove that celibacy is spiritual power, that it connects you with divine power, with God. This is simply absurd.
Celibacy has nothing to do with holiness.
And celibacy gives no power; on the contrary, it creates a conflict within you because you are trying to fight with your own energy. It weakens you. Your own power becomes divided; and a house divided against itself cannot be powerful. And it was because of celibacy that tantra was born in India -- which is just a revolution, a rebellion against Hinduism.
Hinduism says celibacy is spiritual, and tantra made sex spiritual -- and tantra is closer to biology, physiology, science, humanity. Tantra has never created any perversion; but tantra never became a religion, it remained an independent philosophical approach. Anybody can follow it. There is no question that you have to believe in God, that you have to believe in heaven and hell or anything.
Tantra is a tremendous meditation because sexual orgasm is your natural potentiality to feel, just for a moment, something of the beyond. Tantra uses orgasm and joins it with meditation, and what is only for a single moment can become your twenty-four hour state. And it makes it a scientific thing; that orgasm has nothing to do with the other person.
While you are making love you come to a peak of tension, and because that tension relaxes, you feel a tremendous silence descending on you, a great relaxation -- for a few moments no thought, no time. Everything has disappeared; there is only pure isness.
Tantra says this is your natural gift, and it has been given to you so that you can find the way that it is possible for you to be without thoughts, relaxed, and the same orgasmic experience will follow. It has nothing to do with the other. And once you know how to relax, how to drop the thoughts, how to stop time, how to stop mind, you discover your pure isness.
To me tantra seems to be the only contribution that seekers after truth have given to the world. It has no perversion of any kind. It uses nature to experience something which is very simple, and then makes you aware that this simple experience can be experienced in your aloneness. And that very moment you transcend the dependence on the other, because certainly the other is always a trouble, a pain in the neck.
Jean-Paul Sartre says, "The other is hell." It does not matter whether the other is man or woman -- "The other is hell" because you have to depend for your only meaningful experience in life on the other.
Tantra gives you tremendous freedom from the other, and a great gratitude for the other; it is because of the other that you have become able to attain freedom from all dependence.
Tantra arose in India as a rebellion against Hinduism -- because Hinduism was doing the same, on a greater scale, with more sophistication and philosophy, as Christianity did later on in a very crude and primitive way. Hinduism was teaching celibacy, and celibacy is bound to lead to perversions, particularly homosexuality. And homosexuality has brought the ultimate flowering in AIDS.
But one thing should be remembered: just like the Christian trinity, Hindus also have a trinity -- Brahma, the creator god; Vishnu, the god who maintains the world; and Shiva, who will destroy the world. This is a cycle. Then Brahma creates the world again, and for millions of years Vishnu maintains it; then one day Shiva destroys it. So you will be surprised to know that in the whole of India there is only one temple devoted to Brahma. Who cares for him? His work is finished -- he created the world.
All the temples are of Vishnu, or incarnations of Vishnu. All the incarnations of Hindu gods -- Rama, Krishna, they are all incarnations of Vishnu. Naturally, it is simple business that Vishnu maintains the world and he is in power.
And there are temples of Shiva too, but not so many as the temples of Krishna and Rama and other manifestations of Vishnu.
Shiva is worshipped out of fear because he is going to destroy the world. If you worship him he can be a little favorable to you. He may destroy you in some sophisticated way -- an electric chair, not a crude, ugly cross like the one on which Jesus was crucified; or giving you a disease, AIDS, which is far cruder a cross than the one Jesus was carrying and dying on.
Vishnu has a wife; he is not celibate. Shiva has a wife; he is not celibate. But gods have to be given some privilege which is not allowed to the Hindu monk. Gods are a different category. But it is very strange that nobody in ten thousand years has asked that when Vishnu and Shiva can have wives, then what is the reason that the Hindu monk should renounce the wife, the children, leave them in poverty, misery, disease, and gain spiritual power by it?
In fact, he is committing a crime. And he will turn into a homosexual. I know hundreds of Hindu monks who are homosexual, because women will not be allowed in with them, alone; otherwise their whole purity, spirituality, will be immediately condemned. But men can remain with them. As far as I have known no Hindu monk is celibate, and there is no wonder in it because celibacy is an impossibility; and particularly for a Hindu monk.
It may be possible for a Jaina monk to be celibate because he eats only one time a day. He eats in his hands, making a cup of his hands, and whatever his two hands can have at one time, that's all that he has to eat. It cannot be much. He lives starving, hungry. There is no possibility for two things: one, he will not have any intelligence, because intelligence comes to you only when you have an overflow of physical energy. Intelligence is a luxury. All the animals are living without it; it is a human luxury. But luxury can exist only when you have more energy than is needed for your physical survival.
And secondly, he can be celibate because he has not enough energy to create male sperms. If you see a Jaina monk you will feel pity: he is just bones. His eyes don't show any intelligence. Whatever he says seems to be simply ordinary. But his celibacy is killing him -- he is on a suicidal path. He may not be perverted in the ordinary sense of being a homosexual or a sodomist, but I call this too a perversion. He is destroying himself every day, he is dying! No Jaina monk needs AIDS: he creates it himself.
But Hindus and their monks are a different matter. You will find the Hindu monk eating very nourishing food, and eating too much; all the Hindu monks you will find overweight.
One of the great Hindu monks, Nityananda, the master of Swami Muktananda -- Muktananda was very well known in America. Nityananda had only one unique quality: his belly. I don't think in the whole history of man anybody had such a big belly! When he lies down you can see a strange shape.
When I saw him I told him, "You don't have a belly, your belly has a head and legs, because that is your major part!" But he is worshipped, he is thought to be enlightened. And his belly is proof enough. And now this man cannot be celibate: he is eating so much that he will create sexual energy. What is he going to do with that energy? Anything that he will do will be a perversion; and the easiest way is always homosexuality, because if he is found with a woman, all his respectability and great sainthood will disappear. He has to be with a man, and then nobody suspects.
And these people have never asked about their god Vishnu, who has a beautiful lady, Laxmi, with him. Their god Shiva has an even more beautiful woman, Parvati. Let me drift a little....
Shiva was so infatuated with Parvati that, when she died, he would not let her body be burned, as is the Hindu custom; on the contrary, he took the dead body of Parvati on his shoulder, and moved all over the country: perhaps somewhere, some physician might revive her again. He could not live without Parvati.
It took twelve years for him to go around the country, to visit all the great physicians. And he was so deadly blind in his infatuation that he did not even notice that in twelve years the legs of the woman fell, the hands of the woman fell, the head of the woman fell -- and he is still seeking a physician!
There are twelve most holy places in India where Parvati's limbs had fallen. But strange, this man is mad! And to make those places holy, and on the other hand to insist that celibacy is needed for man.... For gods there are different rules, for man there are different rules.
I talked only about two gods. One more incident will show you what kind of gods Hindus have. In fact all religions have pornography in their literature, but nobody can surpass Hindus.
It is said, one day Brahma and Vishnu argued about something and could not come to a settlement, so they said, "We should go to Shiva; perhaps he can help us come to a conclusion."
Shiva's son was sitting at the door, watching. He was told that nobody was to be allowed, but he had never thought that Vishnu, Brahma, were included, and he was at a loss: how to prevent these gods? That will be insulting. So he allowed them. Shiva was making love to Parvati. These two gentlemen came and stood there for six hours, and the love went on, and Shiva and Parvati did not take any note of the two gentlemen standing there.
Frustrated and angry they left and cursed Shiva, "You have insulted us badly, and we curse you that you will be remembered by your sex organs." That's why Shiva's statue is just a phallic symbol resting in Parvati's vagina. And all over India that statue is worshipped, and nobody bothers what they are worshipping! And they are great spiritual people worshipping genitalia, and that too, in a state of making love!
It is ugly. But religious people are blind, everywhere. No Hindu ever thinks, "What is this shivalinga?" Even the name, shivalinga, means the genitalia of Shiva. They go on calling it shivalinga without understanding even the meaning of the word. There are no statues of Shiva, only these phallic symbols -- because of the curse.
Only Brahma is without a wife -- obviously, because he is the creator god. From where will he find a wife? But what he did is even worse. He created a woman and became so infatuated that he started running after the woman to catch hold of her and rape her! His own daughter! But gods are allowed every crime. And the woman, afraid that he would rape her, became a cow.
Brahma became a bull; you cannot deceive Brahma, the god, the creator -- and that's how the whole creation has come into being. That's why there are so many species of animals, man, insects. The reason is: the woman goes on changing and Brahma goes on following, changing himself into the male. It is still continuing.
It is not just a short affair like the Christian God, who made the whole world in six days, and was so tired on the seventh that he rested; and since then he has been resting. Nothing has been heard about him. Monday never came again; he has never been back on the job. Just in six days he got spent, finished!
Brahma is still continuing, chasing the woman. He has not yet caught her because she goes on changing her form, he has to change his form; by the time he reaches closer she changes her form. And the creation goes on and on in different species. This idea looks closer to evolution; otherwise, why so many species? What is the need? So many mosquitoes -- what is the need? So many bedbugs -- what is the need?
The Christian God cannot answer that he created bedbugs to suck the blood of Christians; and created mosquitoes, created snakes and scorpions -- for poor Christians! But what can Brahma do? The woman is certainly a mystery: she goes on becoming things which even Brahma may think is not right, but what can he do? -- he is infatuated.
She becomes a scorpion so he has to become a scorpion. She becomes a bedbug; feeling that now Brahma will stop. But he is not going to stop -- he becomes a bigger bedbug. And the story continues; the creation is continuous. But the reason for this continuity is that the father is trying to rape his own daughter.
What do you call it? -- perversion or spirituality?
Hinduism has all the perversion that Christianity has, and much more.
One of the incarnations of God is Krishna. Hindus believe that there are going to be twenty-four incarnations of God. Twenty-three have happened; for the twenty-fourth they are waiting.
That, too, is a subtle psychology in every religion: some hope has to be left. Jesus Christ is coming back; the twenty-fourth incarnation of God is going to happen.... And they have been thinking this for thousands of years. It never happens, and it is not going to happen ever. It is just a hope, an opium, to keep people thinking of the future so they can forget their misery in the present. The twenty-fourth God will come and release you from your bondage, suffering, misery, pain -- everything. He will open the door of paradise for you.
Krishna had sixteen thousand wives. These were not married to him; he had married only one woman, Rukmani -- one out of sixteen thousand. These were other people's wives whom he had taken forcibly. Their children, their husbands were deprived. And what are you going to do with sixteen thousand wives?
Even one wife is enough to finish you. Sixteen thousand wives! Perhaps the strategy is that sixteen thousand wives will quarrel among themselves, and Krishna will be saved; nobody will bother about him. He may not even know their names, he may not know their faces; he may not have made love to many of those women.
He has done a great crime! Those women belong to somebody else -- what is that man going to do? What are the children of those women going to do? They have lost their mother unnecessarily. But no Hindu objects that such a thing is simply the worst crime you can commit. And of course Rukmani behaved just like any woman will behave: became very jealous that this man goes on bringing women.
I had a meditation camp in Gujarat, in India, in a very beautiful place, Tulsishyam. In the valley -- it was a mountainous place -- in the valley there is a temple of Krishna with one of his beloveds, Tulsi, who is not his wife. And on top of the hill there is a temple of Rukmani, but made in such a way that Krishna cannot see the temple, but Rukmani can go on watching from there what is happening there in Krishna's temple with Tulsi. I loved the idea! -- the whole human psychology.
Rukmani is alone and angry. You can see her face: the despair, anger, hate, jealousy. And the temple is facing towards the valley. I have been in the temple and stood by the side of Rukmani's statue. You can see Krishna and Tulsi. They are nothing more than statues, but you can see from there both the fellows. Standing in Krishna's temple you cannot see Rukmani, nor her temple. It is hidden in bushes, high in the mountain. But whoever was the architect has made it plain that Rukmani must have been very jealous -- just like any woman.
And Krishna was nothing but a playboy, and that too, not a nice one. I have no objection: if some woman loves him and he loves her, to me there is no problem, that is perfectly good. But he has forced those sixteen thousand women from their homes, and imprisoned them in his own palace. This is not love! This is not even human. But he is considered to be the perfect incarnation of God. The other twenty-three will be partial incarnations of God. What a perfection!
You ask me about Hinduism and its sexual perversion.... All the religions have their sexual perversion. They have created sex maniacs, they have created rapists, they have created homosexuals, they have created lesbians; and now the ultimate outcome of it all is AIDS. AIDS is the great contribution of all the religions together.
And idiotic politicians are making homosexuality illegal. They should make all these religions illegal, because they are the cause of all sexual perversions, and unless they are removed from the psychology of man, man can never be really natural. And that is one of the fundamentals for his growth.
You can only grow by being natural.
And nature has provided you everything, even a glimpse of meditation which will lead you to the ultimate goal of enlightenment.
But making homosexuality illegal is making the symptom illegal, not the cause. And nobody is taking care what is the cause, who are the people who have forced man to be sexually perverted? Your saints, your founders of religions are the greatest criminals humanity has known. They have perverted you in every possible way. Their whole teaching is against nature.
Mohammedanism allows every Mohammedan four wives. Nature produces equal numbers of men and women. Now, if a man marries four wives then what are the other three men going to do? You are forcing them into some perversion. Either they will become homosexuals, or they will follow the path of sodomy and make love to animals.
And if homosexuality has brought AIDS, no one knows what will happen if sodomy spreads, because if you make homosexuality illegal, a crime, you are driving people towards sodomy. Sodomy is not a crime, so people will start making love to dogs, to cows, to deer. And if a man making love to another man has created this disease, you can conceive something even worse will happen out of sodomy.
The simple thing is: make celibacy a crime, anybody who remains celibate will be sent into jail for five years. Make all the monks marry the nuns. Of course the Polack pope will be in difficulty: no nun will like to be married to the Polack. Then Mother Teresa will be good.
But something has to be done to uproot the cause, the very cause; otherwise humanity cannot be saved.

Question 2
BELOVED MASTER,
WHY ARE THERE SO MANY GERMAN SANNYASINS WHO COME HERE YEAR BY YEAR FOR A COUPLE OF MONTHS AND TOTALLY REFUSE TO GO INTO ONE OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNES?
WHY IS THE ATMOSPHERE IN GERMANY SO HOSTILE THAT WE ARE NOT ALLOWED TO GO INTO THE STREETS ALONE, EVEN IN DAYTIME?
HOW CAN WE LIVE WITH THIS HOSTILITY?
HERE I HAVE THE POSSIBILITY OF BEING ALONE.
I LOVE THE SPACE HERE, AND NATURE SURROUNDING ME. GERMANY IS TIGHT AND THE COMMUNES ARE IN THE CITIES.
PLEASE COMMENT.
Germany is still being followed by the shadow of Adolf Hitler. Adolf Hitler has contaminated the German mind to such depths that even the new generation, which has not known Adolf Hitler and what he did in Germany, in some way carries the impact.
Adolf Hitler has the unique distinction in the whole history of man of killing ten million people. There have been Alexander the Great, Ivan the Terrible, Napoleon Bonaparte, Genghis Khan, Tamerlane, Nadirshah -- but they have all proved pygmies in comparison to this madman, Adolf Hitler.
Adolf Hitler is in the air. The German mind is still the by-product of this man, so when German sannyasins come here, they find a totally different atmosphere. They feel respected, loved; they feel their dignity, and they start deep down relaxing. So when the question comes of them going back, they don't want to. They have tasted something better than Germany.
Just the other night one very beautiful and intelligent German journalist was asking me if I ever leave America where will I go. I said, "In the first place I am not going to leave America until I get my green card. Alive, I cannot leave America without the green card. I will fight up to the Supreme Court."
They have only six categories for obtaining the green card, and I have applied on five categories. And if they want me to apply on the sixth I can do that too. The sixth is marriage, and I can marry as many women as they want, because the more women you marry, the more you become capable of obtaining the green card. I can defeat Krishna very easily. I can break all the records!
And on each category I am going to fight separately. Each category will take twenty years to be decided by the Supreme Court, by the time it reaches to the Supreme Court. If I get the green card, good; if I don't get, I will start the case in the second category. Five categories means one hundred years! All the Supreme Court judges will be dead, at least twenty presidents will be dead; all the INS officers and their two, three generations will be dead. I will be dead -- but the fight will continue!
My people will be here, my grave will be here, and my grave will ask for the green card. And this is strange: living you won't allow me to be here, but if I die, you will allow my grave to be here. What kind of logic is there? Just be dead, and you get the green card. Is America a worshipper of death?
And for four years they have not been able to find a single argument against my applications. A whole department is continuously working, but I will tell them, "You will never find anything against me." Who can prove that I am not a religious man? And if I am not a religious man, then on what grounds are Jesus, Mohammed, Buddha, Krishna, religious people? Who can prove that I am not a religious leader?
You all can stand as a witness. How many people do they want to witness? I have one million sannyasins around the world.
Jainism is a religion which has only three hundred thousand people, and you accept it, and you have accepted Jainas and given them green cards. In fact, you will have to tell me which number makes a man a religious leader? And what is the criterion? Even five people accepting me as their leader are enough. Even a single person accepting me as his leader.... You cannot destroy a single individual's right.
For four years they have been working. So I told the German journalist that if they give me the green card tomorrow, I will immediately move to Germany. He was shocked. He said, "Why Germany?"
I said, "Because Germany needs me. After Adolf Hitler somebody is needed to destroy the conditioning that he has left behind. And I would love to have a little taste of German politicians too. I have seen the American politicians and their stupidity; I would like to see the German politicians, how they behave with me."
But I can understand the sannyasins who come here and don't want to go. They should find a way not to go. There are always ways. If you don't want to go -- this whole earth belongs to us. All political boundaries are false. And nobody ever asks, "When Columbus landed in America, did he have any visa, any green card?
I am going to fight the case, and anybody who does not want to go is welcome. Fight! -- because we want to destroy all these visas and green cards and passports. There is no need; the whole earth is ours, and movement is man's birthright.
If you want to live in Germany or in India, why should you be stopped? And every day foreigners are getting to your country and you don't think about it. When a child is born he is a foreigner, coming from outer space, and he is okay. And Germany is not that far away. And you don't ask the child, "Where is the visa?" and "Apply for the green card!"
And he is absolutely a foreigner. He is not coming from anywhere on the earth. He is coming from somewhere, from some other planet, and who knows...? He should show his passport. America should decide that each child born should bring his green card with him. Just make a law; otherwise the child is illegal.
This whole thing is so idiotically nonsensical.
Man is simply man -- neither American nor German nor Indian nor African.
And each man should be respected just as a human being. His color does not matter, where he was born does not matter.
He was born on this earth, and the earth has no lines on it dividing it into nations.
The first man who walked on the moon, when he came back and was asked what was his first idea when he walked on the moon and looked at the earth, he said, "My first idea was, 'My beautiful earth!'" It looked so beautiful from there, because from there it is as lighted as the moon. But the way he said, "My beautiful earth!"... The Soviet Union was not excluded.
The earth is one whole, and sooner or later humanity has to accept it as one whole.
As my communes around the world become more consolidated, stronger, then Rajneeshpuram is going to be the capital of the whole world. And we are going to give you international visas, international passports. You need not have an American passport or Indian passport. It is so humiliating, insulting. You will have an international passport. We are going to issue international passports, and we will tell the whole world that those passports should be respected; otherwise our communes around the world will revolt. They will burn all their passports, and all their visas, and all their green cards.
And we would like to see one million people imprisoned for the single reason that they have committed the crime that they wanted the whole earth to be one. If you are imprisoned for such a cause it is something sacred.

Question 3
BELOVED MASTER,
IN THE PAST FEW DAYS YOU HAVE REPEATEDLY DISCUSSED THE NEED TO SUPPORT THE FORMER "MOMS." YOU KEEP ON REMINDING THE REST OF US THAT WE ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR SHEELA, WE ALLOWED HER TO DO WHAT SHE DID.
THESE MOMS ARE THE SAME ONES WHO THREATENED ME FOR THREE YEARS TO EITHER DO WHAT THEY TOLD ME TO -- SURRENDER TO YOU, THEY TOLD ME -- OR LEAVE.
I, AND MANY OF US, WITHOUT KNOWING ALL THE FACTS, STAYED ON TO BE WITH YOU AND HELP CREATE WHAT WE WERE TOLD WAS YOUR VISION.
NOW YOU CONDEMN US FOR STAYING HERE, THAT WE MUST KEEP THESE VERY SAME PEOPLE IN THEIR POWER POSITIONS. I DO NOT UNDERSTAND WHY WE CANNOT LOVE THESE MOMS AND STILL THEY COULD NOT BECOME MORE ASSIMILATED AND LIVE WITH THE REST OF US; AND NEW, FRESH PEOPLE DO WHAT THESE MOMS HAD BEEN DOING.
PLEASE EXPLAIN.
First, the days of the moms are over. Nobody is a mom anymore. I was not even aware that there were moms! It must have been Sheela's idea. She was married to a Jew: "mom" is a Jewish word, and Jewish moms are the most dangerous in the world. For your own sake they will kill you!
But I am keeping the same people in their positions for the simple reason that they should not feel that remaining behind, revolting against Sheela's group, they have been punished. They should be rewarded, not punished. They are the people who are going to expose the whole series of crimes of Sheela and her group. To remove them from their positions is insulting to them. They will certainly take it as a punishment.
You should love them and respect them more than ever, because before you were respecting them out of fear; now respect them out of love because they decided to remain with you and not to go with Sheela, who was threatening them in every possible way. And they knew perfectly well that she has been trying to kill people; she has already killed one person. She was trying to poison my milk!
So these people of course are no longer moms, of course they don't have any fascist authority, so why unnecessarily be disrespectful to those who have remained with you? They have chosen you rather than Sheela.
And as far as those persons are concerned, I would like to say to them, "Forget that fascist nightmare, and behave with everybody just as a sannyasin." There is no hierarchy. While I am here there is no possibility of any hierarchy.
Hasya is just a sannyasin, no more than you. You may be working in the kitchen, she is working in the office. You may be a doctor, she is the president of the foundation. These are functions, so while she is in the office she is president; when she is out of the office she is just the same as you are.
The plumber and the professor are not different when they are dancing in the disco. You cannot say to anybody, "You are a plumber -- I cannot dance with you, I am the vice-chancellor of the university."
There is no hierarchy, but functions have to be different. Everybody is needed. Sometimes we can do without the professor, but we cannot do without the plumber. Sometimes we can do without the president, but we cannot do without the kitchen people.
All functions which are needed by the commune to survive, and not only to survive but live abundantly, are equal; functions are equal. But when somebody is doing his function, you should behave with the person according to his function.
For example, if you go to the president.... I have given the prefix to all women sannyasins, "ma" -- "Ma Prem Hasya." The men have been given names with "swami." So when somebody is functioning in an office, you have to be respectful, even though he may be your friend. You should address Hasya as "Ma," not "mom." You should address John as "Swami." But when they are out of their office you can address them as Hasya, as John; they are your friends.
Just a little alertness, awareness on everybody's part, and there is no difficulty in it. If we can leave our position, power, work, in the office, it will help you to be more human, more loving, more loved, more respected. And while I am here there is no problem.
This nightmare happened only because I was silent for three and a half years. When I said this to a journalist, he immediately responded, "That means you are responsible for it."
I said, "Certainly. I am responsible for Adolf Hitler, because why was I not born in Germany at that time? I am responsible for every criminal in the world because why was I not there to prevent him? I was not silent to give an opportunity to Sheela to create a fascist regime. My reason to be silent was my own. But certainly it gave her an opportunity, and she forgot completely that she was only there to represent me."
She must have been thinking that I am going to be silent forever. The moment I started feeling that something was going wrong, I came back.
But this experience was immensely good. In my whole life I have never felt that anything bad happens. You have just to use it in a right way. And we will use it in a right way, we are using it in a right way. The commune is more clean, unburdened, fresh, more joyous, more aware.
And these three and a half years' silence were needed for me to get disconnected with all that I have said before. Now I am speaking on my own authority, on my own experience. That discontinuity was absolutely needed. And you will see the difference.
I have spoken on Jesus before; I am speaking on Jesus now too, but now I am saying exactly what I see, feel, experience. Then I was choosing from Jesus' sayings because I was trying to find my own people.
When you open a new shop you need customers! When I opened my shop I saw all my customers were accustomed to going to other shops. They were all divided: somebody was Hindu, somebody was Mohammedan, somebody was Christian. There was not a single person who was freely available to me. Then naturally I started speaking on Jesus, Krishna, Mahavira, Buddha, Sufis, Zen mystics -- Lao Tzu, Chuang Tzu, Milarepa, Marpa.... I covered the whole range, and got hold of many customers from other shops.
It was necessary. Now I have got my own customers, and I can say to you the truth. And you are able to hear it and to understand it. Before you would not have been able to understand it.
So it has been a good experience in every way and we will make much use of it. It was a great cleansing. And you are far stronger, because all those people had committed crimes: if they had remained here, the whole commune would have been condemned sooner or later as criminal.
You don't see the point: their leaving makes them criminals; otherwise, why have they left so suddenly? And the situation has changed completely. Now we will be supporting law, the courts, the government, against the criminals. Your whole commune is saved; otherwise your whole commune was going to be against the government because of those people.
It is really something to rejoice in that our commune has nothing to do with crime, the criminals have left; and we will support the government and the law against those criminals in every way.
This will bridge the gap that they had created between you and Oregon, between you and America. By their going away, the gap has disappeared. Now we are Oregonians, authentic Oregonians, the latest Oregonians -- fresh and new. Now we are Americans, and we will try in every way to save the Constitution of America against any crime that destroys the democratic values.
It has been tremendously important, beautiful. You will understand it only later on, looking backwards: they have done a great service to you, unknowing.
Okay?

============================================================

Question 1
BELOVED MASTER,
I AM SO ANGRY RIGHT NOW, AND I DON'T KNOW WHAT TO DO ABOUT IT.
IN SPITE OF WHAT YOU SAID ABOUT RESPONSIBILITY THE OTHER DAY, I CAN'T EVEN GO TO WORSHIP.
PLEASE COMMENT.
This is something basic to be understood. Your love is not love. It is full of hate, anger, jealousy, everything that goes against the qualities of love.
It is very dangerous to allow you to love me, because I am allowing you all other things also. Your love can turn into hate any moment. It is so superficial. It is just a mind game.
You don't know what love is. Please don't call me "Beloved Master." Those words on your lips become poisonous.
What anger are you feeling against me? I have given you my vision, my insight, my compassion, my friendship, everything that I have. And the reward is your anger.
You should be angry towards yourself, but it is very easy to project ugly things upon others.
Whatever happened in these three and a half years while I was silent -- almost absent -- you cannot make me responsible for it. You are responsible. You behaved like idiots.
Five thousand intelligent people could not see that they were being ordered to do things which were inhuman. They were being ordered to kill people, to poison people; and you could not even think -- can I be behind it?
I love life, love, laughter. How many times have I said to you that these three L's are my basic philosophy?
When you were given orders by a fascist group who was dominating you to poison the water system of a whole city, to kill my physician, my caretaker, my dentist....
And just the other night we have discovered suddenly five hundred beautiful fish died in Patanjali Lake. That means that before leaving, that group has dumped poison into Patanjali Lake. It is fortunate that we are not taking Patanjali Lake's water for your use. It is being used for irrigation; otherwise you would be, many of you, with those dead fish.
And you are angry at me.
You must be retarded. Can't you see a simple point? A man who has never been life-negative, who has been changing your lifelong habits of nonvegetarian food into vegetarian food, who is not willing even to kill any animal.... Don't you have even a small, logical understanding? A man who is teaching you to be a vegetarian will help you to destroy a whole innocent city, The Dalles, by poisoning its water system? The thing was so stupid!
And you were doing everything. And if I had not started speaking, you would have been doing all those things even now. Now you don't feel like worshipping. What has happened to your courage? For three and a half years why were you worshipping? -- for the simple reason that you need somebody on top of you to force you, to enslave you, to order you and command you; then you are ready to do anything. Then even killing people becomes worship.
But you cannot go to worship on your own accord. Should you be angry at me or at yourself -- at your stupidity, retardedness? You need a fascist type of structure. And you were all perfectly fine doing everything that was illegal!
And I am telling you, "Be responsible, never do anything against the law, never do anything against human values, against the ideals of democracy, freedom."
Now you don't even feel to go to worship. You need somebody with a gun behind you; then only can you worship.
Hasya has removed the bodyguards, and she was thinking slowly to remove the guns from the commune. They don't fit with our approach to life. We don't want to harm anybody. We want to create a loving atmosphere.
But just one day after she had removed the bodyguards, one idiot immediately jumped up. Now she has to put the bodyguards back again. And now the security will be more strict.
And if you are feeling angry with me, what the hell are you doing here? Get lost!
This is not a place for anger and not a place for people who cannot take responsibility, because these are the people who create fascist structures. We don't want these people at all. So simply pack your luggage and go to hell. The county road goes directly to hell.
I have been loving to you, and I started speaking only because of you, because I was being informed that things are going wrong. I was available to my physician, to my dentist, to my caretaker, and when they all felt that now things are going beyond the limits.... Even my room was bugged. Even my milk was being poisoned. That was too much for them, and they said, "Now something has to be done. These people have taken too much advantage."
That's why I started speaking; otherwise I was going to remain silent for my whole life. I have spoken for thirty years -- nearabout four hundred books, each book containing at least five hundred pages. I don't think there is anybody else in the whole history who has four hundred books of that size and that penetration.
There was no need for me.... I have spoken enough. Just for you I am speaking, so that this fascist order can be dissolved and you can live freely as human beings in a democratic way. But it seems you are not capable of living in a democratic way. You always need Adolf Hitlers, Joseph Stalins, Benito Mussolinis. Without your need, these people cannot come to power.
Yesterday I had told you, when anybody is in the office, on a post -- for example, the president of the commune or the president of the foundation or the presidents of other corporations -- you have to address them either as Ma or as Swami. I withdraw it. You can address people just by their name, anywhere.
I wanted to make it the simplest possible society, where there is no hierarchy. But perhaps you are angry because you cannot function in a democratic world. But this commune is going to become one of the best democracies in the world -- a direct democracy. So it is better, those who cannot feel good in a democratic atmosphere, they should leave. They can go to the Soviet Union. This is not their place.

Question 2
BELOVED MASTER,
WHY HAVE YOU ALLOWED ALL THIS TO HAPPEN TO US?
I FEEL THAT YOU HAVE KNOWN ALL ALONG WHAT WAS HAPPENING IN THE COMMUNE, AND I'M ANGRY AT YOU.
WAS IT A LESSON WE HAD TO LEARN?
I have told you a thousand and one times that I am not a god. I am not a messiah, or a prophet. God is omniscient. He knows everything, what is happening anywhere -- past, present, future.
The people who have made God omniscient were all fascists, and they created a fascist God -- because if God knows about the future, that means the future is determined. Then where is the possibility of freedom? Freedom can exist only if the future is open. But about an open future there is no possibility of prediction. The man who was so beautiful may commit a murder tomorrow. Tomorrow is open.
The saint can become a murderer.
The murderer can become a saint.
The idea in all the religions of an omniscient God is a fascist idea. It means everything is determined. Whether you are taking coffee or tea tomorrow morning, is already determined for millennia. And you cannot choose; you will have to take what is your destiny.
Even the religions like Buddhism, Jainism, which do not accept a God, could not resist the temptation of making their religious leaders omniscient. God is not there, but Mahavira is omniscient, Buddha is omniscient; so what is the difference? As far as humanity is concerned, life remains mechanical, robotlike. Whatever is going to happen is going to happen; you cannot do anything about it.
I am not a god, and I am not a prophet, and I am not a messiah. I am a simple human being.
When I had chosen Sheela she was a beautiful woman, immensely capable of doing things, very practical, courageous. I had given the commune into the hands of Sheela, Vidya, Savita, who had never shown any fascist tendency.
And they worked hard. They created this commune. They changed this desert into an oasis under tremendous pressure by the politicians, by the attorney general. And these people were all illegally trying to destroy the commune -- they were fighting with them, they were protecting the commune.
Naturally, if you start fighting with politicians you start learning politics; otherwise you cannot fight. If you start opposing dirty cunning minds, by and by, unknowingly, unconsciously, you fall in the same trap. You have to follow the same rules. In fact, if you are opposed to a dirty politician, you have to be dirtier; otherwise, you cannot win.
This gave them the taste of power.
I was in silence and this was my instruction: I don't want to know what is happening in the world. Sheela, my physician, my dentist, my caretaker, they were all told that nothing has to be brought to my notice unless it is absolutely necessary. I wanted to live in isolation. This is my birthright. Who are you to be angry about it?
And these people, when I had given them the opportunity, were totally different. Perhaps anybody of you, in such circumstances, would have turned out the same, because everybody, deep in the unconscious, carries a lust for power. But it remains unconscious because there is no opportunity for it to become a reality. These people saw that unconscious will to power surfacing because the opportunity was there.There was nobody to prevent them, and they were able to use my name in everything.
And I am not omniscient.
I never knew what they were saying to you. I never knew when they bugged my room. So you can see that I am not omniscient. At least I would have known that my room was being bugged, under the excuse that they were putting a switch so that I could alarm the guards if there was any emergency.
I had never touched that switch, because there was never any emergency. Inside the switch they had put a microphone. And if I cannot see just by the side of my chair that there is a microphone, what do you expect of me?
I am just like you. I don't have any pretensions to be holier than you, higher than you. Just a little difference -- that I am awake and you are asleep. But I was also asleep....
In fact, because you are asleep, it makes it clear that any moment you can be awake. Sleep is possible only for a person who can be awake. Rocks don't sleep. Only living beings sleep. They can be awakened. But I don't see that by being awakened you become omniscient, or omnipresent, or omnipotent. These are just egoistic, megalomaniac ideas.
I don't have any ego or any megalomania, I am simply awake. That means I know who I am. That does not include the bugging device. So I was not aware at all what was happening, and whatever Sheela was bringing to me was always the good news, that things are going perfectly well.
But you can see the opportunity. First she had to fight with the dirty politicians, so she had to learn the same tactics, the same strategy. She had to fight in courts against illegal charges, so she had to understand law. And she was continuously creating a commune here, so she had in her hands the immense power of money.
We have put more than two hundred million dollars in the commune. From all over the world, sannyasins have poured whatsoever they could. Just an opportunity.... Who does not want to be rich? There is nothing wrong in being rich, but one should not try to be rich through wrong means. Create wealth, and be rich! This was simply theft. The money was coming for the commune, and she was slowly taking a few parts and accumulating it.
And this woman who has informed was her secretary five years before. They were intimate friends, so whatever she says seems to be meaningful. She is dying of cancer, and it always happens when you are dying, you want to unburden yourself of any lie that you have been hiding. That's why she has written the letter saying that "I am dying, but I want to relate that Sheela has stolen forty-three million dollars and she has it in a bank account in Switzerland."
So money -- it is everybody's desire, and there is no harm in it, but be creative. Stealing, and that too stealing from a commune who loves you, is criminal. She has no money of her own. She was just a waitress in a hotel before she came to me. Waitresses in hotels don't have forty-three million dollars in accounts.
She had the opportunity -- that you love me, you trust me. For thirty years thousands of sannyasins have loved me, trusted me, and nobody has been cheated, nobody has been exploited, no fascism has come out of it. But I was in silence, and I was completely in isolation: not talking to anybody, not meeting anybody. This gave her another opportunity: that, in my name, she can manipulate you.
She started slowly, but things have a way of growing. Everything grows. The more she became powerful, the more the lust for power to control. She dropped all those sannyasins who were intelligent enough to see the difference between what she was saying and what I have been teaching -- not only different, but just the contrary.
I have been teaching to you: Don't believe -- inquire, doubt, search. Unless you know, it is better to remain ignorant. At least you are honest. Belief is self-deception. You don't know, but the belief covers your ignorance.
Ask anybody outside the commune, "Is there a God?" and he will say "Yes," as if he knows. He does not know himself, and he knows God! And just try to argue with him, and soon you will come to know that it is his belief, that from the very beginning he has been conditioned that there is a God.
It will look very strange to you that all the religions have prevented people from discovering the truth of life -- because before you discover, inquire, question, they fill your mind with all kinds of beliefs. Those beliefs give you a deceptive feeling as if you know.
But there is much difference in "as if" to know, and "to know." Knowing transforms you. "As if" to know, you remain the same.
You go to the church, you go to the synagogue, you go to the temple, you read holy scriptures, but no transformation happens.
I have been teaching to you not belief but doubt. Doubt is clean, fresh, young.
Every child is born with doubt, not with a belief. Every child asks thousands of questions. Those questions show that he has doubts, that he is skeptical. He is continuously asking, "Why?"
If you go to the Soviet Union and you ask a child is there a God, he will say no. That, too, is a belief. He has not inquired. Just in the Soviet Union he has been conditioned that there is no God. What is the difference between a theist and an atheist? between a Catholic and a communist? Both are doing the same thing: destroying your quest, giving you ready-made answers.
Ready-made answers don't help. Unless you discover the answer yourself, unless the truth is your own experience, you are not going to have a transformation.
Information is not transformation. You can become very knowledgeable through information, but your ignorance remains the same. The greatest knowledgeable person is ignorant, is just like any ignorant person who knows nothing.
Perhaps the ignorant person is in a better position than the so-called knowledgeable scholar, professor, theologian, because the ignorant person at least is honest. He says, "I do not know." From that honest beginning he can start a journey of knowing, because nobody can remain satisfied with ignorance.
So either he will become knowledgeable -- which is cheap. All the schools, colleges, universities, churches -- they are doing that cheap thing. They give you knowledgeability and you forget that you are ignorant. It is opium. All knowledgeability is a kind of drug so that you can forget your original ignorance. But it remains there.
My teaching is radically different. I want you to drop all knowledgeability.
I am reminded about P.D. Ouspensky. He was one of the greatest mathematicians of this century, and he has written one of the greatest books, TERTIUM ORGANUM.
I have never come across any other book which has such crystal-clear statements. It can deceive anybody. It seems as if the man knows!
In the beginning of the book he writes, "Aristotle wrote one book, ORGANUM. Organum means the first principle of knowledge. Bacon wrote NOVUM ORGANUM, New Principle of Knowledge. Both are very significant steps in the world of knowledge."
And Ouspensky says, "Now I am revealing to the world TERTIUM ORGANUM, the Third Canon of Knowledge. And I want to say that the third existed even before the first -- I am simply revealing it. Otherwise, it is the ancientmost: even before the first, it was in existence."
And reading -- I have read all the three -- certainly he surpasses Aristotle and Bacon both. They look like pygmies; he is a giant. And the way of his writing is certainly unique. He does not write in paragraphs, because each sentence is so important that he writes only maxims, very logical.
He was world-famous before the Russian revolution. But he was also a very sincere and honest man. He knew that whatever he has written, it is just knowledgeability. He knows nothing. He has not experienced anything.
He wanted to meet someone who has experienced, who has been face to face with reality. And then he heard the name of Gurdjieff.
He went around the world in search of somebody who really knows. He was in India for a long time, searching for some wise man, but could not find. Frustrated, after years when he came back to Moscow.... It is very symbolic that he met George Gurdjieff in the same restaurant where he always used to go. He had seen Gurdjieff before, too, because they were both visitors to the same restaurant. But he had never thought much of it. Gurdjieff did not look like a wise man.
Gurdjieff was a totally different kind of person than you understand a wise man should be -- nice, polite, beautiful like Gautam Buddha. He was a Caucasian, very strong. He could kill any man just with his hands.
And Ouspensky could not believe, when he was told by one of his friends, that "This is the man you have been searching for. He knows, but it is difficult to approach him. I will manage, I belong to his inner circle. And very rarely he accepts anybody, but perhaps you may be accepted."
So one night he took Ouspensky to Gurdjieff's place. A dozen people were sitting there around Gurdjieff. These two also sat down. Half an hour passed, nobody spoke. Ouspensky was getting troubled. What is happening? Even the friend who had come was sitting with closed eyes. He nudged him and said, "Do something. This way I will never be introduced."
So the friend told Gurdjieff, "I have brought a new person. He wants to become part of our circle. It is up to you to accept him or not."
Gurdjieff called Ouspensky to come close so he could see into his eyes. And Ouspensky said, "I have never seen such eyes, and I have never felt so nervous -- almost on the point of breakdown. And that man's eyes were penetrating to the very deepest core of my being, like swords."
A few minutes passed. It was a cold night; snow was falling, and Ouspensky was perspiring.
Gurdjieff pulled out a piece of paper, gave it to Ouspensky, and he said, "I know about you. I have seen your book, TERTIUM ORGANUM. You know nothing, but still you have written a very great book. But you cannot deceive anybody who knows.
"You go into the other room and, on this paper, on one side you write what you know, and on the other side you write what you don't know -- because whatever you know, we are never going to discuss it. That is finished; you know it. Whatever you don't know, I will teach you."
Ouspensky, for the first time, was faced with the question, "What do you know?" A writer of many books, world-famous, and he could not write a single thing that he knows.
He came back, gave the blank paper back, and he said, "I don't know anything. Forgive me, perhaps I am not qualified to be part of your inner circle."
Gurdjieff laughed. He said, "This is not disqualification; this is qualification. You are honest, you are sincere. Being so famous, writing so many books, still you are capable of accepting the truth that you don't know anything. You are accepted in the group. Your training begins from this point: I do not know. Now there is a clean inquiry possible."
This has been my teaching to you. You are not to surrender. You are not to believe.
But that's what you did. And you are feeling angry at me.
If I had taught you to believe and surrender the way Jesus has done, the way Mohammed has done, the way Moses has done, the way Krishna has done, then of course your anger was right.
If you want to be angry, be angry against Jesus Christ. Be angry against all the founders of religions.
They all say, "Believe and you will be saved."
And I say to you, "Believe and you are drowned."
I say to you, "Doubt, because that is something that you have come with. Nature has provided you a method for inquiry. Doubt is a method of inquiry."
In ten thousand years of religious history, religions have not contributed anything -- except AIDS, homosexuality, lesbianism, sadism, masochism, wars, discrimination -- all kinds of crimes: killing millions of people, burning living people.
They are all based on belief.
Science -- which is based on doubt -- has contributed within three hundred years everything from the smallest safety pin to the rocket that reaches to the moon.
If you count the blessings that science has showered on you you will be surprised. Your clothes, your glasses, your watches, your health, your medicine, your food -- everything science has improved. Science has only been unsuccessful in improving you, because all the religions are sitting on your neck.
I want you to get rid of all the religions and become a scientific seeker.
How can you feel anger against me?
I had no idea what was happening. The moment I came to know what was happening, I immediately stopped it. It did not take much time for me to stop it. What Sheela and her gang had managed in three and a half years, I finished within three days. And they were not even able to face me; they all escaped like criminals, cowards.
Criminals cannot be brave.
At least I had expected that Sheela would have to come to say goodbye to me. But no. In fact, she deceived. She informed me that she had a cold, so in two or three days, when her cold was gone, she would see me. But she did not stay here for two or three days, the next day she was gone.
I am getting information every day about where they are, what they are doing. And they are in a tremendous fear, because they have committed every kind of crime. They should be brought back. They will have to face the courts, and they will have to reap the crop that they have sown. It is poison.
But you are feeling angry at me because I must have known all this all the time. You impose your ideas on me, and you want me to behave accordingly.
I am not a person to accept anybody's projection, even though it is very ego-fulfilling. I don't have any ego, so there is no question. I can say to you I had no knowledge, I was absolutely ignorant of what was happening.
So drop this stupid anger. Go into the hills, shout, scream, freak out till you become calm and quiet. Then take a good bath and be purified and new. And now start living in the commune with your own responsibility.
I am not responsible for you.
You are not responsible for me.
Everybody has to be responsible for himself. That's the only way to be an individual, the only way to have freedom, integrity.

Question 3
BELOVED MASTER,
A FEW PEOPLE ARE FEELING NOT TO WEAR THEIR MALAS OR RED CLOTHES, BUT THEY CONSIDER THEMSELVES RAJNEESHEES AND WANT TO LIVE HERE.
HOW DOES THIS FIT YOUR VISION?
There are no Rajneeshees, and there is no Rajneeshism. That was also part of this fascist regime.
You cannot be Rajneeshees because there exists nothing like that. Even I am not a Rajneeshee, so how can you be? So, first thing, forget that you are a Rajneeshee.
Second thing, the mala and red clothes are symbolic of the commune. If you don't want to wear the mala and red clothes, then pack your luggage and get lost. This is not your place, and we don't want you to be here.
This only shows how the mind moves to extremes. Either you will be a slave or you will be licentious, but you cannot be a free individual.
Your red clothes are your identification that you have dropped all old conditionings, that you are the sunrise of the new man and of the new humanity.
The mala has one hundred and eight beads. It represents the one hundred and eight methods of meditation. Any method will do. It is just to remind you continuously that one hundred and eight doors are open to bring you into light, and you are unnecessarily groping in darkness. Choose any method. I have spoken extensively on all the methods of meditation.
Dropping the mala simply means forgetting the symbolic meaning of the mala. Dropping the mala means that you don't want to meditate. If you don't want to meditate, then what the hell are you doing here? It is a meditation commune.
And why were you not walking around without the mala and without red clothes before? Cowards!
When everything was being done against humanity and against you and against the law, that was the time to revolt. That time you were just docile. And now, because nobody is forcing you, you are walking around without the mala and without red clothes. You can walk, but that means walk out. And we don't want anything to do with such people, because these are the people who will again force the same structure.
My picture, and the locket in the mala, is simply symbolic. It is not something sacred. It is symbolic of your freedom from all religions the way I am free! It is symbolic that you are my fellow travelers. It is symbolic of your love.
It is difficult, of course, for me to hang around my neck one million lockets to show my love. It is easier for you.
On the one hand you address me, "Beloved Master" -- and you cannot have the mala and the locket. I know the reason. In the outside world, everywhere you will go you will be condemned, you will not be accepted. You will be misfits. And I want you to face the world, rather than get lost into the crowd. My picture is enough. You will not be accepted anywhere. So you can decide. If you don't have the courage to be rejected everywhere -- in your family, in your friends, in your society -- you are free. Nobody has told you to become sannyasins. You have become sannyasins on your own accord.
Naturally, if you don't want to remain sannyasins, you are perfectly welcome. But not on the streets of Rajneeshpuram.

Question 4
BELOVED MASTER,
THE OTHER DAY YOU SAID ALL MASTERS HAVE HAD TO LIE. I DON'T SEE THE NECESSITY FOR LIES. ISN'T IT RATHER THAT THE TRUTH, NO MATTER WHAT THE CONSEQUENCES, IS THE ONLY MEANS OF LIBERATING OURSELVES?
BESIDES, WHAT DO WE HAVE TO LOSE?
First, you seem to be understanding more than I understand. In fact, you should be here and I should be sitting there. Come on! I am ready to vacate this place and I will be sitting there, and you do the job. Stand up! Now, don't chicken out!
All kinds of idiots have entered. Do you understand that there is no way to express truth in words?
Not a single enlightened person in the whole history has said that truth can be said. So whatever can be said will be a lie.
Lao Tzu, one of the greatest masters, never wrote any book. He continuously avoided his disciples persuading him, asking him, "Soon you will be gone; you are too old, and you have not given us anything written that we can remember, understand." And one day Lao Tzu left.
Even the emperor of China was a disciple of Lao Tzu. When he heard that Lao Tzu had left towards the Himalayas -- that was his long, long dream, to die in the peace, the eternal peace of the Himalayas -- he immediately sent messengers to all checkposts on the roads which lead to the Himalayas to say that, wherever Lao Tzu is found, he should be prevented from leaving. Unless he writes his experience he cannot leave China.
And he was caught at one of the posts on the border. The man on the post also happened to be a lover of Lao Tzu. Lao Tzu was a man worth loving.
He said, "It is difficult for me to prevent you, but these are orders from the emperor. And my own feeling also is that you should write the essential experience of your truth -- just a small treatise and you will be allowed to go. So rest in my cottage and start writing, because otherwise you cannot go to the Himalayas."
Under such circumstances, Lao Tzu wrote his only book, TAO TE CHING. The first sentence he wrote is, "The truth cannot be said, cannot be written. Please remember it while you are reading this book.
"This is a reminder that everything that I am going to say is bound to be untrue, for the simple reason that truth is experienced in a state of your mind where no thoughts, no language exists, when there is only space and utter silence."
Now, how to bring that experience of wordlessness into words? The moment you try to bring it into words, something changes.
It is exactly like when you have a staff that is perfectly straight. But put it in water, just halfway, and you will be surprised. It is no longer straight. Pull it out, it is straight. Put it back in water, it is no more straight.
Is water doing something to the straightness of your staff? No. It is still straight, but sun rays reflect differently from water, and that creates the illusion of crookedness.
I am saying the truth, I will be saying the truth, but words have their own associations, their own meanings, their own history.
So, first, when I put my experience into words, something becomes different. Second, then you hear it, and you can hear only according to your conditionings. Then, things become farther away from my experience.
Gautam Buddha was asked one day, "Why do all enlightened people insist that truth cannot be said? If it can be experienced, then what is the trouble? Why can it not be explained?"
And you all know -- you can experience love, but can you explain it, what it is?
You all experience beauty -- but can you explain what beauty is?
And these are nothing compared to truth, which is the deepest experience. If even beauty cannot be explained, love cannot be explained -- and everybody is experiencing it -- truth is absolutely unexplainable. Once in a while a person experiences truth, and nobody who is hearing about it has any idea what is being talked about.
Buddha said, "When I became enlightened, for seven days I did not speak a single word. I had decided not to speak my whole life because I did not want to destroy the truth of my experience. I was being persuaded, and one thing made me start speaking.
"The people who were persuading me, they said, 'You are right. There are people who will not understand; there are people who will misunderstand. But there is a third category also -- it may be a very small minority, one in a million -- who are just on the borderline. A little push, a little encouragement, and he will enter into the world of light, life, eternity. Won't you speak for that one man?'"
And Buddha agreed. He said, "There is no harm. Those who cannot understand me do not matter. Anyway they don't understand anything. Those who are going to misunderstand me will misunderstand everything in their life.
"I will speak for the one person in one million. Perhaps I can help one person; that is a great reward." And he spoke for forty-two years.
But whatever he spoke is not truth.
Truth basically cannot be expressed. It is approximately true, but there are no approximately true experiences: either it is true, or it is false. Howsoever close it is to truth, it remains a lie.
So remember, please, when I said enlightened people -- all enlightened people -- have lied, they have lied for your sake, for that one man in one million.
And that's what I am doing.
If you want to change places, I am ready. You can think it over.

Question 5
BELOVED MASTER,
OUR PRESENT SITUATION WAS CAUSED NOT ONLY BY SHEELA'S SUCCUMBING TO THE TEMPTATION OF POWER, BUT ALSO BY THE EXPLOITATION OF OUR WILLINGNESS TO SAY YES TO WHATEVER WAS ASKED, AS A GESTURE OF LOVE AND SURRENDER TO YOU.
IT SEEMS WE MUST FIRST FREE OURSELVES FROM THE EXPLOITATIVE DEPENDENCE OF MASTER AND DISCIPLE BY MAKING THIS COMMUNE OUR COMMUNE, NOT YOURS. SO THAT YOU ARE OUR DEAREST FRIEND WITH WHOM WE ARE SHARING OUR HOME, RATHER THAN US SHARING YOUR VISION.
PLEASE COMMENT.
Why my vision? Share your vision! It is your commune. What has it to do with my vision? I am not a member of your commune. I live outside the commune and any day, if you want, I can leave this place.
Share your vision and do whatsoever you want to do. How ego works! How it finds ways!
Behind the curtain of this fascist order, you would like to dissolve the relationship between master and disciple. But I have always been saying I am not your master. So you are responsible if you think you are my disciple. I have already dropped the idea of being anybody's master. I am fed up with such people!
And now you are wanting that this commune should not be called my commune, but your commune. Agreed. It is your commune. Just one correction.... Why should your commune share my vision? What right do you have to share my vision? And if you share my vision, it becomes my commune. So you can choose. Either you share your vision -- and you are all blind, there is no vision, so the blind can lead the blind. And you will fall into some ditch, some creek.
But if you are sharing my vision, then this is my commune.

Question 6
BELOVED MASTER,
PEOPLE ARE ASKING TO BUILD LOG CABINS IN THE MOUNTAINS AND DO THEIR OWN THING. THEY FEEL IF THEY ARE WILLING TO PAY THEIR OWN EXPENSES, THEN IT IS ONLY BULLSHIT BUREAUCRACY WHICH STANDS IN THEIR WAY. CAN THIS APPROACH WORK?
Nobody is standing in your way, but you will be breaking the law. You will have to ask the state government. You have to ask LCDC, LUBA, and if they allow you, you can make cabins anywhere you like. This city cannot give you any permission, because this city is illegal.
And we don't have any bureaucracy here. For bureaucracy you have to go to the capital, Salem. Or, if you want even bigger bureaucracy, you have to go to Washington -- the White House, where every black thing is happening. But we cannot give you permission.
The land is ours, it is constitutionally our property, but the government is not functioning according to the Constitution. A strange fate -- that we have to fight for the Constitution against Americans! It is their Constitution, and they are prostituting it.
You cannot make cabins; otherwise you will be arrested. So just wait a little. We have no objection. In fact, we want all these hills to be turned lush green, with beautiful cabins in tune and harmony with nature, so this place can become one of the best resort places.
But you will be surprised, they have declared the city illegal. The city was legal for two years; they had incorporated the city. For two years it was getting support from the state and the federal government, as every city gets. Now a sudden pressure -- perhaps from Christians -- and they change their mind. A legal city, legally incorporated by themselves, becomes illegal.
In a way, it is good that we are a unique city in the whole world. There is no other illegal city in the world. Either there is a city, or there is no city. An illegal city is a new phenomenon.
We are fighting, but the state government -- particularly the attorney general -- does not want the case to be decided by federal courts. This is strange. This means the attorney general and the state of Oregon do not believe in the American Constitution and the nation's higher courts. They think those higher courts will not be fair to them. They want it to be decided by a state court, which is simply illogical to anybody.
If the state itself is involved in the case, is a party -- one party is the illegal city of Rajneeshpuram, the other party is the state.... Now to decide the case in a state court means the state can pressure those judges. They are their servants. Their promotion depends on them.
This is so simple. And we are saying that because the state itself is involved, then a federal court should decide it. And we are not afraid about it, because whatever is, we are absolutely legal, constitutional. They are afraid that in the federal court they are going to lose the case. But they are in contempt of the federal courts.
They have to remember that we are not going to leave this thing. It will go up to the Supreme Court. And fortunately the Supreme Court of America is still the most fair court in the whole world. And we are absolutely certain to win. There is no reason why five thousand people living two years, remaining legal... then without any reason suddenly they are declared illegal.
In fact, the attorney general should be responsible. If this city is illegal, then why did you incorporate it in the first place? You should have explored, inquired. You did not do your homework. Secondly, the attorney general seems to be retarded. It took him two years to find out that the city is illegal.
We are going to fight, because we are absolutely certain that the Constitution of America values truth, values freedom, values the individual, respects individual property.
So we are ready to go to the federal court, but they are trying to fight hard that the case should be decided by a state court. A state court is under the state, under the attorney general. That will be something illegal. If it happens, we are not going to participate in the case. We will boycott it. It is illegal. A party in the case is also the judge in the case. This is simply absurd.
But we cannot help you to make cabins. You will have to wait. Let the city be legal, then the city can give you the permission to make cabins. There is no problem.
We will be making them ourselves, so you don't have to put in your expenses. We have enough money.

Question 7
BELOVED MASTER,
I HAVE NO MORE QUESTIONS WITH ME.
That's great!
Okay?

============================================================

Question 1
BELOVED MASTER,
JUDAS SOLD JESUS FOR THIRTY SILVER COINS, AND AFTER TWO THOUSAND YEARS WE SANNYASINS ARE STILL BEHAVING THE SAME WAY WITH YOU. IS THIS THE LAST EFFORT OF THE POLITICAL MIND ON ITS DEATHBED?
Man has not evolved as far as consciousness is concerned. Thousands of years have passed; man's stupidity remains the same.
Jesus has promised to come back, but I assure you he will not come. One experience with you was enough. Who wants to be tortured and crucified again? Who wants to be sold by the same people he loved? -- the same people for whom he was working his whole life, and he sacrificed himself. And that, too, for thirty pieces of silver.
There is some flaw in Charles Darwin's theory of evolution. I am not a supporter of it. He thinks apes became men in a long process of evolution. But we have known apes for ten thousand years -- not a single one has tried to become man again. And if apes can become men, then men certainly can become supermen, but there seems to be no sign at all. On the contrary, man is continuously degrading himself.
America is one of the most cultured, and the latest country in the world, with a small history of three hundred years. But in three hundred years, twenty percent of America's presidents have been assassinated. Just that fact shows that America is barbarious. And strange to say that the twenty percent who have been assassinated include the best presidents America had -- Abraham Lincoln and Kennedy. They do not assassinate phony characters like Jimmy Carter, and they will not assassinate Ronald Reagan. They fit with them. They are as much retarded as the common masses are. Abraham Lincoln does not fit. He is far above the retarded people.
The average mental age of humanity is only thirteen years. This you call evolution? A man is ninety years old, and he has the mind of a thirteen year old. It is because of this retardedness that he believes all kinds of idiotic beliefs, dogmas, religions. He never questions, never inquires, never explores. He does not have consciousness enough to go on a quest for truth.
And of course the politicians don't want him to evolve. The priests don't want him to evolve, because man's evolution is their death. An evolved man, a conscious man, has no need of political leaders to tell him what is right and what is wrong. He does not require any pope, any Mother Teresa, any Ayatollah Khomeini, any Shankaracharya. In fact, these people will seem to him retarded.
So all the religions and all the political parties of the world are conspiring against humanity. To keep man enslaved, the best way is that he remains a helpless child, always in search of a father figure.
In politics he finds father figures.
In religion he finds father figures.
It is not a coincidence that Christian priests are called fathers.
I have heard: two small boys were playing, a Christian and a Jew. The Jewish boy asked -- because a Christian minister had passed and the Christian boy had saluted and asked the blessings of the father.... The Jewish boy said, "It is very strange, your religion; your father has no wife, has no children. How does he become a father?"
How do women, nuns, become mother superiors? They are not married; they don't have children. The reason is psychological: people need father figures.
Even Jesus behaves in a retarded way when he calls God the father. Many things are implied in it. Calling God the father means he cannot remain independent, on his own. He needs a great omnipotent, omnipresent, omniscient father.
Jesus died on the cross in immense frustration, because all his hopes were crushed. He shouted at the sky, "Father, have you forsaken me?" But nobody bothers to think that the father has never promised anything. It was all your imagination. You create a father, far above in the sky, then you start praying to the father. And naturally your prayers are mostly not fulfilled. You know -- because you are a sinner -- your prayer is not authentic. Deep down you doubt, you are skeptical, and prayer is fulfilled only when there is total surrender. And that is impossible.
Doubt is something essential, something you are born with. You can repress it, but you cannot eliminate it. It is repressed, but it is within you and will not allow your surrender and belief to be total. And naturally all the religions are telling you that you are born in sin, and you are committing sin in everything -- by getting married, by having children, by eating this, by drinking that.
If you follow exactly what religions want you to do, suicide is the only virtue. You cannot live, you cannot laugh, you cannot love. Naturally, you know your prayers are not heard, not answered, because you are not worthy.
But you never look at the problem: is there anyone to listen to your prayers, or is it only your projection? Out of helplessness and fear, you create the father. And then out of misery and suffering, you pray.
Once in a while a prayer is fulfilled. That is simply coincidence. That does not prove the reality of God or the reality of prayer.
It happened, once a man used to meet me when I used to go for a morning walk. He was the only other man up that early in the morning. We became sort of friends. He told me, "I am a great believer in the monkey god Hanuman."
Indians have strange gods. It is good that Darwin never came to India; otherwise he would have used this monkey god as one of the proofs that man has come from the monkeys. Man is still worshipping his forefathers -- and it looks logical.
But Indians worship trees; Indians worship rivers. Indians worship phallic symbols -- absolutely pornographic. India is really a museum of all the bizarre and berserk. It is one of the oldest countries; it has collected really antique stupidities, and continues.
The man said to me, "I am a worshipper of Hanuman, the monkey god. Hanuman is a true god."
I said, "You are the first man.... Just tell me a little more. How did you manage to find out that he is a true god?"
He said, "My son was out of service, without employment. I prayed to Hanuman and gave him an ultimatum, 'If within a month my son does not get employment, I will stop worshipping you.' And my son got the employment within the month. I have absolute proof that Hanuman is a real god."
I said, "You keep your proof and remain happy, but never try it again. Coincidences do not happen every day."
He said, "What do you mean?"
I said, "Your wife is sick, suffering from cancer. Give it a try again. Threaten your monkey god, 'If within one month the cancer does not disappear, I am going to stop worshipping you.'"
He said, "That is a good idea, because I never thought about it." But rather than the cancer disappearing, his wife died. He was very angry at Hanuman.
I said, "It is all you. There is no monkey god; it is your projection. Sometimes as a coincidence your prayer is fulfilled. Sometimes, most of the times, it is not fulfilled."
But he said, "This is too much. I had asked him to remove the cancer, and he has removed my wife!" Still he is thinking that the monkey god exists.
People need some protection from above, particularly retarded people. They have created God. They have created mediators -- the popes, shankaracharyas, Khomeinis. There are millions of these mediators around the world. They are parasites, and their whole business depends on one thing: that God should continue to exist. And I say to you, there is no God.
You are here. If you want to live a life enriched with love, music, poetry -- if you want your life not to be something like a burden that you carry from the cradle to the grave, but a dance -- then you have to evolve your intelligence, your awareness, your consciousness. Nobody is going to help you, and nobody is going to save you. All saviors are false -- exploiters. All prophets are taking advantage of your stupidity.
The new man will not have any messiahs, prophets, saviors, god-men. There is no need. These are the needs of those who have remained stuck in their mental growth.
I want to emphasize the point that if a man can have ninety years of physical age and thirteen years of mental age, the vice versa is also possible, and should be made possible.
A thirteen-year-old boy can have the mind and mental age of a ninety-year-old man. And that will be the day of rejoicing, when your mental age is ahead of your physical age. That is the beginning of a superman, the beginning of the new man, a new humanity.
Then no cowboy film actors can become your presidents. Then millions of idiots cannot gather to see a football match. Then there will be a totally different perceptivity about things.
A California university has been surveying for one year and has come to the conclusion that every time there is a boxing match, violence in California increases immediately -- thirteen percent more than the normal. The people who enjoy seeing boxing are really satisfying their own violence, getting excited.
Why does the violence rate all over the state increase? And they have been studying only violence. They should study rape and other crimes too, and they will find an increase in every crime. Knowing this, why is boxing not made a crime?
It is a crime -- a thirteen percent increase in the rate of violence for the following whole week. How many murders will happen? And who is responsible for it? And what do your politicians go on doing?
It is a simple understanding, that boxing should be banned. Can't you find something, some entertainment that helps to make you more human, rather than making you more animal?
Boxing is dragging you backwards; but Muhammad Ali, and people like that, are your heroes. If Muhammad Ali and people like him remain your heroes, you are going to crucify Jesus. It does not matter whether two thousand years have passed or not.
Evolution needs a certain structure. It needs a certain education. It needs a certain sensitivity.
Entertainments should be a raising of your consciousness.
Mikhail Naimy's book, THE BOOK OF MIRDAD, should be filmed, should be shown to people. Just seeing that film you will feel a great upliftment. The book should be made available to every library, to every university, but most of the people have not even heard the name of Mikhail Naimy. His book -- one of the greatest masterpieces of art, beauty, meditation, consciousness -- remains unknown to the major part of humanity.
What do the universities go on doing? They are not doing what they are supposed to be doing. They are not creating the universal consciousness in man.
Even universities go on teaching you, "You are American, you are Russian, you are Indian." At least universities should stop this nonsense. Universities should teach you that you are human. Color makes no difference, and there are no boundaries on the earth. The whole earth is ours.
If all the universities of the world start teaching you to be human -- not Christian, not Mohammedan, not Hindu, not Buddhist -- there will be a possibility of evolution. But, on the contrary, there are Catholic universities. How is it possible? It is a contradiction in terms. A university has to be universal; it cannot be Catholic. There are Hindu universities, there are Mohammedan universities. Even education is contaminated, polluted.
Ronald Reagan was proposing that, in every educational institution, prayer should become compulsory. In the first place, prayer can never be compulsory. Anything compulsory is hated. Secondly, which prayer are you going to make -- Catholic, Protestant, Jewish, Buddhist, Hindu? Who is going to decide?
The proposal was absolutely absurd. And it is good that the Supreme Court of America refused it. It is a pressuring of educational systems by the government.
But I would like the Supreme Court to consider again -- not prayer, but meditation.
Meditation does not belong to any religion. In fact, meditation makes you capable of dropping your Christianity, your Judaism, your Hinduism, because now you know the real truth of your being, which is not in your holy scriptures, which cannot be in anything given to you from outside. It has to be discovered by yourself. It is your freedom to discover it or not.
Meditation is not religious. Meditation is a scientific method. Atheists can practice this; no God is needed. Prayer needs a God. For meditation no belief is needed, no requisite. Meditation is simply a method to enter into your innermost being and to become more conscious.
Right now, man's consciousness is very superficial. One-tenth of your being is conscious. Your unconscious is nine times more than your consciousness. It is as if just on your porch you have a little candle, and the whole house which has many rooms is in utter darkness. Your whole house has to be lighted. In that light is transformation.
If a man becomes fully conscious there is no corner of darkness in his being which is unconscious. He cannot commit a crime. He cannot do anything wrong -- not because you have told him, not because the BIBLE says so, not because the ten commandments are there, no. Now he has his own insight.
Now he can see himself what is right and what is wrong. And seeing, nobody falls in a well. In darkness it is possible to fall in a well. Seeing, nobody can do anything wrong. But seeing is possible only when there is no darkness within you.
A fully conscious human being is the new man. We are struggling for the new man.
That's why I go on destroying your conditionings. My whole effort is to deprogram you and make you clean -- as clean, as pure, as innocent as you were when you were born.
You were not born a Christian, you were not born Jewish; you were born just an innocent potentiality of growth which has been stopped by the vested interests. And those vested interests are still in power. They are doing their best to destroy any possibility for human evolution.
My people have to fight for their own sake and for the sake of humanity. First, become enlightened, and then spread your light to anybody who is interested.
Everybody is interested. Who would not like to become more conscious, more alive, more loving, more compassionate? Just models are needed. People are needed who can create a tremendous urge in others that they can also have the same joy, the same dance, the same song and the same fragrance.
The politicians and the priests are still not on their deathbed. We will have to put them on their deathbed. They will resist, but what to do? Either they have to become part of an evolutionary process or they have to disappear from the earth.
No more crucifixion can be allowed. We have done enough crime against the potential growth of humanity. It is time that it should be stopped. But the only way to stop is: begin with yourself. You should become an example -- that you are neither Hindu, nor Mohammedan, nor Christian, that you don't believe in God, heaven and hell; that you don't believe that you are American, Russian, Indian, that you claim the whole earth to be yours, that you claim the universe to be yours.
It is our home. There is no need to divide it. Division brings war, bloodshed. Politicians want it to remain divided.
In an undivided humanity, politicians will be out of employment. An undivided humanity -- then what does the Polack pope have to do? Go to Poland and become really what he is, just a Polack.
Humanity is the greatest flowering of existence. And existence has given you a responsibility; it has trusted you that now you will carry evolution further. But for ten thousand years or more there has not been any change at all.
It is very shameful. It is ugly, disgusting.
My people have to free themselves from all conditions. Meditate deeply. Move beyond your thoughts, emotions, and search for the center of the cyclone. There is a center in each of you -- the very source of your life. It has to be found.
It should be the goal of your life to find it. Once you are there, everything will go through a revolution.
All the revolutions that have happened before -- French revolution, Russian revolution, Chinese revolution -- are not revolutions, just changes of power gangs, changes from one mafia to another mafia.
The real revolution is only one, and that happens within you, within each individual. And it has to be done really fast, because the idiotic politicians of the world are preparing for a global suicide by nuclear weapons.
Now there are two dangers for the destruction of humanity. One comes from politicians -- the nuclear weapons. The other comes from religions -- the disease called AIDS.
Religions have contributed nothing except this great thing, AIDS. AIDS is born out of homosexuality. Religions -- all the religions of the world -- have been teaching celibacy, which is unnatural, unscientific. And I am amazed, not a single scientist, not a single medical expert will say the truth: that celibacy is impossible.
It is programmed in your biology. Just as a woman has to go through her monthly period -- she cannot do anything about it, it is part of her biology -- in the same way, man, by his food, by his exercise, by his work, goes on creating male sperms.
And he has only a small space for them. When the space is full, they want to get out. And it seems to be logical, because they are alive and they want to get out into the world and grow and become beings. If you don't give them a natural outlet, then they will find some unnatural outlet.
If monasteries keep only men, and nunneries keep only women, then naturally men will become homosexuals. Homosexuality is a by-product of the religious stupidity of insisting on celibacy. Unless you prevent celibacy being preached from all the platforms in churches, in temples, in mosques, you cannot get rid of homosexuality. And homosexuality has come to a climax in the disease AIDS, which has no cure. AIDS is simply slow suicide.
So politicians have created death for you, and your religious leaders have created death for you. And it is time to revolt against both. But you can revolt against both only if you go through an inner revolution which will give you strength, stamina, courage, guts and insight.

Question 2
BELOVED MASTER,
IS MATURATION AN ONGOING PROCESS? HOW IS MATURATION RELATED TO AWARENESS? PLEASE EXPLAIN.
Yes, maturation is an ongoing process. There is no limit to it -- not even the sky is the limit. Your consciousness is far bigger than the whole universe. It is infinitely infinite. You cannot come to a point where you can say, "Enough." There is always more and more. There is always a possibility to go on growing. And growing, maturing is such a beautiful experience, that who wants to stop it?
We are stopped in every way. Even a great scientist like Albert Einstein has used only fifteen percent of his intelligence. What to say about ordinary people? -- they never use more than five percent.
Just think, if Einstein was capable of using one hundred percent of his intelligence he would have given the world unimaginable richness.
And if everybody is using his consciousness one hundred percent, then who would like to go to heaven and live with those dead saints, dodos, masochists, whose only qualification was self-torture? -- which is simply a psychological disease.
If everybody uses one hundred percent intelligence, we can create paradise here. There is no need to go anywhere. We can give man as long a life as he wants, as healthy a life as he wants. We can create so much wealth that it becomes just like air -- nobody needs to hoard it.
Using your intelligence totally, means the beginning of maturity.
Awareness is only a methodology. First, become aware of how much intelligence you are using, or are you using it at all? Belief, faith, are not intelligent. It is taking a decision against your intelligence. Awareness is a methodology to watch how much intelligence you are using. And just in that watching you will see that you are not using much. There are many ways awareness will make you alert. You can use it.
Awareness will bring you to your one hundred percent intelligence, will make you almost divine. And awareness does not stop there. Awareness helps you to use your intelligence fully.
Intelligence is your outgoing road, connecting you to the world, to the objects. Intelligence will give you more science, more technology. In fact, there is no need for man to work anymore, if we can use our intelligence. Machines can do almost everything. And you need not go on carrying, according to Jesus, the cross on your shoulders. That is stupid.
Machines can do everything, and you are freed for the first time from slavery; otherwise, it is only in name that you feel you are free. But you have to earn the bread, you have to earn some money to make a shelter, a house, money for medicine, money for other things.
So it seems you are independent, but you are not. The old slavery is no more there; now you are not chained, but there are invisible chains -- your children, your old parents, your sick wife, your job.
Man is not yet free. He is working eight hours, and still carrying files home. Working late in the night at home, working on Sundays. Still the files go on growing on his table, and there seems to be no end to it. Enter any office and you will see these people, see these people's tables. Can you call them free? Just think about yourself: are you really free?
There is only one possibility: supertechnology, which can do all the work and man will be completely free to be creative. You can play your guitar, sing your song. You can paint, you can make sculptures. You can do thousands of things to beautify this earth. You can make beautiful gardens, ponds.
There is so much to be done to make this earth beautiful. Even if there is a God he may start feeling jealous, thinking that it was wrong to drive Adam and Eve out of heaven; those people are doing far better. And there will be no surprise -- if there is a God, one day he will knock on your doors and will say, "May I come in?"
Awareness will release your intelligence, will make you mature. And then maturity goes on growing.
Ordinarily you simply grow old, you don't grow up. Growing old is one thing, growing up is totally different. All animals grow old: no animal, except man, can grow up. Growing old simply means you are coming closer to your death -- not much of an achievement. Growing up means you are coming to realize the deathless, the eternal which has no beginning and no end. All fear disappears. All paranoia disappears. You are not mortals.
Growing old, you are mortals. Growing up, you become immortals. You know you will be changing many houses. You will be changing many forms, but each form will be better than the past one, because you are growing, you are maturing. You deserve better forms, better bodies. And, finally, there comes a moment when you don't need any body. You can remain just pure consciousness spread all over existence. It is not a loss, it is a gain.
A dewdrop slipping from the lotus leaf into the ocean.... You can think the poor drop is lost, has lost its identity. But just look from a different dimension: the drop has become the ocean. He has not lost anything, he has become vast. He has become oceanic.
Awareness is the method to first wake up your intelligence, then to wake up your being, then to help you become mature, give you the realization of immortality, and ultimately to make you one with the whole.

Question 3
BELOVED MASTER,
YOU HAVE OFTEN REFERRED TO THE QUOTE, "POWER CORRUPTS, AND ABSOLUTE POWER CORRUPTS ABSOLUTELY." HOW CAN THIS BE PREVENTED FROM HAPPENING AGAIN?
IS A HORIZONTAL HIERARCHY REALLY POSSIBLE?
ALLELUIA FOR THIS NEW DAY.
That sentence is not mine. I have quoted Lord Acton, so a few things have to be clarified.
I agree with him to a certain extent, but basically I disagree with him. His quotation is, "Power corrupts, and absolute power corrupts absolutely."
This is a factual experience of the whole history of man. Whoever comes to power, goes through a great change. A man you have never thought would do such criminal acts starts doing them on a large scale.
When Adolf Hitler was chosen by Germany to be the chancellor -- and remember, Germany is one of the most intelligent countries in the world, seriously intelligent. They are so serious that they cannot understand any jokes. But there are no two opinions about their intellectuality. They have given to the world the best philosophers like Kant, Hegel, Feuerbach, Freud, Marx, Albert Einstein. In every field they have contributed. In music, in poetry, in literature. Just one problem with them: they don't have a sense of humor.
I have heard that if you tell a joke to an Englishman he laughs two times: first, just to be polite to you -- it is expected, you are telling a joke; not to laugh is ungentlemanly. He does not understand what is the matter, but just to look nice he follows etiquette. He is a gentleman, he laughs. And the second time, he laughs in the middle of the night when he gets the joke.
The German laughs only once -- that too, when he sees that others are laughing, so there must be something in it. Next time never comes.
But if you tell a joke to a Jew he does not laugh at all. On the contrary, he says, "Stop all this nonsense. The joke is very old, stale. Secondly, you are telling it all wrong!"
Such a serious country, and they fell into the hands of an idiot. Even Charlie Chaplin would have been better. If they wanted the same type of mustache, Charlie Chaplin was capable of doing it.
What happened? Adolf Hitler was not a bad man in the beginning. In fact, the whole country felt that he was capable of bringing the chaos in the country to an end, he could make the country strong.
And he did that, but once he was in power then his own personality started going into a change. Now it was not a question of making Germany strong, financially rich. Now it became a question of conquering the whole world. What happened? -- and this has been happening always.
So, factually, Lord Acton is right, that power corrupts and absolute power corrupts absolutely. But Lord Acton himself was a politician. He cannot go very deep into the psychology of the matter.
Power does not corrupt; it simply gives you an opportunity to bring all your unconscious into the conscious. You always wanted to do these things, but there was no opportunity. So you had repressed all those desires, because they were making you miserable. But any desire repressed remains alive and, whenever there is an opportunity, the desire rises to the conscious mind.
Power does not corrupt you; you are already corrupted. Power gives you an opportunity to realize whatever your desires are. In fact, the people who have been in power are themselves amazed. They had never consciously thought about it. It was all in the dark corners of their minds, hiding. But now there is opportunity; there is no need to keep those desires repressed. They start surfacing.
So to me, basically, psychologically, power simply gives you an opportunity to show your real face; otherwise, you are wearing a mask, a nice, smiling Jimmy Carter smile.
Power gives you the chance not to wear the mask. You can show your real intentions and nobody can prevent you. And if it is absolute power, then certainly you are going to do every animal act that is part of your collective unconscious.
I have to remind you there are three layers of your consciousness: the conscious -- the first, very thin layer. You can scratch just a little bit and the unconscious will erupt. Then there is this unconscious -- nine times bigger than your conscious.
And the latest, and the greatest contribution of Carl Gustav Jung, is that beyond the unconscious there is still a tremendous darkness which is the collective unconscious. You have been carrying all that you have been for millions of years. You have changed your forms, but your unconscious goes on carrying all those memories.
Scientists say man was born in the ocean, so the first form must have been a fish. And the child in the mother's womb in nine months passes through the whole evolution of man. And it is strange: if you take a picture every day for nine months you will discover the whole long history of each human being.
First the child is a fish, and at the last, before he becomes a human child, he is a monkey -- even with a tail! And before he completes the circle in nine months and becomes a human child, the tail drops. But the place where the tail was connected to you, the bones which were holding the tail, remain with you all your life.
That was the greatest argument of Charles Darwin, that man has come from monkeys. He has just lost his tail and has stood on two feet. And because he has stood on two feet, he has grown a certain intelligence.
And he is right about it, because all animals are horizontal to the earth, so the blood circulates to the head, to the tail, in the same proportion. Their heads cannot grow the very subtle nervous system which is needed for intelligence.
In your small skull you have millions of small nerves. They are so thin you cannot see them with your eyes. They are so thin that if you put one nerve cell on top of another, then one hundred nerve cells will be as thick as your hair. They are really delicate. Because man stood on two feet, blood could not reach to the head in the same proportion -- it was against gravitation. Small quantities reach. That allowed the whole structure of the mind to develop.
You may not have observed that you feel so relaxed after sleep; all worries, all tensions are gone. In the morning you feel so fresh. The reason is you fall down from humanity into a horizontal position; you become an animal. And an animal has no tensions, no worries. The blood circulation becomes equal to your mind and feet: that's why in the morning you feel so fresh.
Seeing this freshness, this morning aliveness, yoga got into a trap. They thought that if horizontal blood flow can give you so much mental relaxation, then standing on your head will be really great, because all the blood will be flowing like a flood, because now it will be in tune with the gravitation. Your feet will not be getting enough blood, and your head will be flooded. But their logic was not right. That much of a flood destroys your mind tissues; they are too delicate for that much blood.
In India, I have never seen a single intelligent Hindu sannyasin who has been practicing the headstand. They are just super-idiots, for the simple reason that they have destroyed....
Yes, you will see them very calm and quiet -- just like buffalos munching grass, so calm and quiet. Have you seen any buffalo bored? any buffalo worried? in anxiety? in tension? asking about the meaning of life? thinking, "What is anguish?"
No, for a buffalo all these problems don't exist. She does not have that delicacy. And the people who have been standing on their head for hours become buffalos. Yes, you will see them very calm and quiet, but don't be deceived by their calmness and quietness. They have paid for it; they have lost their intelligence.
The human child passes through all the stages humanity has passed, and your collective unconscious has all the memories. You may have been a lion, you may have been a tiger, you may have been a fox. In your past lives you may have taken all these forms. That means, if you get absolute power, all these forms will start arising.
If you have power -- not absolute power -- then only your unconsciousness will affect your actions. But if you have absolute power, then your collective unconscious will start affecting your actions.
So it is not power that corrupts; it is that power simply reveals your reality.
You are asking me, what can be done to prevent it? The only way to prevent it is that you should enter as a witness, first of your conscious mind, thoughts, imaginations, etcetera -- just be a witness to them without any judgment.
And you will be surprised. As your witnessing becomes more and more crystallized, thoughts start disappearing. When you are one hundred percent crystallized, all thoughts disappear. Consciousness becomes just a pure silence.
Now you can move deeper. Now you can turn your witness and enter into the darkness of the unconscious, where you will find all that you have been told to repress.
Telling to a fourteen or fifteen-year-young boy that celibacy is a virtue, that he has to remain celibate until he has come from the university and he gets married, you are simply asking the impossible.
At the age of eighteen man has the most sexual power. After eighteen he starts declining. It is at the age of eighteen that he comes to the peak of his sexual energy, and he can have tremendously significant orgasms. And he is capable of having three, four, five orgasms in one night. When he was able to have orgasms, he was told to remain celibate. He repressed his energy, or he became a pervert. He became a homosexual or he started masturbating.
But in all the countries even doctors go on telling people that masturbation will make you crazy, will make you mad. This is sheer nonsense. In fact, to get rid of sexual energy which is too much, masturbation is the most hygienic method. And at the age of eighteen, if you can be taught masturbation with meditation, your whole life will be a totally different life. Not a life of misery, suffering, sadness, frustration, but a life of sheer dance and song.
That's what I will teach people. When they are at the peak of their sexual energy, that is the moment when they can have orgasm very easily. And now the Pill is available, so there is no problem. Boys and girls should be living in the same hostels. They should be making love. The fear of getting pregnant is no more there. Now love is, for the first time, pure fun. And joined with meditation it becomes sacred fun.
No prayer, no church-going can help you to understand what I am saying. No HOLY BIBLE can give you the insight.
But if the girl is not available, then help people with masturbation. Teach them how you have to be meditative. And when you come to a peak and you explode into an orgasmic joy, watch. Be alert. This is absolutely medical, scientific, and to me, spiritual. But this is not being done. They are being told lies: that you will go crazy if you masturbate. Then you are driving them towards homosexuality.
Girls you keep in separate hostels. Boys you keep in separate hostels. Masturbation will lead them to madness -- nobody wants to be mad. So what alternative have you left for them? All these imbeciles who have been teaching these things drive people towards homosexuality. And a man becoming homosexual is in a great danger. Now we know that he can have AIDS, which will not have any cure.
Between the age of fourteen and twenty-five, while he will be in the university, he is in every way repressed. In the unconscious he will find all these repressions. But if he remains just a witness, those repressions will surface to the conscious and disappear. That is the miracle of witnessing.
When the whole unconscious is empty, then ordinary power cannot corrupt you.
The third step has to be taken now: to enter into the collective unconscious. And you are capable of it. The same method: witness. You may witness yourself as a tiger, as a fox, as a dog, as a wolf -- all are the possibilities. Different people will come to realize different forms, because different people have come from different sources.
Just witness. Those forms will start surfacing; they will move into the conscious and disappear.
Anything that you can bring to the consciousness with witnessing, disappears. And if you can clean, give a spring-cleaning to your whole consciousness, to the very bottom, then no power can corrupt you -- not even absolute power can corrupt you. In fact, on the contrary, power will make you more humble, more creative. Absolute power will make you a great servant of humanity, a great blessing to existence.
This is the only way. You cannot prevent others, but you can transform yourself.
And the new humanity will choose such people to be the presidents, to be the prime ministers, to be vice-chancellors, chancellors -- people who have a completely pure consciousness.
I call it enlightenment. All darkness has disappeared and everything has become light.
The enlightened person will have power, but his power will be used for sharing love, for creating more opportunities for love. His absolute power will make him absolutely humble.
Sannyasins have to cleanse themselves. We have one million sannyasins around the world at least. If we can cleanse just a few thousand sannyasins, then those will be the people who will be holding power in the coming days. And they will transform the whole humanity and its course.
Okay?