---
title: From Death to Deathlessness 01
series: From Death to Deathlessness 01-40
talk_number: 1
url: https://oshoworld.com/from-death-to-deathlessness-01
language: English
duration: 01:31:49
author: TALKS IN AMERICA
scraped_at: 2026-01-03T09:14:14.938935+00:00
---
Osho,
You said that you lie out of compassion, and we, your sannyasins, can understand what you are saying. But can the outside world ever understand? Won't it create more misunderstanding about you, about Rajneeshism, about your sannyasins? Please comment.
Compassion knows no conditions. It can do anything, it knows no right and no wrong. Compassion can lie to help you. In fact, in your sleep you can only understand lies, you cannot understand the truth.
Many things are involved. First, the experience of enlightenment, awakening, illumination, happens when there is no mind present. Enlightenment is a no-mind experience. Words are not there, language is not there. In fact, you are not there either. It is such a silence, so profound and infinite, it cannot be expressed without lying.
The moment the truth is said, it is no longer true. Just the process of saying it makes it a lie. To bring the wordless experience into words is to change the very quality of the experience.
So in fact, anything that is great – if it has been experienced at any time, by any individual – out of sheer necessity that person has to use lies to speak of it. But the lie of the awakened one is far more true than the truth of the sleeping one.
I am reminded of a small anecdote…. A man went to a nearby big city. His children had asked, “Bring us this, bring us that,” and he had promised that he would. But by the time he had returned home, his house was on fire. There was a great crowd around, and they were all concerned about the children who were inside.
The crowd told him, “We have been shouting, ‘The house is on fire, and there is still time – you can get out.’ But they are enjoying the whole scene, they are not aware of the danger. Now you are here, somehow bring them out.”
He had forgotten to bring the toys, the trains, the cars and the dolls that the children had asked him to bring. He went to the only door which was not yet burning, but it was locked from inside. He knocked on the door. He tried to tell them, to explain that the house is on fire. They said, “We are enjoying it so much. It is so beautiful!”
The man was shocked. He said, “Forget about what you are enjoying. I have brought your cars, your trains, your dolls” – and he had not brought anything. The moment they heard about their toys, they opened the door and ran out. Then he could explain to them why he had to lie. “Forgive me, I could not manage time enough to find your things; next time I will bring them. But forgive me for saying a lie to you – because that was the only way to save you; you would not come out.”
Do you think this lie is a sin? And this is about an ordinary man and his children. What about me and my children? It does not matter to me whether I lie or not, because it makes no difference to my consciousness anymore, it is just a game. But to you, it matters immensely.
I can go on telling the truth – nobody among you is going to understand, and nobody among you is going to be benefited by it. It will pass over your heads. Hence I said the man of compassion has to lie. The lie is only a device to wake you up. Once you are awakened I can say to you, “I am sorry that I had to say so many lies to you.” And I am absolutely certain you are going to forgive me.
As far as the outside world is concerned – for me you are my world, there is no outside world – they should take care of themselves. I am existing for you, not for them. If they get disturbed or confused, so far so good. Perhaps out of their disturbance and confusion they may start becoming curious about what is going on. Many of you have come here out of such curiosity, and then you got caught, and you have not been able to leave.
So I never take the outside world into consideration. Let them sleep. But if they get disturbed, if they get hostile, it is good; then a certain relationship between me and them begins. Enmity is a relationship just as friendship is. In fact, enmity is far deeper and stronger than any friendship.
I am doing it absolutely knowingly. I want to shock the outside world. Perhaps that is the only hope for them, perhaps the shock will create an opening for them. They may come here hostile, as enemies, but about that there is no problem. We have this buddhafield of love, singing, dancing, rejoicing. All their hostility and opposition will be simply gone. The moment they see you and me, they are finished.
So don’t take it seriously. You are afraid that I am creating difficulty for you sannyasins. Of course, I am continuously creating difficulties. What else can I do? You go on falling asleep again and again! I have to create difficulties because only in difficulties can you remain awake. Once you learn the beauty, the ecstasy of being awake, then certainly there will be no need to give you shocks unnecessarily.
So, don’t be worried about that. If you go into the outside world, people will be hostile to you, but you have to be compassionate to them. Let hostility and compassion stand facing each other. It is one of the fundamental laws of life that compassion cannot be defeated by hostility. Compassion simply changes the hostile person. So don’t be worried that you will be facing hostility. Be concerned about compassion, love. Just start looking into people’s eyes with grace. That will disturb them more – and I want to disturb them!
There was a man in Gautam Buddha’s time whose name was Angulimal. He had taken a vow to cut off one thousand heads, and to take one finger from each dead person and make a garland of one thousand fingers. Angulimal means the man with the garland of one thousand fingers.
He was a ferocious man. People stopped going close to him. The road that passed by the hill where he was staying was no longer being used. He had already cut off nine hundred and ninety-nine heads; he was waiting for only one more. The road that passed by his hill was utterly empty, nobody was coming. And then Buddha came to pass. That road was the shortcut, but people were going the long way around, just to avoid Angulimal. Naturally, Buddha took the shortcut.
His disciples said, “Bhagwan, you don’t know what you are doing! Haven’t you heard about that madman, Angulimal? It is better to go the long, roundabout way, rather than to take the shortcut.”
But people like Gautam Buddha never turn back. He said, “I cannot turn back, now even more than before. If I had not known about Angulimal, perhaps I might have taken the other road. That poor fellow is waiting for only one head! My work is done; I have known all that can be known, I have experienced all that can be experienced. Now there is no reason for me…. If I can be of some service to that poor man, it will be good.”
He went. Angulimal saw him. Buddha’s disciples, who were always clambering around him, by and by started creating a distance between him and themselves. If he was caught, at least they could escape. Angulimal saw Gautam Buddha coming. Even that dangerous man, who had murdered nine hundred and ninety-nine people already, felt for the first time that he also had a heart. Gautam Buddha was looking so innocent, so childlike and so beautiful in the early morning sun.
Angulimal shouted, “You please turn back, because only one head is missing! Perhaps you are a stranger…but looking at you, something in me says ‘Let this man go – there are many idiots, I can cut off their heads.’ Even if my mother comes here, I will cut off her head! But you please go back. Don’t come close to me – I am dangerous! Do you see my sword? It is waiting for the last head.”
Gautam Buddha continued. He stepped off the road and started moving into the mountains, closer to Angulimal.
Angulimal said, “It seems you are more mad than me. Why are you going on and on and on?”
Buddha said, “Angulimal, I stopped going anywhere a long time ago. I am not going anywhere, it is you who are.” Angulimal was standing there – Buddha was walking!
Angulimal said, “Certainly you are mad. You are walking, moving, and you say you have stopped a long time ago. I am standing, and you say, ‘You are moving.’”
Buddha said, “Just try to understand. Your mind is moving, thinking. My mind is silent, there is no movement. And you will not get a better head. It is really a joy to fulfill your vow. Prepare your sword.”
Angulimal could not understand what kind of man he was. He was in a great shock; he had never come across such a man! He was ashamed of himself for the first time in his life. He could not look at Buddha eye to eye, because those eyes were radiating compassion, love, grace, joy, blissfulness, ecstasy – things that he had never known, but the fragrance was reaching him.
He said again to Buddha, “You please go, sir. I don’t want to kill you. You are unnecessarily insisting that I do something that I don’t want to do.” But Buddha went on coming closer and closer. And finally he was standing before Angulimal.
Angulimal said, “I used to think I was a stubborn man – you are a thousandfold more stubborn. Now I cannot help you, I have to cut your head.”
Buddha said, “It is an old tradition and convention to fulfill the last wish of a person who is going to die, and I have a very small wish. You fulfill it and then kill me.”
He said, “What is your wish? Even if it is the biggest thing, I will manage it for you.”
Buddha said, “No, it is a very small thing. Just cut off a branch of the tree under which you are standing.”
Angulimal said, “What kind of thing are you asking? But okay, if that is your wish.” With his sword he cut off a branch.
Buddha said, “Now, put it back. Let it be part of the tree again. Let it blossom again.”
Angulimal said, “That is impossible. How can I join it with the tree?”
Buddha said, “If you cannot even join a small branch to the tree, do you see the implications of it? Any child could have broken that branch off the tree, and you are a strong man – you have not done a great job. You can cut off my head, but can you manage to give me life again? And if you cannot create, what right have you to destroy?”
There was a moment of silence. The sword fell from Angulimal’s hands. He threw away that garland of nine hundred and ninety-nine fingers, and fell at Buddha’s feet. He said, “I never thought about it, that destroying something – any mediocre person, any coward, any idiot can do that. The real genius is creative – you are right. Please accept me as your disciple.”
Buddha initiated him.
He came back to the town. Even the king, Prasenjita, when he heard that Angulimal had become a sannyasin of Gautam Buddha…. He was a lover of Gautam Buddha, but he was afraid to go there because that man Angulimal could not be trusted, he could do anything any moment. But he wanted to see the man; he was so famous all around – hearing his name, even kings used to tremble.
He came, he touched Buddha’s feet and asked, “I have heard that Angulimal has also become your initiate.”
Buddha said, “Yes, he is sitting by my side.”
Prasenjita became so afraid, he pulled out his sword. Buddha said, “Now it is not needed, put it back in the sheath. The Angulimal that you used to know is dead; this is a totally new man who cannot harm anybody. Don’t be afraid.”
And that very day when Angulimal went to beg in the city, the same cowards who had stopped even going on the road that passed nearby Angulimal’s place locked their doors, stood on their terraces with large piles of rocks, and started throwing rocks at the poor man.
He fell down; blood was flowing from all over his body. Buddha was informed, and he came. Just a few more minutes and Angulimal would be gone. Buddha said to him, “Remember one thing, that this act of yours – that you have not in any way reacted to the hostility of the people – is enough. You are dying as a truly awakened man.” Smiling, touching Buddha’s feet, Angulimal died.
Don’t be afraid of people’s hostility. Just be aware of your compassion, your love, and nothing is going to be wrong.
As far as I am concerned, out of necessity I will have to create devices. I will have to tell you things which can wake you up. They may not be true, because the truth, in the first place, is inexpressible. In the second place, even if somehow one manages to express it, it never reaches the sleeping person.
The sleeping person is living in lies, that is the language he understands. And if I have to make you understand me, I am going to do everything possible – telling lies included – because the goal of lying is not to lie, it is just to wake you up.

Osho,
Could you speak of the creative female? I am a woman, and the creative spirit burns strongly in me. Recently, you mentioned that there should be much art and music, but it was in reference to men. I know women can offer a vision, an insight, a softness to the world of art that has never before been seen. I feel it has a different base to start from. Perhaps it is because art can be born out of love and no longer needs to be conquered.
The first thing to be understood is that I am not speaking only of men. Whenever I am speaking, I am speaking to you all. In fact, there are more women here than men.
Drop that idea from your mind that I make any distinction between man and woman. You seem to be part of that stupid movement called women’s liberation. Here there is no need for any women’s liberation. Here the situation is totally opposite – the men are afraid of the women. They are writing letters to me, “How can we be liberated?”
In my commune there is no need to make any distinction. And this is the same stupidity – man used to think for centuries that he is higher, he is better, he has more intelligence. Now the woman starts the same idiotic game. I won’t allow it.
Creativity is not concerned whether you are man or woman. If you feel to be creative, do it. But don’t think that you are going to give creativity something higher, something that man has failed to do.
Why always go on putting dividing lines between man and woman? The truth is that every man carries a woman within him, and every woman carries a man within her. And it is bound to be so, because whether you are man or woman, you are created by one man, one woman. They have contributed to you half and half. Your father and your mother both are alive in you. It is only a question of which side of the coin is facing up and which side is underneath.
That’s why it is so easy for Leeladhar to change a man into a woman, or a woman into a man, because the basic reality is similar – just a little bit of difference which makes no difference. Even a plastic surgeon can do it, you don’t need a spiritual surgeon for it.
Certainly, it will be a better art if both men and women are creating from their different angles. But the way you say it, you don’t understand creativity at all. You say creativity can be out of love; painting, sculpture and dancing need not be conquered. But the possibility is ninety-nine percent that love is so fulfilling you will not bother to paint. You will not bother to waste your time in making a statue.
Love is so fulfilling that who cares about writing poetry? Poetry is written by people who have missed the train. Now they are somehow consoling themselves by writing poetry about love – love they do not know.
It is very difficult to be creative out of love. Yes, a different kind of creativity will be there. If you love a man, perhaps your kitchen will become the field of your creativity. You would like your man to have the best food. You would like the man to have the best clothes. Just look at my clothes! This is creativity out of love.
Rarely is it possible for a woman who loves, to be bothered about painting, poetry, dancing, et cetera. It is really man’s inferiority complex – that he cannot love so deeply, that he cannot give birth to a child – that makes him have to find some substitutes to compete with the woman. He creates painting, he creates sculpture, he creates architecture, he creates the landscape for a garden. He wants to feel that he can also create.
It is basically coming out of his inferiority. He can see the woman and her immense power of creating life. He creates a dead statue – howsoever beautiful it is, it is dead.
Whoever has asked the question seems to be against men, and any woman who is against men is herself becoming something unnatural. Being against men, she is becoming a man herself. Psychologically she is now feeling inferior because the man can paint and create music and dance. Naturally, she will have to stop giving birth to children so her own creativity can be directed toward these things: painting, poetry, music.
But I would like you to know that you will be a loser. You are competing with man, and you need not compete; you are already superior. You need not write poetry, you are poetry. Your love is your music. Your heart throbbing with your lover is your dance!
But if you want to create poetry, music and dance, you will have to deprive yourself of love. You will have to be in the same space where man is: feeling inferior and then finding substitutes for creativity. That is ugly. I cannot give my support to it. The woman is the superior sex; she need not prove it.
Why does man have to conquer? – because he is in a difficulty. Be compassionate to man, he is in a great difficulty. He has to reach the peak of the Everest, he has to go to the moon – all stupid things, because what are you going to do on Everest? You will not find even a Coca-Cola there. And what are you going to do on the moon? Life is almost impossible on the moon, because there is not enough oxygen, and water is not available at all.
The one person who has walked on the moon was walking with all kinds of gadgets, carrying many things, oxygen and other emergency things. And he was covered completely so he would not get any infection that might exist on the moon. Now do you want to live like that, covered with a plastic bag, carrying oxygen and other things? What kind of life will that be? And for how long? It is okay for half an hour to have a walk on it and come back home. The man on the moon must have looked silly. It is a dead planet, you cannot live on it.
It is a strange world the politicians have created. They want to destroy a living earth, a living planet which has everything life needs. And they want to go to the moon, a dead planet which can provide nothing to support you – not a single tree, not a single bird, no animals, no rivers, no oceans. The politicians seem to be really nuts! How much money has been wasted to reach the moon! The same money could have saved Ethiopia.
Man is continuously trying to prove himself superior.
One of my friends, who was also a colleague of mine in the university, told me, “I am in a difficulty and I cannot talk about it to anybody. You are the only one I know who may perhaps understand my situation, and may be of some help.”
I said, “What is the problem?”
He said, “The problem is I am in love with a woman who is taller than me. Now, should I marry her even though she is taller?” No man wants to marry a woman who is taller – just out of an inferiority complex; otherwise what is the problem?
I said, “There is no problem. You can always carry a small stool with you, so whenever you want to kiss your woman, stand on the stool. If women can manage with taller men, then why can’t a man manage with a taller woman? Just watch women, how they are managing with taller men, and do the same. Perhaps you will have to use shoes with high heels – so use them! People in love say, ‘I could die for you’ – but you cannot use shoes with high heels so that you can reach your woman?”
He said, “I came to find some solution, and you are making a joke of me.”
I said, “No, I am not making a joke.”
It is really because of the inferiority complex in man that he has to marry a woman who is not taller than him, that he has to marry a woman who is at least three or four years younger than him. And that is absolutely unscientific.
If you listen to science, everybody should marry a woman who is at least five years older than him because women live longer than men – five years longer than men. Why should you marry a woman five years younger than you? Then you are creating a ten-year distance. You will be dead and your widow will be suffering alone for ten years. The most scientific way will be to marry a woman who is five years older than you, so you can both live together and die together! But man’s inferiority is such….
The woman who has asked the question should remember she is already superior. There is no need to prove it, that’s why there is no need to conquer anything. But if she feels that she has no desire for children, and she wants to paint and she wants to compose music, it is perfectly good.
In fact, many women should do that, because the earth is so overpopulated. You will be a great help if you divert your creativity from children to paintings, because paintings don’t need food. Dancing is perfectly good. Dance as much as you want, it creates no Ethiopia. Write poetry. Because of your poetry, perhaps a few people will have to suffer listening to it, getting bored with it, but that is not much of a problem. They can manage to avoid you.
But if there is no desire to give birth to children, it is absolutely right. Certainly you will have to create something else. Do it, but don’t think that your creativity will be higher than that of man. It cannot be, for the simple reason that you are the superior sex, you don’t have that inferiority in you which is the incentive for man to put all his life into his painting.
He is competing with your baby! And even if he is a Picasso, he dies in despair. His whole life he tried to paint something, but no painting can be alive, no poetry can be alive. So remember that a woman can create, but most probably her creativity will be just third-rate.
But it is good for the world. We don’t want any more population, we want to cut the population to one-fourth of what it is today. So you will be helping a great project. You will be a blessing not giving birth to a child.
But drop the idea that you will be creating something superior out of love. If you really want to create something, don’t think of love either, because love is so satisfying, so fulfilling. It is such a miracle, who wants to write poetry?
I have never come across a single lover, man or woman, who has created poetry, who has created paintings, who has created sculptures, for the simple reason that they are so contented. All these creative things need a discontent, a wound which you have to cover up.
I am perfectly happy with your idea. Just do whatever creative endeavor you want to; but remember, you don’t have the inferiority complex of man, so you cannot compete with man in any way. You are already in a better position. Man is poor; just have compassion on the poor guy.

Osho,
It is my experience that outside our international communes mankind has based life on a system of penalty and reward. Are our communes the only places where there is complete acceptance of responsibility, and mistakes are recognized as opportunities to learn? Please comment.
Yes. Our communes are the only places in the whole world where you are accepted totally, you are not judged, you are not labeled as a sinner or as a saint, and you are not condemned for your small mistakes. You are accepted in your totality. Those mistakes come with you.
Yes, we would like you to learn from your mistakes, but condemnation is not the way. Every mistake is an opportunity to learn something; but the moment people start condemning you, they destroy your opportunity and they make you stubborn. They force you to commit the same mistake again and again just as a resistance. Your ego is hurt.
It is true that outside my communes the society is run by punishment or by reward. Reduced to the roots, the whole society outside is based on fear and greed. Fear as an ultimate consequence creates the idea of hell; greed, on the other hand, as a logical conclusion creates the idea of heaven.
The moment there is no fear in you and no greed, you will be surprised: hell and heaven have disappeared. They were just projections of your psychology; they disappear the moment you accept yourself – and you can accept yourself only if people around you accept you, if they do not create some guilt in you, do not make you feel unworthy.
In a commune it is so easy to accept yourself, because everybody else is accepting you. Acceptance is the very climate of the commune. And there are great implications in it. If a man accepts himself without any guilt, God will disappear. God is your guilt projected. It was God who condemned Adam and Eve in the first place. It was God who drove Adam and Eve out of the Garden of Eden as a punishment, because they had disobeyed. This God seems to be more like Adolf Hitler – no compassion even for his own creation.
And if Adam and Eve disobeyed, the whole responsibility goes to God, because why did he create disobedience in Adam and Eve in the first place?
God begins condemnation, expulsion, punishment – and what a punishment! We do not know when Adam and Eve existed – at least one million years ago, perhaps two million, three million years, or perhaps never. Most probably never. But we are still sinners because four million years ago Adam and Eve disobeyed God.
Do you think it is fair? Even the most fanatic Christian cannot say that it is fair. It is absolutely unfair. We have not done anything. This is strange, that four million years ago somebody did something, and you are jailed for it, imprisoned, sentenced to death. You don’t even know whether these people existed at all. In fact, it is only a story, and the story has been created in almost all the religions, with small differences in the details.
The story has a function – to make you feel guilty from your very birth. You are born in sin – it has nothing to do with your actions. Do you see the unfairness of the idea? You have not done anything, you are just born; but you are born into sin because four million years ago Adam and Eve disobeyed God. He punished them, so the story should be closed. They disobeyed, he punished them – the chapter is closed. But no, it goes on and on.
From the very beginning they start creating guilt in you. For that very purpose the story has been invented. But what purpose does it serve to the outside world? It serves great things. If they can manage to convince you that you are guilty, they have destroyed your individuality from the very beginning. If they go on punishing you for your mistakes, which are human….
You arrive here unprepared for anything; you have not had any rehearsal before your birth. It is natural that when you enter into a new world, with no guidelines given to you by nature, you will commit a few mistakes. Nothing is wrong in committing mistakes, just don’t commit them again and again.
Whenever you commit a mistake, it is an opportunity to learn that this door leads to darkness. Knock on some other door. It is through mistakes that a man grows, learns, becomes mature.
In my commune there is no punishment because I accept your mistakes as human, natural. To punish you for something natural and human is to destroy you, your humanity and your natural spontaneity.
Nobody is rewarded, because punishment and reward are together. The reward says, “You have done right. Now go on doing right until you get the Nobel Prize.” It is a bribe. It is an effort to mold your life according to the vested interests. The society needs slaves, it does not need independent rebels.
And my commune consists only of independent individuals, rebels. They have gathered together – not that they believe in a certain catechism, not that they believe in a certain dogma.
I don’t give you any dogma, any doctrine. You have gathered here because you have found a certain synchronicity with other sannyasins. You are all rebels. Your rebellion joins you together. Your rebellious spirit is the only hope for the world. Spread it!
If we can make the world know the beauty of the rebellious spirit, then there can be no third world war. Then politicians have to hang themselves; nobody is going to bother about them, they are no longer needed.
Strange…small things have great implications. Punishment and reward is a political strategy. It is a religious exploitation. It is creating slaves on a mass scale – and for centuries they have been doing that. They are still doing it, and because we are no longer part of their ugly game, they are hostile toward us. That is natural. They could destroy a single rebellious man very easily, but they cannot destroy communes of rebellious spirits.
You have the power to take over the whole world spiritually. Politically, I am not interested. But if your rebellion spreads…it has to spread like a wildfire. Your red clothes are symbolic of the fire that you have to go on spreading all around.
And in returning humanity to the slave and giving him back his dignity, his individuality, his freedom of thinking and expression, we are saving this living, beautiful planet from the clutches of the politicians.
The politicians and the priests are the greatest criminals in the whole history of man.

Osho,
All my dreams feel fulfilled. My master is dancing. My heart has wings. How can there be anything more after this? Osho, thank you.
There is much more. There is no end to it! Soon your master will be drinking wine with you. Soon your master will be dancing in the disco. You have got a very unreliable man here. I can do anything – and I am going to!

============================================================

Osho,
You have often used the word “existentialism,” and you have referred to yourself as an existentialist. Please define these words.
There has been a contemporary school of philosophy in Europe called existentialism. I have nothing to do with it. That is only a philosophy, a mind game. These people were talking about existence, but they knew nothing of what it means to be existential. I also use the word “existentialist” for myself, but the difference between Jean-Paul Sartre, Jaspers, Marcel, and me is vast, unbridgeable.
When I say I am an existentialist, I am not saying that I believe in the philosophy of existentialism.
Existence needs no philosophy. Birds don’t need philosophy, flowers don’t need philosophy, rivers and oceans don’t need philosophy – but they are all existential; they exist, and they exist with totality and intensity.
I am not a philosopher. To be a philosopher is just to be a “foolosopher.” It is a sheer waste of time. Down the centuries philosophers have been struggling intellectually to find the truth. Not a single one of them has found it, for the simple reason that intellect and its way goes round and round, about and about, but it never penetrates to the center.
To love, you do not have to be a philosopher of love. Love needs no philosophy; love is an existential experience.
I call myself an existentialist. I call you existentialists. But it has nothing to do with those dodos in France. It is not a philosophy but a way of life – not according to any dogma, cult, doctrine, discipline, no! – just living without any idea of how to live. The moment the “how” enters, it opens the door for all the philosophies to come in, all the theologies to come in.
I want you to live like the trees, like the birds, like the clouds. Without man, do you think existence will disappear? Without man, after the third world war, do you think the sun will not rise? And the nights will not rejoice in millions of stars?
My insistence is: live spontaneously without any discipline. Live in freedom and live in totality, because one never knows the next moment. I may not be here, you may not be here. The next moment is meaningless. As far as existence is concerned, it knows only one tense, and that is the present tense. The past is no more, the future is not yet.
Only idiots bother about the past; they are gravediggers. And only idiots are concerned about the future, for the simple reason that they have lost contact with existence now. They are hoping perhaps tomorrow the miracle will happen, perhaps tomorrow the messiah, Jesus Christ, will come down and give you salvation, liberation, paradise.
I want you to know: that guy, Jesus Christ, is never going to come, for the simple reason that the way you behaved with him…. If he has any intelligence he is not coming back to this earth. And I know that you will do the same or even worse to him if he comes again. I think he is not that retarded. And just think: what salvation did he bring when he was here? He could not save himself, and he was proposing to save the whole humanity.
But people who have missed life start hanging onto some hope. They know perfectly well they themselves are not capable, so they start projecting messiahs, prophets, incarnations of God. This is just to console themselves: “Let the tomorrow come; somebody is going to arrive. God is merciful, compassionate…” Seeing your misery he is bound to send a messenger or his only begotten son or a prophet. This gives you a certain kind of opium so you can tolerate the suffering through which you are passing.
One thing: there is no God. It is your hope – and what a hope! An absolutely hopeless hope. And God is not merciful; otherwise through what more misery does he want to show his mercy?
In the first world war people were waiting for the merciful God to do something. He never did anything. In the second world war when Hiroshima and Nagasaki were suffering the worst that humanity has ever suffered, the merciful God did nothing. He is just a lousy fellow – and not even real. It is your projection. You would like a god, a father figure who takes care of you. You would like prophets who have a direct communication line with God.
Do you know that the Mormons believe their leader has a private phone line direct to God, so whatever he says is God’s word. There is no way to argue about it; you cannot argue with God.
Rather than hoping…. Have you not seen entering Rajneeshpuram? – the Christians have put up a beautiful sign: “Abandon hope all those who enter here.” Those fools don’t know that they are preaching my thing.
Yes, abandon hope all those who enter here, because we don’t live through hope. We live in the present, and hope is always in the future. Abandon all future, and start living moment to moment rejoicing in the small things of life.
Remember, life is not made of great things; it is made of very small things. In the early morning, sipping a cup of tea, do it totally, as if this is the last cup of tea you will ever sip again. Take each moment and squeeze the whole juice of it.
I call this my existentialist approach. It has nothing to do with God, it has nothing to do with heaven and hell. It has nothing to do with religion and all kinds of stupid subtleties that theology has created.
My approach has nothing to do with philosophy. It has something to do with you. And it has something to do with now, because to me there is only one time, that is now; and only one space, that is here. Once you have learned the art, the knack of being herenow, you will be so fulfilled, so contented – you will not need any opium for yourself.
On the one hand, you will not need the opium which the religions of the world have been providing for people to keep them dreaming for centuries. On the other hand, you will not find what the so-called existentialists in Europe have found: meaninglessness, anguish, anxiety, despair.
Those people were finding meaninglessness because all other philosophers and theologians had proposed that life is very meaningful. But their meaning was derived from God, heaven, hell, the holy Bible, and all kinds of garbage. Jean-Paul Sartre, Jaspers and people like him were searching for the meaning. There is no need to search for the meaning. Life is neither meaningless nor meaningful. Meaning is a mind thing. Life is a taste!
Do you ever think what meaning taste has? Eating spaghetti, do you ask what meaning the taste has? Having a beautiful shower, the freshness of it, have you ever asked what the meaning of freshness is? Looking at the sunset with so many colors spread all over the horizon, have you asked what meaning the sunset has?
Ask the wrong question and you will find the wrong answer. The existentialists of Europe accepted the questions of religions, which were wrong. Naturally, they found wrong answers. They are not existentialists, I am – because I don’t see any question about meaning. Life is such a beautiful experience, who bothers whether that beautiful experience has any meaning or not? Love is such an ecstasy, who bothers whether love has any meaning or not?
To be silent and meditative is so ecstatic, you will forget all about your search for meaning, truth, God. And once you have dropped the wrong questions, the wrong answers disappear of their own accord. Then between you and existence there is no question, there is no answer, but there is a communion. Your heart slowly, slowly starts beating in the same rhythm as the whole existence. You start feeling yourself part of this immense organic whole. You enjoy tremendously. How can there be anguish?
Those existentialists were feeling anxiety, anguish, despair, because death is there, and death will destroy everything. Life has no meaning, and facing them, there is just death closing in on them. The darkness of death makes them feel lost. They start trembling deep inside their being. Their life has been empty, and now comes death. What kind of existence is this? – just despair.
It seems to be created not by God but by the devil. Perhaps the devil enjoys torturing people. He enjoys wars, he enjoys Ethiopias, he enjoys poverty, he enjoys all kinds of crimes. Courts go on increasing, and crimes are always far ahead of them. Governments go on becoming more and more dictatorial, anti-individual, because they think if the individual is left free, there will be havoc.
With all the armies and police forces and government agencies, still rape goes on happening, murder goes on happening, suicide goes on happening – and always on a larger scale! Looking at the world, the existentialists of Europe found nothing but despair.
But I am puzzled about one thing: why didn’t they commit suicide? They talked about suicide, that suicide seems to be the only exit out of this mess, this madness, but none of them committed suicide. Somewhere deep down, they were still hoping that perhaps they were wrong. Perhaps the messiah is going to come, the misery has reached to its Everest peak, just a little more – a little more patience, a little more waiting, and God is going to save them. All this misery perhaps is only a test of your faith.
That’s what religions have been telling you down the centuries – that misery, suffering, poverty, is just a test of your faith. God is watching you round the clock. Perhaps, deep in the unconscious of the existentialists the same conditioning still prevails. So on the conscious level they go on saying that this is worthless, this life is accidental, that it has no meaning, that all that it gives is anguish, despair, death, and the only way out is suicide. But none of them committed suicide, they all lived long lives. It is just a game with words.
I want you to remember that I am the only existentialist ever!
I have tasted from the cup of existence. There is no meaning. There is no meaninglessness either. There is no hope. There is no hopelessness either.
These things are absolutely irrelevant. If you enter into existence…And the miracle is you cannot enter existence through the mind. Mind consists only of past and future – both are non-existential.
If you want to enter existence, you will have to shut up your mind completely. And in that small gap – when there are no past memories surrounding your consciousness, and no future imaginations or hopes present – in that small moment of pure silence you meet existence for the first time. And immediately all questions disappear. You are so abundantly fulfilled, so content, so whole, that who bothers about meanings?
Have you watched a simple thing? When you are sick, then you ask, “Why am I sick? What is the cause of it?” You go to the doctor to find out the cause so that some medicine can be given to you. But when you are healthy, have you ever asked, “Why am I healthy?” Have you become worried that “I am healthy”? Have you gone to the doctor to say, “Please tell me the cause of my health?” No, when you are healthy and feeling a great well-being, you don’t ask such questions. Health is natural; disease is a disturbance.
To be in tune with existence is the most healthy experience. There is nothing more than that, but it is so much you cannot exhaust it.
My existentialism simply means meditativeness. And Jean-Paul Sartre, Jaspers, Marcel, Kierkegaard, Heidegger – their existentialism is simply mumbo jumbo. They don’t know what it is to be meditative.
The existentialism in Europe is an outcome of Christianity, Judaism. If you search for its roots, from where it has come with so much despair, you will find Christian and Judaic traditions behind it; it is a by-product. Because for centuries the Jewish religion…and the Christian religion is just a by-product of Judaism, because Jesus was born as a Jew, lived as a Jew, died as a Jew. He never heard that he was a Christian.
Christianity is only an offshoot of Judaism. Their basic theology is not different. They differ only on one point, that Jews will not accept Jesus as their prophet, as their messiah. Just that single point; otherwise there is no problem. You can see it: the Christian Bible consists of both – the Old Testament which is Jewish, and the New Testament, which contains the gospels of Jesus. But the Christian has not denied the Old Testament, it is still his holy book.
Look at the bible of the Jews; it has only the Old Testament, the New Testament is not there – cannot be there. They crucified the man as a criminal. They crucified Jesus as one who was against the whole tradition, convention; he was a heretic.
These two religions are not really two, and both these religions are the roots; existentialism is their ultimate fruit. For centuries they have been giving hope – there is bound to come a time when some intelligent person is going to ask, “How long do we have to wait for Godot?”
I used to think that Godot must be the German word for God. I asked Haridas, my German sannyasin, “Does Godot mean God?”
He said, “No!”
I asked, “Then what is equivalent to God in German?”
He said, “Gott!”
I said, “That is even worse that Godot! Godot sounds nearer than Gott!”
But people have been waiting and waiting for centuries; neither the messiah comes, nor does human misery disappear. On the contrary, it goes on increasing. We have made the world more educated, more cultured, without seeing the fact that if people are more intelligent they are going to ask questions which uneducated masses have never asked before. They are going to ask, “How long will it take for the fulfillment of our hopes?” And there is no answer.
They were asking the same question of Jesus two thousand years ago, and he said, “Don’t be worried. Soon I will be coming.” Now, two thousand years…isn’t the “soon” finished?
If the “soon” takes two thousand years, then any intelligent person will have doubts. And what is the guarantee that he is coming in the future? Two thousand years can pass, ten thousand years can pass. His “soon” seems to be very elastic, you can do anything with it. You can go on stretching it out for thousands of years and man’s suffering goes on becoming more and more.
Man has never suffered so much as he is suffering now, for the simple reason that man has never been so intelligent before. Buffaloes don’t suffer. Have you seen a buffalo sad, bored? Have you seen a donkey in very great despair?
Religions have tried hard to make sure that people should not become intelligent. Intelligence was their monopoly: the priest knows, and you should just have faith. The masses went on believing this up to this twentieth century, and it is not a coincidence that existentialism burst out in Europe – not in India, not in Ethiopia.
One would think it would have been more logical for existentialism to be born in Ethiopia, where people are dying in thousands every day; they know what despair is. But they are not intelligent enough. They accept it still as a test of God, perhaps the last test; and beyond that is all they have always wanted, available in paradise forever and forever.
I have watched it in poor countries – because I have been in India – the poor are the least discontented people. It is shocking. They cannot manage even one meal a day; sometimes they have just to drink water and go to sleep. I have asked them, “Why are you drinking so much water?” And they have said, “Just so that the stomach feels full. Food is not available.”
But I have not seen these people feeling despair – they should. They don’t think life is meaningless – they should. They don’t raise a question about God – they should. But poor people are not discontented. They have accepted poverty as fate, as something God-given. And crackpots like Jesus have been telling people, “Blessed are the poor for they shall inherit the kingdom of God.” So it is only a question of a few days more, or a few years. The kingdom of God is not far away.
And they have a certain joy imagining that they will be in paradise enjoying everything possible – beautiful women, rivers of wine – and the rich people will be suffering in hellfire. They will be able to look from above at what is happening to Henry Ford and Rockefeller and the Kennedys. They still believe this. In India, for five thousand years there has been no revolution. People have taken suffering as something natural, to be taken for granted.
Why did it happen on the continent of Europe that existentialism became the most important philosophical movement? For the simple reason that Europe was affluent, rich. And when you are rich, affluent, when you have all that you want, paradise means nothing to you. What can paradise give to you which Paris cannot give?
And when they had all that a man can desire, they suddenly became aware – even if all these things are given, something is still missing: the meaning. They have everything, but that black hole of anguish inside them is not diminished; it has really become more clear in contrast to all the riches and all the comforts and all the luxuries. Now they can see that nothing can help.
A tremendous helplessness – that is anguish. An ultimate hopelessness – that is despair.
But I don’t think these people are really existentialist in my sense. They are just reacting against the whole past, which had great hope of great things. Now they have managed through science every great thing which for centuries man has been hoping, and it has not given them any contentment. It has not fulfilled them. They are poorer than the poor. The poor at least have hope; they don’t even have hope.
My existentialism is not an “ism.” It is unfortunate that I have to use the language that is available; otherwise I would not call it “ism.” That word stinks.
The only way to existence is through meditation. Jean-Paul Sartre never heard what meditation is. Kierkegaard had no idea what meditation is. Meditation is simply to be totally in the present, and to be in rhythm with the existence that surrounds you. Meditation is the only existentialist approach. It is not intellectual, it is total: your whole being is involved in it.
And if even for a moment you can taste the wine of existence, that transforms your whole life. You don’t bother about meanings, you don’t bother about gods, you don’t bother about heaven and hell, you don’t bother about messiahs and prophets. You have the whole existence in your hands, and it is tremendously beautiful. Remember, I am not saying it is tremendously meaningful, I am saying it is beautiful.
When you see a roseflower, and you say it is beautiful, some idiot can ask you, “What is the meaning of beauty? It has to be meaningful too.” But existence knows nothing about your logic, your philosophy, your theology. They are your creations. Existentialism is simply the frustration from thousands of years of waiting, and Godot has not come. In fact, nobody has seen Godot. Nobody knows that Godot has promised to come – there is no appointment.
All the centuries of ignorance, darkness, exploitation by religions have come to an end, for the simple reason that science has released man’s intelligence into a freedom. But that freedom can be misused, and it has been misused by the so-called existentialists. I am using that intelligence and that freedom for its right purpose and dimension.
Live abundantly here, now, and you will never have any despair. And remember you will not be a Christian, you will not be a Jew, you will not be a Hindu or a Mohammedan. Those are just different names of hopes. The opium is the same, only the labels differ.
I am against drugs, and all religions are supplying drugs to you. It is symbolic that Jesus turned water into alcohol. I don’t do miracles; otherwise I would turn alcohol into water. All the religions have been turning water into alcohol and befooling you. It is strange; alcohol is a far worse drug to your health, to your life, than LSD or marijuana. But LSD and marijuana are prohibited, you will be punished. Alcohol, of course, is a religious drug.
If Jesus had done a little more turning, he could have turned ordinary grass into real “grass.” Then it would have been a religious thing. But the poor fellow had not heard the name of LSD, he had no idea of marijuana.
The function of a government should be to keep people awake. But they are afraid of your awakening; hence, their hostility toward me. If I was also turning water into alcohol, your presidents and your premiers and your governors would have come to touch my feet. That’s what they want: that people should remain in a hazy, unintelligent state. Then they can be exploited, they can be enslaved, and any kind of nonsense can be poured into their heads – they won’t resist.
And you can see – no child is born as a Christian, or a Jew, or a Hindu, but the parents and the society immediately start pouring all kinds of crap into the poor, innocent child’s mind. By the time he can think, it is too late: he is full of garbage. And he has been told that it is not garbage; it is something holy, something very precious. He goes on clinging to it, and that keeps him mediocre.
Existentialism in Europe came after the second world war. The second world war struck the intelligent people: if the second world war was not enough for a messiah to come and God to do some miracle, then all those hopes were absurd, then they had been befooled for centuries. But they moved to the other extreme. Because for centuries they had been told life is meaningful, they started saying it is absolutely meaningless.
Because they were told God created man in his own image, they started saying it is all accidental. Nobody has created man, it is just an accident. Some monkeys – must have been mischievous monkeys – jumped on the ground from the trees and started walking on two feet. Man is not a creation – because there is no proof that he is created in God’s own image. This is the image of God! Adolf Hitler is the image of God, Winston Churchill with his cigar is the image of God.
The second world war was such a shock to the intelligent people of Europe that they revolted against the whole past. But when you react – it is a logical thing – you move to the very opposite extreme, and the truth is always somewhere in the middle. It is never at this extreme or that extreme. Truth is always somewhere in the middle, because at the extremes there is always tension, strain, fear. In the middle you can relax.
I teach you not to react to the past. They wasted their life on one extreme, now you should not waste your life reacting to them on another extreme. I show you the way which is exactly in the middle: no past, no future, no reaction, but a meditative space.
And once a man has tasted a meditative state, then there is no problem for him. He knows the secret key, he knows the alchemy of transformation. He can go on moving deeper and deeper into the present – it is infinite. You can never come to the borderline where it ends. And your joy goes on growing, your laughter goes on becoming more and more crystal clear and more and more innocent. Now you are not laughing because somebody has told you a joke; there is no cause to your laughter, it is simply bubbling inside you, uncaused. Now you cannot resist singing.
All prayers are bogus, unless the song comes from your heart for no reason at all. Perhaps just as flowers blossom in the trees, songs blossom in the meditative man. Soon you will be dancing. And the crowd will think you certainly mad. But one who is entering an authentic paradise does not care what people think about him.
First, they will call you mad. But we have to go on growing these mad people around the world. Looking at so many people mad, they will have to think, “One man can be mad, but so many people? And they are intelligent people – they are doctors, they are professors, they are engineers, they are computer experts. And in their whole lives they are working so intelligently. They cannot be called mad.”
We have just to spread our madness fast enough before the idiotic politicians destroy this whole beautiful earth. The time is short, but it is a beautiful challenge.
The more red people there are around the earth, the more people will start inquiring of you, “What is it that you are enjoying? What is it that you are singing for? Why is it that you are dancing?” And once they become curious, inquiring, they are already on the path. Take their hands in your hands and let them move also into singing, dancing, rejoicing.
I am giving you, for the first time, an authentic religion: a religion which has wings to fly, a religion which does not condemn you, but accepts you as the highest evolution of consciousness on earth, a religion which gives you freedom to laugh, to sing, to dance.
The pioneers are going to be in a little difficulty, because the sad people who are living in despair – who have never known a single moment of love, who have never known a single moment of silence or peace – seeing you enjoying, are going to become hostile to you. That’s why the whole of Oregon is hostile to us. We are not hostile to them.
One journalist has asked me, “Cannot your commune and the Oregonians coexist?”
I said, “Never!”
We are going to change the whole of Oregon to red. Why should we coexist? Coexistence means we keep our hostility hidden, and we become hypocrites, and we say nice nothings to each other. No.
I am for either or. Either they change us and make us sad and frustrated, or we are going to change them and make them dance and sing!

Osho,
Years ago I had contact with certain psychologists, and their ideas seemed to set me free. I found new ways to understand myself, and met people with integrity that I respected. I still love the poetry of psychology. Now, reading some psychologists writing about so-called cults, they sound like fanatics, priests and politicians. They want to control people, not to free them. Can you please comment?
That first idea of yours about psychologists was childish. There is no poetry in psychology. Psychology is the latest instrument to keep people oppressed. Because the priests have failed, new priests are needed. The psychologists are the new priests, and obviously they have come with a new jargon, but the basis is the same.
The politician has been conspiring against you with the priest for centuries. But now it seems the priest has lost hold of people. Churches are empty, so empty that my people have purchased a church in Holland and are turning it into a disco. In fact, that is a good beginning. I would like all beautiful cathedrals and churches to be turned into discos. Now nobody goes into them, they are cold and dismal and dead.
The politician is very cunning. He can see the priests have lost their hold – at least on the younger generation. He has to find a substitute. The psychologist has come in handy, because he speaks a different language than the priest. He pretends that his psychology is a science. That is absolutely wrong!
It is not science; how can it be science when Freud, Jung, Adler, Assagioli, are not agreeing on a single point? The four great psychologists – and not agreeing on a single point! Science always comes to an agreement. When the truth is known about anything, the scientist is humble enough to drop his prejudices and accept it. It does not matter who has discovered it, what matters is that it has been discovered!
But the psychologists are divided into so many schools – the same way as religion was divided into so many religions, so many subdivisions of religions, cults, creeds. The same is the situation now of psychology. But the psychologist does not bring God in, does not bring heaven and hell in. He has found different names for these entities. He does not talk about man in the old terms the priests have always used; hence, you got caught in their jargon.
The psychologists don’t say that you have to become an ascetic, that you have to practice a certain discipline for years together – or perhaps for lives together – and then you will be liberated, no. They say psychoanalysis will do, just go on being psychoanalyzed.
I have never come across a single man whose psychoanalysis is complete. In fact, even Sigmund Freud, the founder of psychoanalysis, is an unpsychoanalyzed person. I have been trying to psychoanalyze him, and I am finding treasures. I would not have believed it if somebody had told me that Freud was so afraid of ghosts that even the word “ghost” was enough, and he would freak out.
Once he was talking to Jung, his most intimate follower at that time, who was very much interested in ghosts. Jung started talking about ghosts, and Sigmund Freud fainted. These are your founders of psychoanalysis. That was the point where Sigmund Freud and Jung parted. Jung could see, “This man, who cannot even listen to what I have to say about ghosts without fainting, is not going to be my master.” And Sigmund Freud also realized, “This man is not going to be my successor.” Sigmund Freud and Jung parted.
Listening to me, you may be thinking that Jung was very much more courageous than Sigmund Freud, because he was so interested in ghosts, but that is not true. He was interested in ghosts because he was very much afraid of death, and afraid of becoming a ghost!
Jung wanted to go to Egypt to see the ancient mummies of kings and queens preserved there. Almost ten times he booked his trip, but at the last moment he would find some excuse and cancel the trip. On the tenth time, he even went to the airport; and the moment the departure of the plane was announced, he chickened out. After that, he never made any attempt to go to Egypt. He was very much afraid of a dead body. These people are certainly in need of much psychological help.
You say you were very much impressed. It was not that you had come across something very impressive, it was only because you were ignorant, impressionable – anything would have impressed you, you were just soft clay. Otherwise, to see poetry in psychology is insanity.
There may be some psychology in poetry, but in psychology…In psychology you will find your psychologists talking about masturbation, schizophrenia, nightmares, all kinds of madnesses. I don’t think you can find any poetry in all this. Nobody has found poetry in a medical book, and the psychologist is dealing with far worse sicknesses than any medical book can.
But the politicians found that a substitute was urgently needed, and psychoanalysis has become a worldwide movement. It was bound to. Sigmund Freud was a Jew, and whenever a Jew starts a business, it is going to become a worldwide chain.
What did Jesus do? He was a Jew. And Jews have not forgiven him yet, for the simple reason that they are angry with themselves for losing the greatest business that Jesus had made available to them. Now Christianity is the biggest business firm in the world. Sigmund Freud also made a great business out of psychoanalysis. Jews know how to do business.
Seeing that psychoanalysis was spreading fast, and people were trying to find the meaning of life, some hope, trying to get rid of despair – it was simple for the politicians to use psychology, psychoanalysis, psychiatry, in the service of the vested interests. That’s what they have been doing.
Now you are a little more mature. Seeing what the psychologists are writing about cults, new movements – they are all against new movements, new religious beginnings – it is very simple to see that they are in the service of the past, not in the service of humanity’s future. They have been purchased. They are the new priesthood! Beware of these people. Because they are new, they are more dangerous.
Now psychoanalysts, psychiatrists, are providing deprogramming. If somebody moves out of Christianity – bored with all its nonsense – and joins a new movement, the psychologists are offering their services to the parents, to the society, “Bring your boy or your girl and we will deprogram the person.” And they do it. Of course, they charge enough money. And particularly in America they are very successful, for the simple reason that the American mind is always ready to change. It has not very deep roots in the past. Americans are the uprooted people.
It has been found that three years are enough for an American to be in a job. Three years is also the limit for an American to remain married to a woman. Three years are also enough to have a honeymoon with a new cult, a new creed. There is no need to deprogram them; within three years they will move themselves.
And this is not just about small children or young people. One old man – perhaps seventy years old – has been coming here throughout the whole year, almost every month. He is a billionaire – and you know perfectly well I am not averse to money.
Money is a perfectly beautiful method of exchanging things, one of the greatest inventions of man. It was so difficult before money came in. You had a camel to sell, but nobody was ready to purchase a camel. You had to find someone who wanted a camel and was willing to give his two cows in barter. It must have been a very difficult world. Money has made it easier. You need not bother to find the purchaser, you can simply sell the camel and purchase the cows. It is one of the greatest inventions of man to make exchange easier. I am not averse to money. I want the whole world to become rich and luxurious.
I say to you, “Blessed are the rich and the luxurious. Even a camel can pass through the eye of a needle, but no poor man can enter the gates of heaven.” For a simple reason; what is the poor man going to do there? He will simply feel silly with all that luxury in paradise. The poor man will lose his mind, because all these things were condemned on the earth, they were sins, and here saints are dancing with naked girls! And this is what the saints are doing – who knows what God is doing? Perhaps having a sexual orgy.
The poor man will find hell perfectly suitable. He has always lived in hell, he is accustomed to it, he has experience of it. And of course, the experiencer should be sent to the place where his experience can be of some use.
Jesus’ whole theology is absurd, sending the poor to paradise – they have never enjoyed anything, they have not rehearsed before they entered paradise. And whatever they have been practicing is perfectly suitable in hell.
I would like poverty to disappear from the world. I am all for richness in all dimensions. The poor cannot understand classical music. The poor cannot understand the beautiful poetries of great poets. The poor cannot understand the paintings of Van Gogh or Picasso. The poor will be absolutely at a loss to understand what is going on, if you play Mozart; he cannot figure out that this is something celestial.
This old man was a billionaire, but I don’t believe in persuading anybody to become a sannyasin, and I don’t allow my sannyasins to convert anybody. We are not missionaries. The word missionary is a four-letter word. The missionary is trying to interfere in your life against your will. We are here. If somebody finds the place beautiful, rejuvenating, it is up to him to decide.
His family became disturbed because one time was okay – he had come out of curiosity – but now he has been coming every month for one week at a time, and they are afraid that he may become a sannyasin. He is the head of the family and of all their international corporations: he has the authority over all the money the family has. Naturally, they are afraid.
But how to take a seventy-year-old man to a deprogrammer psychologist? They went alone, not taking him, to ask advice. The psychologist said, “It is really a difficult situation. Your people you can bring forcibly, but this old man you cannot bring forcibly. If you do, it is certain he will become a sannyasin. And I don’t think that I can deprogram him either.”
The simple reason is that no sannyasin can be deprogrammed, we have already deprogrammed him. You don’t have any programs, so what can they do? You are not being given a certain program. They can deprogram the Moonies, they can deprogram the Hare Krishna people. They can deprogram any cult: Jehovah’s Witnesses, Jesus freaks….
I am surprised…Jesus himself was a freak. In fact, Jesus freaks are really doing the right thing; to follow Jesus you have to be a Jesus freak. Jesus was not a gentleman, not dressed in a gray business suit. You can think of him as a freak, as a hippie, or anything, but he was not part of the old conditioned mind. That’s why he was rewarded by crucifixion.
At that time deprogrammer psychologists had not arrived; otherwise Jesus would have been saved from crucifixion. Just deprogramming would have been enough. He had just to be constantly hammered: “You are not the only son of God. Drop this nonsense. If you are the messiah for whom the whole Judaic tradition is waiting, let them recognize you. Why do you go on shouting that you are the awaited messiah?” It would have been very easy to deprogram that poor carpenter, but the psychologists were not around there.
In America they are doing great business, particularly in California. They are spreading in other countries also.

You have found now the right attitude about these people. They don’t want any revolution in the world. They don’t want any kind of religiousness in the world. They don’t want the new man in the world. And they are against humanity, because only the new man can save it. Only the new man can throw these politicians with their nuclear weapons into the Pacific – pacific, certainly, so they can be at peace forever.
These deprogrammers are writing against cults, dogmas, and they don’t know anything about them. They don’t come here. Not a single deprogrammer psychologist has appeared, because he knows he will be deprogrammed.
We have our own deprogrammers, who are certainly far more efficient, for the simple reason that they are not giving you any program. So their work is simple: they simply deprogram you and leave you alone to yourself. They do not reprogram you. They give you freedom. Deprogrammed, you are no longer a Christian, no longer a Hindu, no longer a Mohammedan. You are no longer an American, a Russian, a German. Completely deprogrammed, you are simply an innocent, reborn child.
My sannyasins are again reclaiming their childhoodness, their innocence, which has been disturbed by the priests, by the politicians, by the educationists. In every way you have been cut to a certain size, according to the dress that they have prepared for you. This is strange! The dress should be cut according to you, and for centuries they have been cutting you according to the dress. The dress is already available – the Christian dress, the Hindu dress, the Buddhist dress – and you have to fit into it. It is imprisonment.
It is good that you have understood that these psychologists are the new jailers. Beware of them.
If anybody needs deprogramming, these are the people who need it. So if you can catch hold of a deprogrammer, bring him here. We have to start deprogramming the new priesthood, because we want the whole humanity to be one. We don’t want any priests, we don’t want any religions and we don’t want any nations. We want the world to be one, because only in one world is there no need for nuclear weapons, is there no need for war.
Right now, seventy-five percent of human energy, income, resources, is going in to creating more and more nuclear weapons. And these politicians who go on piling up nuclear weapons also go on shedding crocodile tears for Ethiopia.
Ethiopia, with all its wounds, can be immediately healed. Half of the population of India need not be existing below survival level. In America itself, thirty million people, are so poor that it is simply ugly and insane for the American president to go on pouring money into nuclear weapons.
And the amazing thing is, you have enough nuclear weapons to destroy humanity seven hundred times! Strange! I don’t see the arithmetic. Have these politicians forgotten even the basic three R’s? Russia and America both can destroy this planet seven hundred times. There is no need, one time is enough! You have already got weapons seven hundred times more than you need. Just an average mind can see the foolishness of it.
Stop nuclear weapons, stop this whole idea of war. But the politician knows if the priest disappears he will be in difficulty. He wants to substitute the priest with the psychologist – a more up-to-date version of the same priesthood. There is no difference.
It has to be stopped. So whenever you see a deprogrammer, catch hold of him and bring him here. The way they are catching hold of people…what a strange world! – Parents are hijacking their own children and giving them into the hands of the psychologist, and he hammers them.
The method is very simple. He goes on hammering for two days, three days. The man had been a Christian, now he has become a Hare Krishna. The Hare Krishna ideology is only on the surface, very fragile, new; his Christianity is centuries old in his unconscious. It is very easy to deprogram him; his unconscious will be supporting you. You have just to scratch a little and his unconscious will start coming up.
You have to make him feel guilty: “You betrayed Jesus Christ, the only begotten son of God; you betrayed your country, you betrayed your community.” You have just to make him feel guilty-that is scratching – and soon his unconscious will come up.
But nobody can deprogram my sannyasins, because we already do it and we never give another program to people. We leave them completely free, individual. We give them the dignity of being and individual and not just a member of some religion. We give them the pride to be themselves and not to be an American or a Russian.
Nobody can deprogram my sannyasins.
In fact, if you find yourself in a situation where you are forced to be deprogrammed, don’t be afraid. Deprogram the deprogrammer! Don’t miss the chance. And I know you can do it!

============================================================

Osho,
I trust you unconditionally. At the same time, I don't believe you. Can you speak about trust and belief?
Baby, that is really great! Just groovy. I don’t believe in my own statements either! We are in perfect agreement. I trust myself, I trust you, because I trust love.
Trust is of the heart, belief is of the mind. They are diametrically opposite, they never meet. They can run parallel to each other, but they will never meet. Belief will remain hollow, without any content, and trust is overflowing with joy, blissfulness.
You say you trust me. That’s enough, more than enough. I don’t want you to believe in my statements, because my statements go on changing every day. If you believe in my statements you are going to be crazy. They are so contradictory, you will not be able to figure out what I actually want to say to you.
But trust remains the same – the same flavor, the same grace, the same beauty, because it is not a statement of the mind. It is not a statement at all. It is a silent communion between two hearts, a silent communion in which two hearts synchronize; their beats become a rhythm, their vibe takes the same color and aroma.
I am not a man who wants you to believe in anything, including me. I am against belief as such.
That’s why I have been continuously contradicting myself, so nobody can make any belief out of my statements. No scholar, no theologian is going to make any system out of my statements. In thirty years I must have contradicted myself thirty thousand times. Anybody working on me for a PhD will soon be found in a madhouse. And my reason for doing so is crystal clear. If I were making statements consistent with each other, you would not listen to me, you would make a belief system out of it. I am a little outlandish.
In the forty-two years Buddha spoke, you cannot find a single inconsistency, no contradiction. Now it is so easy to make the whole living religion into a dead belief, a dogma. The religion becomes a cult.
Religion is religion only when the master is there continuously watching that you don’t get into the head, that you remain centered in the heart. But when the master is gone, all that you have left with you is his statements. If they are consistent, then it is very easy for you to make a theology, a Christianity, a Buddhism, a Hinduism, Mohammedanism, and then cling to it. You have forgotten the master; now you have only words, which mean nothing. It was the man behind the words who had meant something to you. Can’t you see the difference?
When Gautam Buddha spoke, many hearts started melting into him. The same words are written in the books; the Buddhist theologian is not speaking any other words, he is speaking the same words Buddha used – but nothing stirs in your heart. On the contrary, your head becomes interested; you start arguing for and against.
My strategy has never been used before. No master has been self-contradictory, and because they were not self-contradictory they have all failed. Although Buddha goes on saying, “Don’t believe in me,” that does not make any difference. When Buddha is gone, they need some substitute – a holy book, the Dhammapada, the Bible, the Koran – they need something substantial to hold on to. They will make a belief, they will make a theology, they will make a philosophy. And that’s how all the religions have slowly, slowly died.
By the time a religion becomes a theology, it is only a cult. Christianity is a cult, Hinduism is a cult, Buddhism is a cult. But the miracle of miracles is, they call my people a cult and I am managing things in such a way that whatsoever you do, you cannot make it a cult. Either it remains as religion or it disappears. It is better that it disappears than that it becomes a cult.
I am not going to leave any successor because we have seen what happens to successors. Two thousand years of popes coming and going…. If you want to find idiots in history, it is so easy – take the names of all the popes, because other names have disappeared. These popes are representing Jesus Christ, and because they are representing Jesus Christ they are infallible. I am not going to leave any successor behind me, because in the first place I, myself, am fallible. How can my representative be infallible?
I am not special, not holier-than-thou. I am not a messiah, not a prophet, just a simple, ordinary human being like you. You cannot manage with such a man to have anything like the whole history of Christianity, Hinduism, Buddhism. They fall into the same pit, into the same darkness. And the basic reason is that their prophets and messiahs and their founders were trying hard to be consistent, because consistency has been thought to be of immense value. It is of immense value, but only for the head. No scientist can afford self-contradictions, he has to be consistent.
I am not a scientist. I am a mystic.
Science tries to demystify things. What does knowing everything about existence mean? In other words, it is demystifying existence.
I do just the opposite: I mystify the rose, I mystify the cloud. I mystify the sky, the stars. I mystify you. And remember, it is no mystification-that is bogus. I simply reveal your reality to you. And it is such a mystery.
I can afford contradictions, because I am not aiming at your head. My aim is somewhere else. You can ask, then why do I talk? I talk to keep your head engaged; meanwhile, my arrow goes directly to your heart. Continuously I am throwing arrows to your heart; but the head knows nothing about it, cannot know anything about it. They are not on talking terms either.
And I have to contradict; otherwise my arrows will be futile. Your head will find rationality, consistency, a better philosophy, better argument, more contemporary, and you will be satisfied with your head. And your head is just a computer, it is not you.
Anything can be fed into the head. It can contain almost all the books of all the libraries of the world; a single head can contain that much information. And the more information you have, the more your head starts swelling up, becoming bigger and bigger. And in the noise and the clamor, who is going to listen to the still, small voice of the heart? Hence, you need not believe my contradictions; you should not believe what I say.
When I am here, why not have a heart-to-heart meeting? That is trust. Behead yourself completely!
You are right, and I can see your difficulty, because in ordinary dictionaries “belief,” “faith,” and “trust,” are all synonymous. They are not. Belief is rational, it is in favor of the better argument, it simply goes on following a long line since Adam and Eve – blindly, faithfully. If so many people are ahead of him, they must be going in the right direction. And everybody thinks so too.
My word is “trust,” and it has a different orientation altogether. It is simply a love affair.
Just think of a situation: a man says to a woman, “I believe I love you.” The statement will offend the woman. He believes he loves you. You simply say, “I love you.” There is no question of belief or faith. You cannot say to a beautiful woman, “I have faith, that are beautiful.” That is enough proof that the woman is not beautiful.
Just the other night, I was talking to a very beautiful heart, a Dutch journalist – which is rare, because journalism is worse than politics. In fact, of the people who become journalists, ninety-nine percent are the people who wanted to be politicians but could not manage. They did not have guts enough to fight and struggle. They could not race in competition, so the second alternative was standing by the side and throwing stones at anybody who is going up higher. The whole function of journalism has become nothing but a frustration, and out of frustration, naturally, comes revengefulness against the politicians.
But this man was not of that category. Accidentally it seems, he became a journalist. He had as pure a heart as you have. I was asked by him, “I have been reading so many contradictions in your books. You say one thing today, tomorrow you contradict it. Then how do your sannyasins go on believing in you?”
A consistent question, relevant. You can believe in a person who says the same thing. You cannot believe in a person when you know perfectly well tomorrow he may say just the opposite: “So at least let us wait for tomorrow, then we can see what to do.” But tomorrow never comes, it is always coming.
And I don’t take any account of my past statements. For me there is no contradiction at all, because unless I compare two statements how can I find there is contradiction? By the time I go to bed I am finished with that day. In the morning I wake up fresh – just like an innocent child, carrying no burden of the past. I speak to you from that innocence.
And I speak not to emphasize a certain psychology, a certain theology – I do not speak to program your mind. I cannot humiliate any human being by programming his mind. Programming the mind of a human being means you are reducing the man to a machine.
His question was relevant. He was puzzled: “There are people who have been with you for twenty, thirty years – can’t they see these many contradictions? And they go on believing in you?” He was simply using the word belief wrongly.
My people trust me, love me. It is not a question of my statements to them. They enjoy my statements, it is good entertainment, but it is not a belief system for which you have to live and die. It is only pure entertainment. You have just to laugh and enjoy.
My real work is going on underground. Whatever I am doing is just creating a situation so your head is engaged. And my real approach, my target, is your heart, not your skull. And it is the best way I have found to sort out people. Those who approach me rationally will soon find the way toward Santa Fe. Santa Fe is going to be a world-famous place. All the camels of different sizes and shapes!
To be with me you have to learn one art, and that is, don’t take my statements seriously. For the moment enjoy them, but don’t expect that I am not going to contradict them. Don’t impose any expectations of yours on me. I never impose any expectations on you. At least this much you can do – a simple thing.
For centuries masters have been imposing their ideas on the disciples. I am not imposing any of my ideas on you. Don’t from your side insist on how I should behave, what I should say or not say; accept that saying something will create contradiction, saying it will create hostility in people outside, saying it will create unnecessary confusion. Don’t expect anything from me. Open your heart. That is where the real surgery has to happen.
And once you have known the beauty, the joy, the blessing of dancing in tune with my heart, you will never be bothered by what I said yesterday, what I said ten years ago. Leave all this to people whose profession is grave digging. Let them settle with the skeletons of the past.
You be here now in this moment, part of my life, part of my love, part of my being. Let me reach you in your innermost core. Allow me to touch your center.
The head is only the periphery, and I am not interested in your heads. I don’t count heads, I count the hearts.
The Dutch journalist could understand. When I stood up and started dancing with the sannyasins, he was dancing behind me – in absolute abandon, as if nothing else existed in that moment but the dance.
I told the man, “You can write anything you want about me. Even if you want to say things which I have not said, I give you the authority, because I have been able to touch your heart. And beware, soon you will be a sannyasin!”
I could see the glow in his eyes – just the idea of being a sannyasin, a great adventure ahead, a great pilgrimage. And the way he was dancing was absolutely drunk. It is just coincidence that he happens to be a journalist, that is not his place. His place is among the sannyasins, he is a seeker. And he trusts me….
The second problem that you have raised is about believing. But who is asking you to believe me? I go on destroying every possibility of believing in me. Even if you want to believe in me, you cannot; I will not allow it. To the very last breath of my life I will go on contradicting continuously.
Perhaps at the last breath I may say all this enlightenment business is just bullshit. Forget all about it! Just be human, ordinary, enjoying the small things of life, relishing the beauty of nature, drowning yourself in love, friendship – and you have something better than enlightenment.
Yes, I want it to be remembered: It is difficult to be enlightened, but enlightenment is not the end. One has to transcend enlightenment too. Then one is completely free. Enlightenment helps one to be free from every other bondage, but then one becomes dependent on enlightenment. The real enlightened person transcends it, and he becomes again simple, ordinary, with no idea of any holiness, no idea of meditation, no idea about anything. He lives moment to moment, joyously.
It is good that you trust me unconditionally. Trust can only be unconditional. Belief is always conditional. A better argument, and your belief can be destroyed. But your trust is unconditional, nothing can destroy it. If there is a condition, then it is easy to argue and prove that the condition is wrong, that the condition has loopholes. And when you see that in your condition there are loopholes, your belief falls down.
Trust has to be intrinsically unconditional; hence, nobody can argue against my people. My people are not believers. They have known something far deeper and far higher: they have tasted the juice of trust.
You are fortunate. Don’t be worried that you don’t believe in me. I don’t want you to believe in me! And what you are feeling, an unconditional trust, is what is needed between me and you.
Belief is a barrier. Trust is a bridge.
So rejoice, and forget all about beliefs. Anyway you cannot believe because I am going to contradict myself.
When I was talking to the Dutch journalist, he was worried. He loves me, he has been here before at celebrations, he has been reading my books. He himself has paid his fare, because the editor was not ready to pay the fare. The editor is ready to publish whatsoever the journalist writes, but he was not ready to pay the fare from Holland to here. The journalist has paid it himself.
It was a problem for him, and naturally he said: “I cannot conceive – you go on contradicting and still your people are not disturbed by your contradictions.”
I said, “That is one of the fire tests for becoming a sannyasin. I will contradict my statements. I can start contradicting them by my actions, but trust has no condition.”
He asked me, “In the world press conference you said that you are a showman.”
I said, “Me, a showman? What are you asking?”
He was, for a moment, silent. And then he said, “You said in the press conference, ‘My people are a circus.’”
I said, “my people? The whole world is a circus except my people! These are the sanest people in the whole world, and anybody who is sane is going to join my people.”
Naturally one gets puzzled. But if you trust, you don’t get puzzled at all. You can enjoy. You laughed when I said I am a showman, and you are laughing when I am saying I am not! You were laughing when I said you are my circus, and now you are laughing when I am saying you are the only people who are not a circus.
This is the beauty of trust.

Osho,
I have been a sannyasin for one year, and feel like a kangaroo who has to make big jumps to follow you. Today, I was shocked to read that you had said you may not remain celibate when you are healthy again. I thought you had said that an enlightened person has transcended sex. Yet, I know how beautiful it is to make love. Why do I feel so confused?
Please comment.
One always feels confused if one has expectations. Now who told you that enlightened people transcend sex? And immediately you are saying, “…although love is such a beautiful experience.” So why prevent enlightened people from having such a beautiful experience? But the idea has been created down the centuries that the truly religious people are celibate, and particularly that the enlightened person is celibate.
I have never been celibate. Among so many beautiful women, you want me to be celibate? It is like standing by a beautiful spring, purest water flowing from the top of the hill, and you are standing thirsty by the side of it because you are enlightened. Forget all about it! I will take care of enlightenment later on – right now I am going to drink from this beautiful spring.
And you have also misunderstood. I have said enlightened people transcend sex, but I have never said they transcend love. It is a complicated phenomenon.
You think sex is love? It is simply biological bondage. In fact, only an enlightened person can make love. What you call making love is just biological gymnastics. You don’t know what making love means. So I say to you that the enlightened man and the enlightened woman are the most beautiful lovers. It need not necessarily be sexual, it need not necessarily be non-sexual. An enlightened man is free.
My mother came to me yesterday; she was a little worried. She said, “It is beautiful to see you dancing, but now you have started dancing with girls!” She was concerned that if people in India see this, in the pictures, on the video, they will be very much shocked. I said, “So far, so good.”
But I am free – more free than Gautam Buddha, more free than Mahavira. Gautam Buddha did not have the guts to dance with a girl.
I can dance because I don’t see any problem. There is no hindrance, no boundary to me; I can do anything.
Just the other night, Vivek was asking me, “Should we go to the disco?”
I said, “I am going to the disco one day, but right now it is too late.”
My discos, my restaurants are called Zorba the Buddha. First I am a zorba, and then I am a buddha. And remember, if I have to choose between the two, I will choose Zorba, not Buddha…because the Zorba can always become the Buddha, but the Buddha becomes confined to his own holiness. He cannot go to the disco and become the zorba. And to me, freedom is the highest value; there is nothing greater, more precious, than freedom.
My enlightenment has freed me from everything, including enlightenment.
Now will be the crucial point. Those who trust me will trust me even when I am drinking champagne, because there was no condition. You had not told me, “I will trust you only until you start drinking champagne.” The trust is unconditional.
The heart knows different ways of seeing. The mind is linear, it looks only toward one line. The heart is multi-dimensional. And the more I feel my people’s trust, the more dimensions of my being I can reveal to them.
I would like you to know me in my total freedom, because that is what I want you to be – totally free, no strings attached.
Blessed is the sannyasin who can trust me without bothering about my statements or my actions. His is the kingdom of God right now!

Osho,
Like yours, my tastes are simple: I like the best. However, I take this to the extreme, and want the ultimate in everything – and not only in material things. I want, especially with women, each meeting, each love affair to be the perfect, ultimate experience. Consequently I remain separate, miss much, and make myself miserable. Please comment.
Strange…you compare yourself with me, and I don’t know what misery is, what frustration is.
You say that your tastes are just like mine: for the best. But before you can have that taste for the best, you will have to become like me – and you are far away.
I have said it, that my tastes are simple; I am easily satisfied with the best of anything. But remember, I am easily satisfied, and your question ends with misery and frustration. You cannot be simple.
And who does not want the best? And do you think I always get the best? For example, you are here…. Now, what am I supposed to do with you? You certainly are not the best – miserable, frustrated – but I will still love you, whether you are the best or not the best.
You have heard only half the statement. It is time you should know the other half also. There are people who want the best; these are the people who fill the whole world, all frustrated, all miserable. There are also a few people who make the best out of anything. They are the people who can say they are like me. I make the best out of anything.
Yes, I am satisfied with the best, but the best is not always handed over to you. You have to learn to transform it into the best. And it is easy, if you understand toward what I am taking you.
Don’t think that there are great things in life and small things in life. It all depends on you, how you look at them. It is your attitude which is determining. You can enjoy a small grass flower, there is no need for lotuses to blossom for you. The joy comes from within you – anything can trigger it.
You need not have what is considered the best by the society, but you can make anything that you have the best. Enjoy it, live it totally, squeeze the whole juice of it – and you will find that everything is the best.
You say particularly with women you would like each experience to be the very ultimate. Have you seen your face in the mirror? Before you think of having the ultimate experience every time, just go into the bathroom and see your face first. That will cool you down.
To get the ultimate, you have to be ultimate. You are just a monkey, and trying to have the ultimate experience with a woman. Thank God that she is tolerating you! Thank God that she only throws pillows at you, and does not throw you out of the window.
Deserve it! Earn it! Nothing comes without your capacity to absorb it. You get only that which you deserve. Remember that maxim: you get only that which you deserve. And there is no need to be frustrated, you always get that which you deserve. Nature is very compassionate. It never gives you less, it never gives you more; it is very fair.
So if you are not getting the best from your women, have you asked the women what they are getting? You may not be getting the best, but you must be getting something. And those poor women may not be getting even that!
Love needs two partners. It is almost like two musical instruments playing together in symphony. If you want the best, then create the capacity to be the best lover, and help the woman also to be the best lover.
There are biological discrepancies for which nobody can be blamed, because biology’s purpose in your love affairs is different. It is not to give you joy. It is just to give reproductions of you, carbon copies, because soon the originals will be in the grave. Biology’s function is finished there. And if you remain only biologically oriented, you are not going to get anything – except frustration.
Every man after making love feels frustrated. It is good that sex helps him to fall asleep; otherwise the whole night he will remain in frustration. It is good that sex helps his heart to be healthier; otherwise the whole night of frustration, and a heart weakening and drowning – by the morning you will find the man finished. Those are biological strategies that make the man go to sleep immediately. There is no sleeping medication which is more effective than sex.
And one thing you must remember: men have died in all kinds of actions – people have died praying – but nobody has ever died while making love. In the whole history of man…not a single exception.
Strange. People die in all kinds of situations – because there are so many people, and so many people have been before, and before them, it seems to be logical that somebody will die while making love. Somebody will die just walking on the street, somebody will die doing something good: painting, music, poetry – or serving the poor. But biology has its own ways. It has made it intrinsically impossible for a man to die while he is making love.
Although all the religions have been teaching just the opposite, that if you make love you will die sooner, it is not medically true. The people who love – their hearts are functioning better. Lovers don’t have heart attacks. The celibate can have a heart attack. Do you want your enlightened people to have heart attacks?
Please, don’t compare yourself with a poor man like me, who owns nothing – not a single cent. Even if I have to be deported, the Oregon government will have to pay for my ticket. But I will make the best out of it. Even if they deport me, I will make international news. I will make so much fuss about it that they will be condemned all over the world.
That’s why for four years they have been silent. They neither say yes to my green card, nor do they say no. They don’t want to say yes; they are afraid to say no, because I am not going to accept their no easily. So they have been, for four years, just sitting, working out what to do. Both ways it is dangerous. Saying yes is a danger, saying no is an even bigger danger.
If they deport me, I will go around the world – I have my people around the world. And I am going to expose the American mask completely: that it is not a democracy, that it simply has a different name, but it is exactly what the Soviet Union is – with one difference. The Soviet Union is straightforward, and Americans do the same thing with hypocrisy; they go round about, round about, and try to make it look democratic.
My deportation – I am going to enjoy it as the best. Anything that has happened in my life, I have enjoyed as the best. I make it the best. Even if I have to make love to an ugly, disgusting woman, I put the light off! In darkness, whether you are making love to Cleopatra or your own wife makes no difference.
Just be a little clever. There is no need to be frustrated. Find out ways, whatsoever is available, to make the best of it.
Yes, I enjoy the best because I know how to turn everything to its best. You also want to enjoy the best, but you don’t want to take the trouble to change it to its utmost beauty and flavor.
As a sannyasin you should learn that life consists of small things, but each small thing can be transformed into something glorious.
You can ask Vivek, who carries my tea, my food – and now I am going for Coca-Cola. Just ask her: whatsoever food is offered to me, I enjoy it as the best food anybody will be enjoying in the whole world. I enjoy my tea – which has no sugar in it, no milk in it, just water and tea leaves; but I really enjoy it, each sip of it. And I feel as if I am in paradise each moment.
So please, learn the alchemy of transforming things.

Osho,
If the brain of an enlightened man was transplanted into an ordinary man, would he start behaving like an enlightened man? Would he experience enlightenment?
No, because the brain has nothing to do with enlightenment. If you put the enlightened man’s brain into some unenlightened man’s body, he will not behave like the enlightened man. He will simply behave the way he had been behaving. Perhaps for a few days he will be in a little difficulty, but soon he will get adjusted.
The brain has to be adjusted to the soul, not vice versa.

Osho,
Could it be possible for scientists to develop enlightened people in a test-tube?
Never. Don’t wait for such stupid things. In the test-tube the scientist can produce a great painter, a great artist, a great dancer, a great musician, a great poet. But the scientist cannot produce an enlightened man in the test-tube, because that is the only quality which you have to work for. Nobody can give it to you.
You have to become more conscious. It does not matter whether you are born in a test-tube or in a mother’s womb – both are wombs. It does not matter at all. Enlightenment is the only thing in human life which will remain forever and forever the glory of individuality. Everything else can be produced; enlightenment you have to grow yourself. It is something so intrinsic to you, it is your very soul.
The scientist can give you a better, stronger body, he can give you a longer life, he can give you a better mind – but he cannot give you awareness. He himself is not aware. He is as unconscious as you are. And do you think these unconscious scientists will be able to produce the consciousness of the awakened one? It is absolutely impossible.
So don’t wait for test-tube babies to become enlightened. Don’t waste your time. You become enlightened yourself. Test-tube babies will have to work their way toward enlightenment on their own.
It is something so individual…and that is the beauty of it, that it is individual. It is not something mechanical. It cannot be produced on an assembly line; otherwise, just as Ford cars go on coming out off the assembly line – every minute one car comes out the same as the one before, the same as the one after…. Enlightenment cannot be created on an assembly line.
It is an absolutely individual growth. It is your responsibility to become enlightened or remain in darkness. That is the only area where science cannot be of any help.

Osho,
I have often heard the expression: when a woman says no, she means yes. But in this commune, it does not seem to be true. In your discourse the other day, however, it seemed that you are not against these games. Can you please comment?
I am not against any games. And it is true. This commune is going to create its own proverbs. Here yes means yes, no means no. In the old society outside, when a woman says no she means yes, because that woman is a slave. For centuries she has been taught to be shy, to be nonagressive, not to chase men.
Here, the situation is totally different. Nobody need be shy about anything. So when the woman says no, don’t try to interpret it as yes – she will give you a good punch on your nose! And when she says yes, she means it. If you can escape fast enough…it is up to you. But here, we mean what we say, and we say what we mean!
And I am perfectly in favor of all these beautiful games – men chasing women – but that has become difficult here. In the outside world when the man chases the woman, the woman runs, escapes, hides. Here, the moment a man even starts chasing, the woman catches hold of him: “There is no need, all this unnecessary huffing, puffing, no need! Why waste time in chasing? Why not do the real thing?”
So beware! In the first place, keep quiet, don’t ask.

============================================================

Osho,
I seem to have heard you say that people are attracted to war because it is exciting, whereas peace is boring. In my own experience I seem to enjoy indulging my personal dramas and traumas, and when I'm not indulging them life is a bit flat. Is it possible to be attracted to peace? Will the new humanity find peace, rather than war, exciting?
It has never happened. Man has never found peace exciting. It seems that the way man is, war certainly will remain exciting, because the peace that you know is not the real peace; it is the peace of a cemetery, not the peace of this mandir! No war is going on, everything is silent – do you think it is flat?
The new man will know this peace twenty-four hours round the clock, waking or sleeping. And the peace that is not only absence of war but a positive flowering within you, a positive wordless song within you, is totally different.
Up to now man has known peace, but that peace was only preparation for war. History can be divided into two parts: the period when people are fighting, and the period when people are exhausted, tired, ruined, preparing for another war from scratch. War or preparation for war: these are the only two periods human history has known up to now.
Peace has never been known, because peace is something which the individual has to create. War is something which the crowd, the nation, the politician, the ideologies, the churches create. Peace, each individual has to create. It will be far better to say that he has to discover it, because it has not to be created, it is already there inside you.
But you are surrounded so much by the mind and its turmoil, you never come to hear the still, small voice within you. And if you cannot hear even the still, small voice within you, how can you taste peace – which is beyond that voice – where you simply exist? There is no thought in the mind, no emotion in the heart. In that nothingness you come to know, for the first time, the taste of peace.
I am saying it from my own experience. For thirty-two years I have been in that peace, and I have not found it for a single moment flat. It is always opening new doors, new dimensions, new depths.
When for the first time you know your inner peace, you think, “This is the end.” Soon you have to change this idea, because the peace goes on growing. And the day comes when you understand that there is no end, the peace is going to become as vast as the universe itself – and the universe has no limits.
You must be feeling flat when you are not passing through some drama or trauma, because in your life what have you got? If there is nothing going on: a fight, a love affair, a marriage, a divorce, fighting for an election or going bankrupt – if all these things are not going on around you, naturally you feel flat. It seems nothing is happening, time has stopped; you feel dead.
It is a well-established fact that whenever there is war in the world, wherever it is, people look more happy, excited. They wake up early in the morning waiting for the newspaper to come. What is happening? What has happened last night? They cannot wait, they want to know it immediately.
People are carrying their transistors glued to their ears not to miss a single bit of information. Life is no longer flat, there is excitement, because every moment something new is happening – victory or defeat, something is happening. You can look forward to some news. When there is no war, then tomorrow’s newspaper will be carrying exactly the same as today’s news.
I used to live in a place…just in front of my house lived the family of a doctor. The doctor was thought to be a little crazy; still, he was a good doctor. People used to come to him, knowing perfectly well that he was a little crazy – but as far as his profession was concerned he was perfectly sane. He used to come every day in the early morning to my house, to read all the newspapers and magazines available there. He would come and ask for the latest newspaper.
One day I gave him a newspaper of the same date but from the year before. And he enjoyed it, he loved it. He said he had never expected these things to happen, because they didn’t seem to be connected with yesterday’s newspaper.
I said, “Now that I know that, every day you will be excited.”
He said, “But how did you do it?”
I said, “This newspaper is one year old.”
He said, “My God! If reading old newspapers makes you so excited, why have you been keeping it a secret from me? Sometimes I used to wonder why you go on collecting old newspapers, magazines. Now I know! Now I don’t care whether today’s newspaper comes or not. There are so many piled up in your room. I can pull one out from anywhere, and it will be exciting.”
People are excited with something that is unexpected. Politicians rule over you because they provide excitement. Wars have been condemned for centuries but nobody listens, because everybody knows that a long peace will be so flat – people will start committing suicide, there is nothing happening.
Just think of one year…no news happens. You just go on waiting and waiting and waiting. Then finally you decide to create news yourself: you commit suicide or you murder somebody. Something has to be done to break this peace.
In one of the dramas of an existentialist philosopher, a man is brought before the court because he has killed a stranger, someone whom he had never known before. He had not even seen the man’s face. The man was sitting on the beach looking at the sea, and this fellow came from behind with a big dagger and pushed it into his back.
He had never seen that man before; he did not even see him while he was murdering him. What could be the cause? – because that stranger was absolutely innocent.
The man was, of course, caught and presented before a court. The judge was also puzzled. He inquired of a few witnesses, “Is this man mad?”
They said, “No. In our neighborhood, this is the most rational and sane man.” The judge was trying to find out something in his past which could make some sense of this act which he had done.
One man said, “I remember one thing, that when his mother died, it was Sunday morning, and we were both sitting in the garden. He said, ‘I knew that old bitch was going to spoil my beautiful holy day. Now, couldn’t she have died on Friday, or Tuesday, or Monday? Why on Sunday? I was ready to go boating on the lake, and I have to cancel my whole program.’”
The neighbor said, “That day I thought this man was strange. His mother dies and he says, ‘That woman died purposely on Sunday. She was always making efforts to spoil all my happiness. Even in death she continued her old habit.’”
Another witness said, “When all the proceedings for the funeral were over, this man immediately rushed to the house of his girlfriend, and they went to see a movie. In the morning, the mother dies; by the evening, he is at a movie with his girlfriend.”
A third witness said, “That is nothing, because after the movie, he was drinking and dancing! His behavior has always been a little bizarre.”
The magistrate asked the man himself, “Do you have any explanation for these things?”
He said, “For everything that I have done I have explanations. My mother dies on Sunday morning: my Sunday, my plan to go to the lake is spoiled – is it wrong to say it clearly, rather than repress it? And anyway whether I say it or not, my mother is dead, so what difference does it make?
“And certainly I was angry. She could have died…there are seven days in the week – why choose Sunday especially? And she knew, because the previous night I had told her, ‘Tomorrow morning I am going to the lake.’ And I am absolutely certain she died on purpose because she was the only one who knew that I was going to the lake in the morning. And as I was preparing to leave, she died. You think I have to give an explanation, or does that dead woman have to give an explanation?”
The magistrate said, “Okay. About that nothing can be done; your mother is dead, she cannot be asked. It may have been just a coincidence. But does it look right to you that in the morning your mother dies and in the evening you go to a movie? And in the night you are found in a nightclub drinking, dancing – do you think it looks right?”
He said, “Absolutely right. Because now, whenever I go to a movie it will be after my mother’s death. Do you mean that for the rest of life I cannot go to a movie? Whenever I go to the nightclub and drink and dance, it will be after my mother’s death. Do you want me to commit suicide because now I cannot enjoy anything – it is after my mother’s death? And what difference does it make whether her death was ten hours ago or ten days ago, or ten years ago?”
There was great silence in the court. The man looked rational, what he was saying was meaningful.
“Now everything I am going to do is going to be after my mother’s death! What do you want me to do? Should I also die with my mother because now there is no point in living any longer; will I be a criminal if I live? If I laugh, somebody will say, ‘What? You are laughing, and your mother is dead?’ And the time factor…can you tell me what is the demarcation line? Ten hours, twelve hours, ten days, twelve days, ten years, twelve years? And what is the criterion to decide that now it is all right to dance and drink – now let my mother be dead.
“I thought that if I am to love, I have to accept the fact that my mother is dead; and then there is no point in wasting time. Moreover I had purchased those two tickets already. Wasting those two tickets over a dead person, I don’t think is sane.”
The magistrate said, “Drop all these things. You just tell me exactly why you killed that man on the sea beach. You had never known him, he had never done any harm to you. You were not even aware whom you were killing.”
The man said, “It is very simple. My life was going very flat. I used to think, ‘Once my mother is gone there will be peace.’ But once she had gone everything became flat. I would come home drunk in the middle of the night and nobody was there to nag me and instruct me as to what time to come home, what to do and what not to do. Life became flat, and I wanted some excitement. And I got it. Does it matter whom I killed?”
He said, “When I pushed the dagger into the man’s back, and a fountain of blood came out, for the first time in years I was excited: what was happening? Something new! I have never seen a fountain coming out of a man’s back. Red blood! Yes, I do not know who the man was, I have no enmity with him. I have not killed him for any reason except for my own excitement. And I got it, and since then life has been very exciting.
“I escaped, and the police chased me; finally I was caught, then I was jailed. Things started moving! And now I am standing in the court listening to all these idiots who are my neighbors. And it gives me great joy to contradict what they are saying. And you are sitting there looking so silly, and these people are saying, ‘Your Honor.’
“It is hilarious, I have never enjoyed life so much! And I am already tremendously excited waiting for the judgment, to see whether I am released, whether I am sent to a mental hospital, or I am sentenced to death, or twenty years’ imprisonment. There are so many alternatives in my mind.”
This man is you.
People are doing all kinds of things just to feel excited. And when the whole world becomes dull, starts feeling stale, flat, some politician comes as a savior to you, an Adolf Hitler. Many people in the world are waiting for another Adolf Hitler – life is becoming flat. That man made the five years from 1940 to 1945 tremendously exciting. I don’t think there has ever been such a long period so full of excitement for the whole world. Adolf Hitler should be given as many Nobel Prizes as possible for making the whole world alive, thriving, their hearts beating faster. They are still waiting.
I received – I could never have conceived it – I received a letter from the American Nazi party. Can you think that in America there is a Nazi party? I got the letter from the president of the party, and he was very angry, “Because,” he said, “you have been continually speaking against Adolf Hitler; and it hurts our religious feelings.” Even I was excited! This is really great: “religious feelings”?
And later on his letter said, “Perhaps you do not know that he was the reincarnation of the Old Testament prophet, Elijah. Soon he will come to deliver humanity from all misery and suffering.”
I can understand this man, his party. Their lives have become flat, they are ready even to make Adolf Hitler a religious prophet. They are ready to do anything, but excitement is needed. After each ten or fifteen years the flatness becomes so thick in everybody’s mind that a war becomes a certainty. Any excuse will do.
Forty years have passed since the second world war. This is the longest period. The credit does not go to you, the credit goes to the nuclear weapons, because both the parties which are capable of fighting, the Soviet Union and America, are afraid. They know perfectly well nobody is going to win, that everybody is going to be finished forever. The whole of life on the earth is going to disappear.
It does not matter who starts the war, the other party will start only ten minutes later. So anybody can start, it does not matter. The other party will be only ten minutes late, and in ten minutes you cannot be victorious. You can destroy a few cities, but you cannot be victorious. Your missiles are aiming at Moscow; their missiles are aiming at New York, Washington, San Francisco – just a push-button game.
They are frozen out of fear, that’s why forty years have passed. And I know that unless the war begins accidentally, the third world war is almost impossible. It is very close, any moment it can happen, but it will be just an accident: some technological defect, some scientist getting nagged too much by his wife, some politician losing his power, his grip, some country wanting to have the attention of the whole world, some crackpot somewhere. There are so many crackpots, and most of them are in politics.
Pots without cracks don’t go into politics; they have other, useful things to do. A crackpot is of no use. That’s why politics is the only profession in the world where no qualification is needed. Everybody is perfectly qualified.
Now there is so much power in the hands of the politicians that they themselves are afraid. They would like to win the war, but it is impossible; both the parties are equally balanced. And the war is not going to be between two countries; nuclear weapons will spread it all over the world. Perhaps within twenty-four hours all life on earth will disappear. This is frightening. That’s why the war has not happened, and perhaps may not happen. But it is always very close; anything can go wrong.
I was just talking to one journalist, and I was saying to him that you should not depend on machines. And now the whole war game is not between man and man – that is out of date – the whole war game is between technological nuclear weapons. Even the missiles which will carry the weapons will not have any pilots with them, there is no need. The missile itself can be programmed where to go, where to drop the bomb.
I was saying to him that man has become so dependent on technological machines that anything can go wrong any moment. And when I said this, the electricity went off! The journalist had nothing to say anymore. The proof was there! I said, “Now we can move onto another subject. This is finished.”
I understand that you are in a very difficult situation. You would love to live in peace, but peace seems to be flat; nothing is happening, you are almost in your grave. To avoid being in such a dead state, you go on doing something or other – falling into a love affair, chasing a man or a woman; and then the whole drama of overpowering each other, of dominating each other, fighting…. That too does not seem to be good – every night a pillow fight. It does not seem good, but excitement is there.
Every husband on his way home is thinking of excuses why he is late, figuring out where he has been, what to say, what not to say. And the woman is figuring out…she has phoned all his friends’ houses and she has collected all the information that she knows he will use for his excuses.
Yes, there is drama. You tell her, “I have been with one of my friends; we met after such a long time.” And the woman laughs, and she says, “Don’t be stupid, your friend has been here! Now I don’t think your friend is a Jesus Christ who can be in two places simultaneously.” You are caught. Every husband feels guilty, the woman is angry, he is trying to persuade her….
At least all these dramas and traumatic experiences keep you from falling into that space you call flat. But at such a cost. The peace is flat, the excitement is a torture; you are caught in a dilemma.
The reason is that you don’t know what real peace is. Just not to fight, not to get involved again with another woman, not to go to the pub and drink too much and beat others and be beaten…. You can avoid all these things. You can just close your door and sit inside your room, but you will not find peace. The question is not of the room and you, the question is of your mind.
Your mind is born out of the monkeys. Your mind is a monkey. Have you seen a monkey sitting silently? That would be a miracle. The monkey is always doing something or other – jumping from one tree to another tree in search of excitement. He is bored with peace. Even if you have not done anything, just look at the monkey and he will make faces at you. What is he doing? He is just trying to create some entertainment.
He will start running after you. If you run, then he will enjoy it very much. Great excitement, although there is no point. If you stop and turn back, the monkey will go up the tree; he does not mean business, it was just a game. He was feeling flat, you were feeling flat, and it was a good game. Both became excited.
Your mind is constantly seeking and searching for some involvement, some trouble, because the peace is really killing, poisonous.
Let me repeat: this is not the peace which I am talking about. That peace comes out of meditation, that peace comes when you come out of your mind and become centered as a witness, just watching the mind without any judgment, without any evaluation, without saying, “This is good, this is bad, this is really groovy.” If you do such things, then you have already jumped in and become identified with the monkey. The moment you say, “This is groovy,” you cannot remain outside; you are on the track again.
You have simply to be a witness, like a mirror that gives no judgment – a beautiful woman, a Cleopatra, or Mother Teresa, it makes no difference.
One journalist was asking me about Mother Teresa, and he said, “I agree with you on almost all the points, but why are you against Mother Teresa? She is a beautiful woman….” And he was shocked to think of marrying Mother Teresa. Then he understood it is not easy to use any word in front of me just like that: “She is a beautiful woman.” Then he must have remembered her face. Are you going to make love to the Nobel prize? What are you going to do with that woman? Then in his mind he must have understood that she is exactly the type of woman that Christians were burning alive in the Middle Ages – witches. She is exactly that type.
I know her. I would prefer to remain in hell for eternity than to get married to Teresa the Terrible!
But the most difficult thing in your life – which should really be the easiest – is to sit by the side of the flow of your mind. Your mind is just like a river. Thoughts and thoughts and a crowd of thoughts go on passing. You simply sit by the bank, unconcerned, just a witness, and you are in for a great surprise.
Slowly, slowly as you become more and more centered and simply a witness, thoughts start disappearing. They can exist only with your identification. You give energy to your mind. When you pull yourself out, you have stopped giving nourishment to the mind. And once there is no nourishment – thoughts are very fragile things – they start dying out.
Soon there is silence, there is peace. And this peace is not the peace of a cemetery. This peace is not dead, it is not flat. It is such a tremendous experience that once you have reached the first rung of the ladder, the ladder goes to infinity. You can go on and on discovering new layers of peace. This is the real excitement, unending excitement.
That’s the meaning of the word “ecstasy”: unending excitement. You cannot exhaust it, you cannot come to a point where you say, “There is no more to discover and I am feeling flat.” It has never happened. On my own authority I say to you, I have been going as fast as possible, deeper and deeper into silence, but there is no bottom, there is no limit.
Each moment of silence brings new fragrance. Peace brings new flowers. Nothing is said, but much is heard. Nothing is shown, but much is seen. Nobody guides you, but some magnetic force of peace itself takes you farther and farther away from the mind, from the body, from the neighbors, from the wife, from the husband. And the excitement is continuously deepening.
Unless we can create millions of people around the earth who have experienced this kind of peace, war is inevitable, because people cannot survive flat lives. It is better to go into a war and have a little excitement, although it means death.
If a man who has not known inner peace is forced to live peacefully, he will either murder or kill himself. Even that will provide some excitement. Excitement is a great nourishment, but only the right kind of excitement is nourishment. The wrong kind of excitement is poison. And up to now humanity has been dominated by the wrong kind of excitement.
You are here with me to learn a very simple thing: to enjoy peace, to enjoy silence, to enjoy something that is within you and you do not have to depend on others for. Such a peaceful man radiates peace for others too. His silence starts touching other hearts too. His silence becomes oceanic and very inviting.
That’s what I am doing here.
Last night, a very nice, juicy journalist was with me. And he was constantly asking me, “Why don’t you go out into the world to teach people meditation, silence, or whatsoever you name it?”
It was difficult for him to understand that the well never goes to the thirsty. And remember, if the well goes toward the thirsty, the thirsty will escape! Seeing a well coming toward him, he will do anything but stand there where he was standing. He is thirsty, that is true, but that does not mean that wells have to come toward him. The well has to remain where it is.
And what to say of an oceanic peace? The well is a small thing; you can miss it, you may not be able to find it. I am not a well. The whole world knows about this ocean. Few are the friends of the ocean, many are the enemies of the ocean – but on one point they all agree, that the ocean is there.
I told the journalist, “I create friends, I create enemies, but I never create a person who can ignore me. I am not ignored. And there is no difficulty; the friend and the foe are just superficially different. The friend will reach me first, and sooner or later the foe will be following. He has already become connected with me – with his hate, with his hostility. He has already married me!” It is only a question of time. He will be watching what is happening to those who are friends.
It all depends on you. If you become peaceful, silent, loving, you will create everywhere a certain area of loving energy. People will start stopping you in the street and asking you what has happened to you – it is something invisible, but very tangible. I am going to remain here. You are going to spread like waves in the ocean to the whole earth.
I am not fighting against the third world war, for the simple reason that there is only one way to fight it, and that is to create a peaceful humanity, a humanity which refuses to fight because now there is no excitement in fighting. Now there is excitement in sitting silently, doing nothing and letting the grass grow by itself. You have found real, authentic excitement. Now who cares to fight?
I am not directly a pacifist, I am not taking protest marches to Washington or Moscow. But I am creating and generating a force which can envelop the whole earth. And that will be the barrier against nuclear weapons, wars, and all kinds of stupidities.
Just recognize your responsibility. Man was never required to be so responsible as he is required to be today, because upon him rests the whole thing – of whether the earth is going to be alive, thriving, flowering, or is going to be a dead planet.

Osho,
You have spoken many times on AIDS and on the third world war, but never about both of them together. Do you think there is still a need for the third world war even if two-thirds of the world population is going to die a natural death from AIDS?
Certainly there is no need for the third world war. AIDS will do whatever the politicians want to be done by a third world war. But it is not in my hands.
Politicians don’t want to take a chance. Every day they are piling up more and more nuclear weapons. And on the other hand – you will be surprised – every nation is trying to repress information about AIDS.
Why is every nation trying to repress the information about how many people are suffering from AIDS, and how many people have been in contact with these people? The cases may not be confirmed, but they are all around, and they will be spreading.
Countries are afraid to declare that they have AIDS because it means they accept that there is homosexuality, it means they accept that all kinds of sexual perversions exist in their country, because AIDS is the climax of all perversions together. It is insulting to their ego.
But they are not realizing the fact that if you repress information about AIDS, it is going to spread faster. Perhaps they are not worried because they know that anyway the third world war is going to be there – AIDS or no AIDS. In the politician’s mind it seems that there is no way out anymore: they are geared toward the third world war.
Yes, it is a concern to me. The third world war can easily be avoided if people learn a little meditativeness. Then their whole excitement and support for war, democracy, communism, socialism, fascism – everything – disappears. They are no longer slaves of any government, any nation, any religion, any party.
And a man who is meditative, who knows his inner peace and silence, cannot be a perverted sex maniac. The experience of inner ecstasy is helpful in both ways. On the one hand, it will make you normal human beings, not perverted in any way. Secondly, it will make you capable of creating small fields of energy which will go on spreading on their own. We have to cover the whole earth with a red blanket. That will be the barrier which cannot be broken by any nuclear weapons.
But you are right. If AIDS goes on spreading the way it is spreading…. It is not only through sexual intercourse that you can get AIDS. Even by kissing you can get AIDS. There are a few tribes – old, ancient tribes living in the mountains in the Himalayas – who seem to be far more advanced as far as kissing is concerned. They laugh at the whole idea, it is so unhygienic. In each kiss the partners are exchanging millions of germs. You have heard the words “kiss of death.” Up to now it has been only words; now it is a reality.
One journalist was asking me, “Then what do you propose as a substitute, because if we stop kissing, we will feel something is missing?”
I said, “No, there is no need. Man is so inventive. You just rub noses with each other, and you will enjoy it more.” These aboriginal tribes in the Himalayas do exactly that. They don’t kiss, they simply rub noses.
But the journalist was more concerned about catching a cold than about catching AIDS, and he said, “What if one partner has a cold?”
I said, “That is such a simple thing. At the most you can catch a cold. If you don’t take any medicine your cold will go in seven days; if you take medicine your cold will go in one week. There is no problem. And it is a show of affection, intimacy, love, that you are willing to rub noses with someone who has a cold.”
But please, avoid kissing. You don’t know who has AIDS. Very few people are confirmed, because very few people go to the doctors. And those who know they have AIDS manage to bribe the doctors to keep the information secret. They know that they cannot live more than two years – that is the maximum – perhaps they will live six months, eight months.
Just think of a man – put yourself in his position – whose doctor says to him, “You have AIDS and you don’t have more than two years to live, at the maximum; most probably six months will do it.” Naturally, you don’t want people to know that you have AIDS, because it is so humiliating. AIDS simply means you are a homosexual, perverted. So you are going to bribe the doctor, “Please keep your mouth shut.”
And there is no medicine for AIDS, so the doctor cannot be of any help. And as for you, when you see that you have at the most two years, or perhaps only six months, you will try to make the best of those six months – make as much love as you can, find as many partners as possible, because life is finishing.
The people who have AIDS become more focused on sexuality because their whole life flame is going out any moment. Before it goes out…. Now they have nothing to lose, but they can give something – AIDS – to as many friends, lovers, as possible. And each person who comes in contact with these people will become a new source. Within fifteen years, the world will be covered with people who have AIDS, and it will be impossible to prevent it.
So you are right – what is the need of the third world war? The need is that the politicians don’t want to take any chance. Who knows? The medical profession may come up with some medicine. Who knows? Man may start naturally building antibodies to AIDS in his body, because this is a challenge to his whole system. Everything is possible. The body does not want to die, it creates antibodies for all kinds of sicknesses. AIDS is a new phenomenon, our bodies are not yet fully acquainted with it. Perhaps our bodies will start creating antibodies to AIDS.
So it is better, the politicians think, to let AIDS do its work – that is the work of God, the father who is in heaven, above the roof – and we should go on doing our own job of piling up nuclear weapons, so no chance is left.
They are determined, it seems, that this planet earth, which is a rare planet…. All the planets around you are dead. This is the only planet which is alive with millions of species – animals, birds, insects, fish, trees. All the planets around you are very poor. They don’t have oceans, they don’t have rivers, they don’t have trees. They are just dead stone. Nothing grows there. And your politicians are determined to make this earth the same.
This is the greatest responsibility that man has ever faced. But remember, the greater the responsibility, the greater the challenge, the greater is the possibility for you to come to your highest intelligence, potential, capabilities, creativity.
So, on the one hand, it is a very sad picture. But on the other hand, never before has humanity faced such a challenge. Who knows? This challenge may give you guts enough to do things which you always wanted to do for many lives, but went on postponing. Now there is no way to postpone – death is knocking on the door.
What do you want? To read the newspapers – or do meditation? What do you want? To go on playing cards – or do meditation?
Man has to be made aware of the great, the greatest challenge that is standing in front of us.
Politicians are trying to keep both AIDS and nuclear weapons hidden. They do not declare exactly how many nuclear weapons they have, all estimates are guesswork. And now they are trying to repress information about the disease AIDS. Their whole effort is so that you do not become aware of the challenge, because the challenge can bring a transformation in the whole of human consciousness.
I am hammering continually on these two things, AIDS and nuclear weapons, for the single reason that perhaps this is the moment when you would not like to remain asleep. This is the moment you would like to know something deeper than life and death itself. That is the world of peace. And it belongs to you, you just have to claim it.

Osho,
As women, our natural creativity is expressed through the bearing and raising of children. What happens to that energy now that that area of expression is no longer viable?
Energy is always neutral. It has no program in it. It can save or it can mar, it can make or it can destroy.
It is a great opportunity that is becoming available to women, now that they are freed from biological bondage. Of course, man has always praised them for their great creativity in having children. But what kind of children have you produced? Just look around the world: these are your children – what creativity! All the animals are doing it, perhaps better than you.
I have been in many jungles and mountains in India. I have never seen any deer which is too fat or too thin; they are all alike. They are not like man: one person is thin and one is so fat and ugly. I have watched all kinds of animals in the wild: nobody teaches them how to produce children. They don’t have any schools, no maternity homes, no guidance from anybody. So don’t take much pride in the fact that you can produce children.
Yes, man has been giving woman much juice about it: “You are a great creator because you give birth to a child.” It was really very tricky of man; it meant that the woman should continue to create children. And in poor countries it is still happening – to have a dozen children is not rare. Some women have more than one dozen. I saw one woman who had twenty children. Now her whole life is wasted. Either she is pregnant or she is raising the children. And when the child is not even six months old, she is pregnant again. She is doing a double job.
I know about a man who had uniforms for his children. I asked him, “What nonsense this is! Why do you create uniforms for your children?”
He said, “Do you know how many children I have? Fifteen. Without their wearing uniforms I cannot recognize which my child is. So the uniform helps me in two ways. I have to take the children to the school and bring them back home. It helps me to recognize my children and sort them out. It also helps me to know if somebody else’s child has not entered into my fold and my child has gone with somebody else.”
I said, “Now it is time you should stop; fifteen is too much.”
He said, “It is God and his grace. I cannot go against God.” He was a very religious Hindu. “If God wants to give birth to more children, then who am I to prevent it?”
All the religions of the world are against birth control methods, the pill. They are against abortion. It means the woman remains biologically in bondage, and her energies continue to create only mediocre people, crowds to serve in the armies, navies, air force, to be killed or to kill-at the most to be clerks, nurses, porters. What do you mean by creativity? You have created a porter. Do you feel proud? How much pride can it give to you?
Every parent should feel ashamed. You are creating like animals. Science has given you a chance today to get out of the bondage of biology-a great freedom so that sex becomes, for the first time, not a biological reproductive method; it becomes sheer play, joy.
You are asking me, if women’s energies are not poured into creating children, then what will happen to those energies? Why can’t you start…. There are thousands of ways to make this world more beautiful. Anything that makes the world more beautiful is creative. Landscape the garden around your house. Crossbreed plants; create new flowers that have never existed before. And of course, they will give new fragrances which the earth has never experienced.
And compete with men in every field. Prove to him that you are equal – not by the women’s liberation movement; prove by your actions that you are equal, perhaps superior. The women’s liberation movement is just idiotic. A few women will gather and just create anger and hatred against men, and they will all smoke continuously, and drink. And they will all become lesbians because they hate men; they cannot love men, they can only love women. It is such a perversion, a woman loving another woman.
I cannot conceive the idea of a man loving another man – and not just ordinary people: one of the popes before this pope was a homosexual. He was a bishop in Milan before he became pope. The whole of Milan knew it, because he was always hanging around with his boyfriend. And when he became pope and went to the Vatican, the boyfriend went there as his secretary. And you know secretaries are just an escape from your wife, a refuge from your wife.
If the pope is homosexual – and popes are infallible – it creates great suspicion, because Jesus was also hanging out with twelve boys. It may be something coming down from Jesus himself.
Monks are well-known homosexuals, and nuns are lesbians; but this is out of necessity. The monks have to live together in a monastery; the nuns have to live in a nunnery, separate – they cannot meet. Naturally, their sexuality starts taking some other forms. And I think it is intelligent, it is not unintelligent: if you cannot get the food you like, then you have to like the food you get. This is simple intelligence.
In jungles animals are never homosexuals, never. But in zoos they become homosexuals. When I came to know about this, I started being really concerned about humanity: is it a zoo?
This women’s liberation movement has only turned women into lesbians. It has created hate toward men, but this is not going to give you equality. Equality has to be earned, it has to be deserved. So since the pill has released you from the bondage of biology, now you are free to use your energy. And a woman has a more delicate body, a more flexible body. She can become a better dancer than any man can ever manage. The man, howsoever trained, is stiff. It is not his fault, his physiology is stiff. Women can become the best dancers in the world.
A woman has a great imagination, but her imagination has remained confined to the home. The reason was children – children kept her in the home, and for millions of years, so it became almost second nature. Otherwise, I don’t see that there is any natural necessity for woman to confine her imagination within the walls of her home.
The stars belong to her as much as to any man. The sunrise and sunset – they are also her possessions. She has to spread her wings, her consciousness. She has to widen her vision, imagination, dreaming, beyond children. Right now, the woman goes on thinking about the child, “He should become a doctor, he should become an engineer, he should become this and that.”
Now the woman has to become what she used to project through the child. Become a doctor, become an engineer, become a pilot. What you imagined through the child…Why not directly encounter reality, and be yourself what you wanted your child to be? I don’t see that there is any problem.
Women are in many ways superior to men, and their superiority can be used for new dimensions of creativity. An experienced mother knows whether there is a boy or a girl in her womb. How does she come to know? Because the boy starts kicking, and the girl never does that. The girl remains more centered, the boy is already freaking out. And you can see in children – girls will be sitting with their dolls in a corner silently enjoying their game, and boys will be creating all kinds of nuisance all over the neighborhood.
What man has created is nothing if the woman comes into the field with her centeredness, with her roundedness, with her contentment, with her love. So move in any direction that feels fulfilling to you.
The day women start creating all kinds of things that men have been creating up to now…. I say to you, there is no need to ask for equality, because women are the superior sex – naturally, because nature has made the woman to create children. Man’s function in creating children is negligible. Any syringe can do what he is doing, just a plastic syringe, use it and throw it out.
Women are more resistant to diseases. From the very beginning, nature has an immense balancing power. If one hundred girls are born, then one hundred and fifteen boys are born, because by the time they reach marriageable age, fifteen boys will have disappeared. They are weaker – any sickness, any disease…. But those hundred girls will be there, so by the marriageable age the balance is equal; those fifteen extras are gone.
If nature were producing exactly the same number of girls and boys, there would be great difficulty. Soon the population of women would have gone far beyond the population of men. But nature has its own ways of balancing. Knowing that man has a much weaker body, in the sense that it cannot resist and fight with sickness, it creates fifteen extras.
The woman lives longer than the man – five years longer – in every country, in every race. And the woman suffers much, but still she survives. Man cannot survive as much suffering as woman manages to. So don’t be worried about your energies. You have more energy than men.
Man started suppressing women only because he felt inferior. His inferiority complex was the cause of his forcing women to become inferior, so he could cover up his wound and feel superior. It is stupid.
And now because biology no longer has power over women, don’t waste your energy in being a lesbian. This is the time for you to be creative in every field, and you will be able to have your Picassos, your Mozarts, your Van Goghs, your Shakespeares. There is no reason why not. Perhaps a little better, a little softer, and your sculpture is certainly going to be more alive.
There is only one thing in which you will not find yourself equal to men – and please remember, don’t try to be equal in that area – that is muscles. Let men be superior as far as muscles are concerned, because if women start going to gymnasiums and creating muscular bodies, that will be the worst day in the history of humanity.
Just closing my eyes…if I see thousands of muscular women sitting here I am not going to come again!
And there is a tendency to imitate. You know that man has imitated you; otherwise, what is the need to shave his beard and his mustache? It seems as though he wants to look as beautiful as a woman, but he forgets completely that to a woman, a man looks more beautiful with a beautiful beard and mustache. He is thinking from a man’s side, that a woman looks beautiful. Just think of it the other way: if a woman grows a beard and a mustache – do you think she is going to find a man to chase her?
But that’s what man has done, imitate. A simple argument, but without understanding. He feels that the woman is beautiful, and as it is so easy to remove the mustache and the beard, why not be as beautiful as the woman? He forgets the fact that for the woman you are losing much attraction.
Just look at my beard! I don’t think any of my sannyasins would like my beard to be shaved. Perhaps many of my women sannyasins are here just because of my gray beard. And anyway, whether I am saved spiritually or not, I am not going to shave my beard!

Osho,
In a recent interview, I asked an Italian philosopher whether the American-Russian summit on nuclear weapons will ever come to an agreement. He said, “When two contenders are trying to screw each other, they will never come to any conclusion.” And he added, “What is missing is a third party, something above the two contenders, a religious authority like there was in the past, to arbitrate the question. But in these days there is nothing like this. Unfortunately, nobody will listen to the pope at all.”
If you were the authority for one day, the third party above all, what would you say to Russia and America?
The first thing: I don’t agree with the idea that these two contending parties, the Soviet Union and America, are not going to come to an agreement. They are bound to come to an agreement, because the forces are equal and war is meaningless.
The only meaning of war is if someone becomes victorious and someone is defeated. That’s how wars have always been. But if a war is going to destroy the whole globe, and both the forces are equally balanced, and both the forces are aware of the fact that after the war there will be nobody even to write the history – who won the war, who was defeated in the war…. Both the contenders will disappear.
This fact is preventing them from clashing. And this fact will become more and more powerful, because they are both piling up more and more nuclear weapons. The more nuclear weapons there are, the less is the possibility of a third world war.
So first, I do not agree that they are not capable of coming to an agreement. In fact, without it being said, the agreement is already there. One thing both the parties know: that war is going to destroy all. War for the first time in history has become meaningless. So what the Italian philosopher suggested is wrong.
Secondly, he suggested that someone is needed, a third party more powerful than both; then there is a possibility of agreement. But the third party – if it is more powerful than both, why should it bother about their agreement? It should rule over both. What is the point of their agreement or non-agreement? If China becomes the third party, more powerful than both, then certainly China will rule over Russia and America. In the world of politics, “might is right.” So on that point also he is wrong.
And on the third point, that if the third party is religious as it was in the past, a pope…. But do you think wars were not happening in the past? Popes themselves were involved in wars, crusades against the heretics, non-Christians, Mohammedans, Jews. The whole history of the popes is the history of bloodshed, burning people alive, destroying cities, putting cities on fire. Which pope has been able to prevent a war? And you say, “Unfortunately, nobody listens to the pope.”
And lastly, you ask me if I am given the chance one day, what kind of agreement I would like to have between the Soviet Union and America. One day is too long; I do not need to do that much work, and don’t think I cannot manage it with just one-and-a-half hours.
It is so simple! Just take all their nuclear weapons and drown them in the Pacific Ocean. Whoever named it Pacific perhaps was thinking of this time, that one day the Pacific will bring peace. There is no need for any agreement. Just take all their nuclear weapons – and that can be done easily within one-and-a-half hours. I can order them, “Drown your nuclear weapons in the Pacific.”
And as far as little wars are concerned, you can go on playing the game, there is no problem. Man needs to fight once in a while; till the whole of humanity becomes meditative he will need to. So with old methods, the methods that were used before the first world war, you can continue to play the game. It is just football, it is not much of a problem.
To me, it is so simple. There is no need for any agreement, and agreement is not possible. And you are giving me only twenty-four hours. An agreement between communism and capitalism in twenty-four hours is impossible. It is not possible even in twenty-four centuries. So what will I do? I don’t care about their agreement. And why should they agree? If Russia feels good with communism, let them feel good. They have the right. If America feels good with capitalism, let them enjoy capitalism. There is nothing wrong in it. But one thing I will do immediately and quickly: destroy their nuclear weapons; then you have castrated both.
Have you seen a bull? And have you watched? You cannot force the bull to pull your cart; first you have to castrate him. And the castrated bull is no longer the same animal.
In India the bull is worshipped as a symbol of the Lord Shiva by the devotees. Those bulls are really worth seeing – their strength, their pride, the way they walk. Particularly in Benares, which is the city of the Lord Shiva – he founded it. According to Hindu mythology, Benares is the oldest city in the world. And that looks right; it is so rotten, it must be the oldest.
But the greatest joy in Benares is to see the bulls. They will be resting in the middle of the street: you go on honking your horn, and the bull will not even look at you. The question of his going away does not arise. And don’t disturb him, because he is powerful enough to upturn your car and kill you. But after castration the same bull goes on pulling your bullock carts.
So what I will do – and it is a simple operation – I will castrate America and Russia. And castration means take all their nuclear weapons away from them and throw them in the Pacific. And close the Pacific to all ships passing through, because that could be dangerous. Although the Pacific is five miles deep, in any accident – if a ship drowns and hits a nuclear weapon – there will be an explosion immediately. So close the Pacific to travelers.
That I can do within one-and-a-half hours. And more I don’t want because of my bladder. Okay?

============================================================

Osho,
Since you have become available to us in this earthly, everyday way, I have been amazed at the amount of fear I feel with you so close. It makes me want to hide from you. I love you so much, and I don't understand this fear. Can you explain?
Love is always followed by the shadow of fear. The reason is, love is almost a death. Your old self, your old personality dies, and you are born again. Love is a death and a resurrection. Love is a cross. Jesus dies on it, and Christ is born on it.
That’s why followers, disciples have always wanted their masters to be prophets, messiahs, gods, far away from themselves – for many reasons. This was one of the most significant reasons: that you could adore your master but you could not love him. And what is adoration without love? It is absolutely meaningless.
Adoration without love is a body without a heart beating in it. It is a corpse.
Your prophets, your messiahs, your reincarnations of God, they also wanted to keep you as far away from themselves as possible because they had to hide their own secrets from you. For example, scientifically nobody can be celibate, and they were all pretending to be celibate. They were fulfilling your desire that they should be superhuman – and nobody is superhuman. A distance was needed so you would never come to know their reality.
Mahavira sits on a high, very high – pedestal. You cannot reach him. Of course you will never know whether he perspires or not. To keep the story going that tirthankaras – the prophets of Jainas – do not perspire, it is certainly necessary to keep a certain distance.
When I am sitting here, I don’t know whether you perspire or not. But when I came to your disco I was really surprised. The smoke of the cigarettes…I never feel it here. And, my God, the way you perspire! I was thinking that my disciples had stopped perspiring!
Of course, I myself rarely perspire, because moving from one air-conditioned place to another air-conditioned place in an air-conditioned limousine, there is no chance for me to perspire. But once in a while the electricity fails, the compressor in the car stops functioning – then I know certainly that I am not a prophet. I perspire just like you, and I am fortunate that I perspire just like every human being, because I don’t want to be made of plastic. My skin is as real as yours. If Mahavira did not perspire, the only possibility is that he had a plastic body without any pores.
Perspiration is absolutely natural. It helps you to keep your temperature always the same. When it is hot, your perspiration glands of which there are seven million, all over your body, start releasing small drops of water. The heat evaporates that water; it becomes engaged in evaporating the water and leaves you alone. It keeps your temperature the same; otherwise, without perspiration your temperature would be the same as the temperature outside. Soon you would burst – any moment.
For centuries it has been a good contract – not made knowingly, but made certainly by your unconscious mind, and your prophets and messiahs and tirthankaras, avatars – that a distance is needed. So your prophet is always something so far away from you, you need not be afraid. You can adore, you can love, you can play whatsoever mind games you want to play with him: he is beyond your grasp.
I am totally different. If you say you love me, I can come down and catch hold of you wherever you are. I will not wait. Somebody loves me – and you say you love me deeply; I will chase you to the very end of the sky. And particularly more so, because for two months I have been celibate. So your fear is right!
And you are hiding? That is the whole game of love. You are not hiding out of fear. Out of the corners of your eyes you are waiting to be found. Just the human, purely human joy of being found, somebody searching for you, chasing, and you are hiding…. It is not out of fear that you are hiding. It is out of love, and love makes you afraid because it brings you to a point where you have to drop your ego. That is a death. And only after the death of the ego will you know the real taste of love – never before it.
Please, come out of your hiding. I am a lazy man – you may go on waiting in your hiding place, and I may never come. Anyway I don’t know your address, your name. You have to be a little more daring. So go to the pub, have some strong drinks; the fear will disappear, and you will come rushing toward me like a bull. If anybody is to be afraid, it is me!

Osho,
Why are so many of your sannyasins German?
The whole credit goes to Adolf Hitler. Adolf Hitler led the strong German spirit – particularly the youth – into such a hell, into such suffering and misery, into such utter failure, that the German mind since then has been searching for somebody who is just the opposite of Adolf Hitler.
They have found the anti-Adolf Hitler in me.
It is not just a coincidence. Nature follows certain laws. If the second world war was a long nightmare, the reason was that the Germans followed a man who was giving them hope, the promise of a better world. And by the end of his life Adolf Hitler started proclaiming himself the reincarnation of the Old Testament prophet, Elijah. He was not only a political leader, he was a religious prophet; and Nazism was not only a political creed, but a new religion preparing the way for the superman to come.
You have been cheated, deceived. Now for centuries the spirit of German youth is not going to forget or forgive Adolf Hitler. They want someone who is just the opposite of Adolf Hitler. I am not a prophet. I am not a reincarnation of the Old Testament prophet Elijah. My foot! I don’t care a bit about these Old Testament prophets – most of them are idiots, fanatics. The German youth finds in me a friend, not a leader. They are fed up with leaders.
I am not giving you any promises for the future. My insistence is on the present. This moment live, love, laugh, but don’t wait for tomorrow.
Adolf Hitler was saying to the German youth, “Sacrifice your present, your youth, your love, your mother, your father, your wife, your beloved, your friends, for a better Germany to be born – a Germany which will be ruling over the whole world.”
German youth is completely finished with all kinds of promises. They are no longer interested in the future, because in the name of the future they have been exploited.
With me, they find a totally different type of man, who gives no hope, no promise, no certainty for tomorrow, but only says, this moment is all that you have got. And never sacrifice this moment for anything, whatsoever it is – not even for God.
I teach you how to live! Adolf Hitler was teaching you how to die for the fatherland, for Nazism, for the leader, Adolf Hitler, for the future generations who will rule over the world. And I am saying, drop the very idea of future. Future generations will take care of themselves. Don’t you stupidly sacrifice yourself for future generations – future generations will have their own present.
But this foolish idea is very ancient. Your parents sacrificed their love, their life, their joy, their pleasure, their holidays – everything – for you. And you are sacrificing everything for your children, and your parents’ parents were doing the same.
Do you see the logic of it? Every generation is sacrificing for another generation, and that generation will sacrifice for another generation. Nobody is living. Nobody has lived up to now.
They were all great martyrs. With beautiful phrasing you can hide the reality of a thing. You sacrifice – it is your duty – for your children. Don’t you want your children to be happy? Don’t you want your children to be healthy? Don’t you want your children to be cultured? Obviously, you say yes, but you should say, “The same was said to our parents. They sacrificed themselves; they never lived. They sacrificed for us to live and love, and now you are telling us not to live but to sacrifice again.”
It is a very tricky game of postponing your life and love and joy and bliss and dance. And for centuries man has done that, with all good intentions. But the way to hell is paved with good intentions.
I am telling you that you are here to enjoy yourself. If you enjoy your children, play with them, teach them, but don’t sacrifice for them! Remember, your sacrifice makes you resentful of your children, and your resentfulness creates anger, rebellion in your children against you. No boy can ever forgive his father, no girl can ever forgive her mother. What kind of a society have you created?
Sacrifice is a dirty word. Drop it from your vocabulary.
Yes, if you love your children, and if you enjoy your children, do whatsoever you want to do. It is not a sacrifice, it is not duty; it is love, and out of love you can never feel resentful. And if it is out of love, your children cannot be, deep down, angry against you. These so-called beautiful words – sacrifice, duty, responsibility to the nation, to the religion, to the culture, to the civilization – are all ugly.
German youth is more attracted toward me for the simple reason that I am teaching just the opposite of what they have suffered at the hands of Adolf Hitler. Adolf Hitler has paved the way for me. Nobody can prevent me from taking over Germany.
The German government is doing everything so that I cannot enter Germany. That is enough indication that the paranoia and fear have already reached into the hearts of those who are holding the power.
They have put a few cases against me. I have never been in Germany – I was really amazed. How can I commit any crime? – I have never been there. But they have put cases against me for two reasons. They can refuse entry to a man who is under litigation. Or they can let you enter and then imprison you because so many cases are against you; you cannot leave the country until all the litigations are over.
I rejoice at their fear. Whenever a government becomes afraid of me, it brings great joy to my heart. That means my work is happening. The governors, the presidents are somehow trembling within. To hide that trembling they will do all kinds of things.
But whatever you do, your edifice is crumbling. The fear is not coming because of me, the fear is in you.
And it is a strange experience…. For example, here in Oregon we are such a small commune, but we are not afraid of the Oregonians. We are not frightened by the vast numbers of them-and they are trembling with fear, trying in every way to prepare themselves. They have kept their army on alert. For this small commune you need the army to be on alert? They have told their army that any moment they might be ordered to reach Rajneeshpuram within three hours.
We have not done any harm to anybody. In the four years we have been here, we have done great service to this desert, to Oregon. We have made Oregon’s name world-famous. Otherwise, I myself had never heard the name. But now, all around the world Oregon has become the focus; they should be grateful to us. And we have converted their desert into an oasis, full of laughter, love, dance, song, music. No desert is so fortunate as this desert we have turned into an oasis! They should be grateful.
For fifty years this land was for sale and there was nobody to purchase it. Who purchases deserts? And what are you going to do with a desert? And not a small one – one hundred and twenty-six square miles! Just to put a fence around it means thousands of dollars.
They are frightened. The fear comes from the fact that if the people of Oregon become acquainted with us, they will forget the idea, “It is better to be dead than red.” They will change it to the idea, “It is better to be red than dead.” This is the fear.
Why is the German government afraid of me? Why does the German parliament continuously argue about me? I am nobody – not a politician, no power in my hands. Why should I be discussed in the parliaments of Holland, Germany, England, America? It seems to be simply strange.
But when one is in paranoia, afraid…. The greatest fear comes when your youth starts moving in another direction; that means you are losing your grip on the future. The youth are the future, and if the youth are moving in some direction, certainly their children will move with their parents, and the old generation will be left behind in their graveyards. It is a real fear. The youth are the life of a land, and when life is slipping out of your hands, great fear arises.
But nothing can prevent existence from following its fundamental laws. After Adolf Hitler, I am absolutely needed in Germany! The wound that Adolf Hitler has left behind, nobody else can heal. My love, my people and their love, can heal the wound very easily.
In Germany we have many communes, and those are the only places where you will see people laughing, enjoying, dancing, singing. Every day, thousands of non-sannyasins are coming to our German discos. It became a problem to accommodate so many people. People are waiting outside the discos in line, so when the first group leaves they can enter.
No church can claim that there is a line outside waiting! Naturally the church is afraid, the government is afraid. What is going to happen to these people? And they cannot understand either your way of life or your freedom, or your thoughts, or your spontaneity. You are the strangest people they have come across.
Yes, Germans are one of the biggest groups among my sannyasins, and every day more and more Germans are turning toward me. I can give you the guarantee that Germany cannot remain anything other than a land of sannyasins – and that will be the absolutely certain prevention of any other Adolf Hitler happening.
They have suffered so much, they need a little relaxation. They have been in such a mental torture, they need some peace of mind. Their political leaders cannot give it to them. Their religious leaders cannot give it to them. Naturally, they have started seeking, and they have found me. I can give them everything that Adolf Hitler has destroyed in the German spirit.
The German spirit is in ruins. We can again make it a beautiful home where you can live, love, dance, sing. And Germans are capable people, strong people. If they could stand alone, against the whole world and maintain that stand for five years, continuously victorious, they can do the same for our vision of the world. Their energy, their strength can be used for creative purposes.
Adolf Hitler took advantage of their strength. That’s why, fed up with the politicians and the priests of their land, they have joined hands with me. And I am only a friend. I do not claim any superiority over you, and that’s what the German spirit needs.
It needs love, it needs friendship, it needs meditation, it needs silence. It needs to understand poetry, painting, architecture. It needs to understand jokes.
It is said that if you tell a joke to an Englishman, he laughs twice: first, when you tell it, out of politeness, not to be rude to you; and second, in the middle of the night when he gets the point. The German laughs only once. He never comes to understand the point. He laughs because others are laughing, so there must be something in it.
And never tell a joke to a Jew, because he will not laugh; on the contrary, he will say, “This is an old joke, and moreover you are telling it all wrong!”
Perhaps for the first time in their history, Germans who have been sannyasins have been able to understand a joke. And I am going to fill the whole of Germany with beautiful jokes. Such a powerful nation needs some dimension of creativity to put its power, its intelligence into. It does not deserve Adolf Hitlers.
There will be many Germans here. Remember, to prevent Germany again falling into the same ditch…it fell into one in the first world war, it fell into it again in the second world war. And Germany still has American soldiers and American missiles; they can be forced into another ditch, and that will be the end of the whole of humanity.
Throw out the Bibles and read joke books. Tell the Americans to leave with all their missiles. Tell them, “We are not going to need them, and we are not going to sacrifice ourselves for any nonsense, any fatherland.”
Germany is the only country which calls itself “fatherland.” What a male chauvinist mind! All countries of the world are called “motherland,” but Germans could not call their country motherland – it looks as if you are calling your country by the name of the weaker sex. Fatherland seems to be right.
Please, start dropping the idea of fatherland. Make Germany a motherland. Give it more feminine qualities, take away its male chauvinistic ideas. And my sannyasins are capable of doing it. Don’t just be satisfied with yourself that you are happy, celebrating, for the simple reason that the more you spread your celebration, the more you rejoice. The more you shower blessings on others, the more blessed you become.

Osho,
I heard that some of the people that were named on last year's enlightenment list, which you subsequently declared to be a joke, still believe themselves to be enlightened, and have received a certificate to prove it. They say that you said it was a joke only out of your compassion for us unenlightened souls, to spare us from greed and jealousy. Can you please comment?
Be compassionate to those enlightened people, because never in the world have certificates been issued for enlightenment. If they had any intelligence, they would have immediately returned the certificate.
Certificate for enlightenment? I don’t have any certificate. It seems I am the most unenlightened person here: no degrees from your university, no certificate for enlightenment. Sometimes I start thinking, “What the hell am I doing here? With so many enlightened people….”
It was a joke, and those who are still clinging to those certificates are poor souls; just have compassion on them. It is not that I have called it a joke so that those who are not included in the lists will be able to drop jealousy, competitiveness, or an inferiority complex because “somebody else has become enlightened and I am still a camel.”
Don’t be worried. This is a caravan of camels!
And whenever, once in a while, a camel turns into a lion, I whisper in his ear, “Keep quiet. Don’t start roaring, because the camels are too many: they will simply kill you. They will not tolerate such a nuisance.” And whenever a lion changes into a child, then naturally for his protection I have to tell him, “Now you are a child – vulnerable, open, keep it a secret hidden deep within you.”
Certificates have been given to the camels so they can enjoy their camelhood without any inferiority complex. I love jokes. There is no need to be worried. If they are going all around with their certificates, just have a good laugh with them. Pat their backs, tell them, “Boy, you are doing well, just go on. You have received the certificate; sooner or later enlightenment will also come.”

Osho,
When you were testing your enlightenment by smoking, drinking alcohol, and having sex, did you try eating fish and meat? Does a vegetarian diet have a real value for our consciousness, or is it optional, like smoking?
It is not optional. Before enlightenment, it makes you gross, destroys your sensitivity, does not allow you to feel the life that surrounds you. It keeps you blind to the fact that just for your taste, you are killing living beings. Their bodies may be different, but their spirits are not different from yours.
Just think of cannibals. Has any cannibal ever become enlightened? Fortunately, it has not happened. If it had happened, the cannibals would have eaten that enlightened man first, just to have a little taste of enlightenment.
There is not much difference between cannibals and the people who eat meat and fish; they are all killing living beings. And the person who can kill should not expect his heart to become compassionate, full of love.
So before enlightenment, eating meat will prevent you from experiencing the light, experiencing your being. It is not optional.
After enlightenment, it is optional, but no enlightened person can eat meat and fish. Not that by eating meat and fish his enlightenment is going to disappear – enlightenment cannot disappear, whatever you do. But the enlightened person becomes so sensitive, so aesthetic, that the very idea of killing somebody just for the few buds on your tongue is simply idiotic.
Before enlightenment it is absolutely not optional. After enlightenment, it is optional, but no enlightened person can manage to eat meat or fish. I have tried, but I could not succeed. Fish…I cannot even stand its smell. To think of myself, even in imagination, eating fish, seems to be absolutely impossible. Meat has been placed before me, but I could not touch it. The very idea that life has been destroyed…. And enlightenment is all for life; it cannot accept death just to have a little taste. So it is optional but impossible.
I know many of you are brought up in families where meat and fish are normal, routine. You have been conditioned from your very birth to think that God created all these animals for you to eat. And I don’t know why He created you – for the animals to eat?
Gurdjieff jokingly has proposed a theory – because Mohammedans, Christians, Jews, all believe God created animals for man to eat. The problem I posed to you was also put before Gurdjieff, that if everything is food for somebody else – one animal eats another animal, that animal is eaten by another animal, and so on and so forth – finally there is man. For whom is he food? Or is he an exception?
Gurdjieff was a remarkable man. He said, “Man is also food. He is eaten by the moon.”
His disciples could not think what he was talking about, but he had many proofs in his favor. More people go mad on the full-moon night, than on any other night. More people commit suicide on the full-moon night than on any other night. More people commit murder on the full-moon night than on any other night. More people have become enlightened on the full-moon night than on any other night.
There seems to be some reason behind it. On the full-moon night, man’s psychology, his body, are all affected by the moon. The people who commit suicide…perhaps the moon has better ways of finding its food than you have.
The moon need not come to you with a gun or with an arrow, but in a subtle way its rays come as death to many people, through suicide, murder. Those who somehow escape become mad. And enlightenment is the ultimate death, because the body will be dissolved and the soul will never be reincarnated into any other body. The moon has eaten the enlightened man completely, not leaving even a trace behind.
Gurdjieff was simply joking, but he made it very clear that you should not think yourself exceptional. Otherwise, when you kill a lion, it is a game. And when a lion kills you, then? Nobody calls it a game. In a game both parties are equal. Sometimes one party is victorious, sometimes the other party is victorious, but the game remains a game. When man kills animals, it is a game. When animals manage somehow to kill a man, this is disaster.
You have been brought up in families where you never gave a single thought to what you were eating. Whatever you were given from the beginning, you accepted. You became accustomed to it. That is one of the reasons why the greatest number of enlightened people happened in India, because that is the only country which is vegetarian. In India also there are non-vegetarians, but from non-vegetarians not a single man has become enlightened.
The case is similar in the West. It hurts your conditioning, but the truth is that Moses, Elijah, Jesus, are nothing compared to Gautam Buddha, Vardhaman, Mahavira, Shankara, Nagarjuna-no, just nothing. Their flowering, their height…. The distance between Jesus and Gautam Buddha is so big for the simple reason that these people – Jesus, Moses, Elijah – are all gross, they are not sensitive enough to become enlightened. And because they could not become enlightened, they could not preach vegetarianism to their following. If they had become enlightened, the first thing to teach to their followers would have been vegetarianism.
Smoking is a different matter. It does not kill anybody. At the most it can take two or three years off your life. But it is your life, you are not killing anybody else. You are simply settling for seventy years instead of seventy-three. This is purely your personal business. Enlightenment cannot be affected by taking the smoke in and throwing it out. It is just silly, it is nothing like sin.
Alcohol can disturb before enlightenment, because it can make you more unconscious – that’s its whole purpose. Your consciousness is burdened so much with anxieties, worries, anguish, that you take a drink and feel good because your consciousness goes to sleep. Hence, before enlightenment, any kind of intoxicant is absolutely to be dropped. It affects your consciousness and drags it downward toward darker realms of unconsciousness. And the whole effort of the seeker is to pull the darker parts out into the light, so this is just the reverse process.
But after enlightenment you are free. There is no problem; now no intoxicant can make your consciousness drop from the height it has reached. You can enjoy intoxicants if you like, there is no danger. But ordinarily, all the enlightened people in the past have not used intoxicants after their enlightenment.
Gautam Buddha was asked once, “Do you think taking something alcoholic would be a disturbance to your achievement?”
He said, “No, but if I start drinking, the problem is for my followers who are not enlightened. Seeing me drink, they will say, ‘Aha! Isn’t it groovy to be a follower of Gautam Buddha?’” But I don’t want you to remain in darkness about anything. Gautam Buddha was trying to keep his followers in ignorance, howsoever compassionate his act. But keeping anybody in ignorance I cannot accept as compassion.
So I want to tell you that after enlightenment one can drink any alcoholic beverage. But there is no need, because the enlightened one has no tensions, no anxiety. He has nothing to drown in alcohol, so there is no need for him. But just to be a good companion to you, he can drink a little bit once in a while. That will keep him more human, and that will give you more hope! It will destroy the distance between the enlightened and the unenlightened. And that is my greatest effort – to destroy any distance between the enlightened and the unenlightened.
Of course, there is some existential difference which I cannot destroy. But this is not the existential difference – that you smoke and I don’t smoke, that you drink and I don’t drink. This is not existential. The existential difference is very small, and that is: I am awake and you are asleep. It is not much, because I am just sitting on the same bed where you are asleep. Just a little effort will make you awake.
Your sleep gives a guarantee: anybody who is capable of sleeping is capable of awakening, they come together. So what is the fuss about? Take your time. Whenever you want to wake up, wake. There is no hurry, you have the whole eternity available to you. Yes, I may not be there to wake you up, that is the only unfortunate thing about it. But somebody else….
One day you are going to be awake. If you love me, you would like me to wake you up. That is the only real indication of your love. If your love is just a word, you will go on sleeping and snoring. And you can talk in sleep. I can hear your snoring, and I can see you asleep, and still you are bubbling, “I love you, Osho.”
If you really love me, then wake up, because only in your awakened state can we have a communion, a feeling of oneness – not just a feeling, but really a melting into each other.
You have mentioned sex too. Biologically, sex is natural. It is not a hindrance to enlightenment. It is just like eating food, drinking water, breathing the air in and out, waking up in the morning, going to sleep in the night. Your digested food becomes your blood, your semen. It is a natural phenomenon.
Sex in itself is not a barrier to enlightenment, but all the religions have made it a barrier by repressing it. It is not sex that is the barrier, it is perverted sex that becomes the barrier. Homosexuality is a barrier, lesbianism is a barrier.
But because all your religions have been teaching you to be celibate if you want to attain to God, self-realization, liberation, enlightenment – whatsoever their name is for the ultimate experience – then celibacy has been taught to be the basic requirement. It is that idea of celibacy which has driven people into all kinds of perversions.
Celibacy has led humanity to the perfect perversion, AIDS. This is a religious disease. This is the blessing your popes and your shankaracharyas and your imams have given to you.
Certainly whenever nature is not allowed to be natural, it takes you off the route of your growth, you start growing in a different direction. Enlightenment is your natural growth. The more natural you are, the easier the growth. Sex is not a problem; celibacy is.
Before enlightenment, enjoy sex as much as you can because after enlightenment there will not be any sex at all. So do your best and be quick! Life is short, who knows? Tomorrow you may become enlightened. After enlightenment, love is the reality. Sex becomes just a past thing; you are out of the bondage of biology.
So please, don’t call your sex “making love.” It is not making love. Only when you are enlightened is it possible to make love, because then it is no longer a biological necessity, but just beautiful fun; you can enjoy it. And the enlightened person can enjoy it more than anybody else. He enjoys everything more than anybody else. His capacity to enjoy is tremendous. But there is no necessity. If he chooses not to play tennis, there is no biological necessity. If he chooses not to play football, existence is not going to ask him, “Why are you not playing football?” It is simply up to him.
Making love is simply a game between two body energies. If you like the game, and likings differ – if you like the game, play it, and play it the best you can. If you don’t like the game, there is no necessity, and then celibacy is natural.
After enlightenment, sex is no longer a need, but you have all the mechanism: the whole body of a woman or a man. You are still eating, you are still drinking. You are still creating the energy that used to become sex when you were unenlightened. You can use that energy in making love, or in painting, or in creating poetry, or in dancing. And if you don’t want to do anything with the energy, a great change in your chemistry and biology happens. You don’t create that energy anymore if you don’t use it. But then remember, you will become fatter.
You can see in India, sannyasins…. Muktananda’s master – perhaps you have seen his picture. I don’t think anybody in the whole world can compete with that man as far as his belly is concerned. It is almost as high as Everest. It was so difficult for Nityananda, Muktananda’s master, to sit – his belly was so big. He was always lying down, and you could see the great slope!
Now the energy accumulates. It is better to use it. This is ugly! An enlightened person should become more beautiful, nicer, more proportionate. But the idea that you have to be celibate creates people like Nityananda. And after a certain point….
For example, Nityananda, even if I had met him and told him…he died before I reached his place. He did well; otherwise I was going to tell him, “Your belly looks like a very foolish thing, attached to a man who is enlightened. Why don’t you make love?”
But I think he would be incapable of making love – the belly would keep the woman miles away! I cannot imagine…. I have looked into the ancientmost scriptures on sexology, Vatsyayana’s Sutras. He describes all the positions, eighty-four positions of making love; there is not a single exercise applicable to Nityananda. Perhaps Vatsyayana never came across such a personality.
I have looked into the second great treatise on sex written by Pundit Koka. I think sometimes that Coca-Cola must be some relation to Pundit Koka; perhaps Cola was his girlfriend. And they both together have created such a juicy thing….
The Coca-Cola company does not reveal its secrets to anybody. They are preserved in Switzerland in a bank, locked. The company is not ready for any price to sell the secret of the drink. It is ready to lose great markets. For example, in India Coca-Cola became prohibited for the simple reason that the government wanted to know the formula, how it is made – “because unless the Indian medical board passes it, we don’t know what you are supplying.” But the company refused. The company said, “We never give our formula to anybody. We are ready to get out of your market.” And since then in India, they have been trying, making many cold drinks, but nothing comes close to Coca-Cola. It cannot, it has a very ancient source.
I looked in Pundit Koka’s book of exercises. He is certainly far more advanced than Vatsyayana, because Vatsyayana is three thousand years old; Coca-Cola is only one thousand years old. The name of the wife or the girlfriend is not known. Just the male chauvinist world – the man gives his name to his wife. Why can’t it be vice versa, that the wife gives her name to the man? No man will be ready for that.
I have searched Pundit Koka’s book of sexual exercises in every detail. He has more postures, but still nothing for Nityananda. The belly is so big that it seems almost impossible to reach the woman. Before it happens to you, don’t accumulate energy. It is good that the energy remains flowing, that it remains fresh, it remains young. Your sex energy becoming stale is dangerous; it will create a certain staleness in all dimensions of your life.
Sex is perfect, no celibacy is needed before enlightenment. After enlightenment sex disappears, giving place to love – a far more delicate phenomenon. You can have as much fun as you like, in no way can it disturb your enlightenment. It is something bodily, chemical, physiological. How can it affect your consciousness?
The enlightened man can make love, and while he is making love he is still centered in his being. He is just a witness, he is seeing himself and the woman making love; he is a third party. And this is what I mean when I say the enlightened man transcends sex, because he becomes a third party. He can see his own body and the body of his woman completely as a witness. His witnessing is not disturbed by anything.

Osho,
Were you always self-sufficient even as a child? Did you never need cuddling or hugging? Was your body free of this desire?
Unfortunately, yes. I don’t remember that I ever needed any cuddling and hugging. I say, unfortunately, yes. Perhaps I have missed something beautiful. Cuddling and hugging are needed by children because they feel so small, so fragile, so afraid of the big world around. I have never felt any fear, and I have had my sources of warmth within myself – as far back as I can remember.
I never liked to sleep with my mother, with my father. Particularly my grandfather was very much in love with me. It is something to be understood. Grandfathers are always immensely in love. They may not have loved their own son, but they love their son’s son. There must be some psychological reason behind it. Their own son, because of all the religious teachings in the air, has always reminded them that they have committed something ugly, sinful. This son is the by-product of that act. But with their son’s son, they have no guilt feelings.
So it is always the grandfathers and grandmothers who are more loving. My grandfather was very loving, and he always wanted me to sleep with him. I point-blank refused him thousands of times: “You stop! I cannot!”
He said, “But what is the matter?”
I said, “There are two things. One, you cuddle me and you hug me, and that I don’t like. Secondly, you cover your head with the blanket, and my head also. And it is too much. You snore inside the blanket, and the whole night I have to hear it.”
Finally he agreed. He said, “Okay. If you don’t want to sleep in my bed, at least you can sleep in my room.” I said, “That’s okay,” so I had my small bed in his room. But just because of his snoring, I still covered my head. If I didn’t cover my head, I immediately remembered him. He snored really loudly.
For years I slept in his room, covering my head just not to hear. I still cover my head. He has been dead for many decades, but he has left a present with me – this covering the head with the blanket. Once in a while I try to get rid of it, but within five minutes, it is back. He is not there snoring, but the air-conditioner, the fan in the other room – and I am surrounded by so many mechanisms. One or the other is making a noise. And I say, “Dear grandfather, will you ever leave me or not?” I don’t think he is going to leave me.
I have never liked cuddling and hugging. In fact, it is not good of me – I don’t like the smell of another person’s body, but what can I do about it? About likings and dislikings you cannot do anything. You are born with them and you die with them – enlightenment or no enlightenment.

Osho,
I remember that I did go for rebellious things, but when I was turned down or shut off or dismissed, it hurt so deeply that I gave up. Can you tell us the secret of how to be strong enough to cope with the consequences?
It is very simple. You have been too serious about your rebellion. That’s why you got hurt, because you were thinking you were doing something great, and they told you to shut up! You were expecting a Nobel prize.
The secret is very simple. About your rebellion, don’t be serious. On the contrary, when they say, “Shut up!” have a good laugh, be hilarious; then they will be hurt. They will not be able to figure out what is the matter: “I shouted at the boy and rather than getting sad, hurt, he laughed.”
That’s what I was doing in my childhood. I turned whatever they gave to me, or were trying to give to me, I turned it back with great force. If somebody told me, “Shut up!” I laughed loudly, and I inquired, “Does your ‘shut up’ apply to laughter too? I will not say a thing, but I will sit here and go on laughing until you ask what is the matter. Better you ask now.”
I used to sit in front of my father in his shop, because he had told me to keep quiet. I would go on smiling at him, and he would try to look busy. But I was just sitting there, and I was not doing anything, just smiling. And finally he would have a nervous breakdown, and he would say, “Please tell me what you want!”
I said, “Unnecessarily you wasted so much time by telling me to shut up. And you went into a torture, and I had to waste my time. So please, drop this habit of telling me to shut up, just listen carefully to what I say.”
The secret is simple: never take yourself too seriously, then nobody can hurt you. You cannot find any man on the whole earth who has been condemned like me. From all corners, from every country, from every religion, from every political party I have only received condemnation as my reward. But nothing has given me even a scratch.
Hurt? I don’t know what it means. I never got hurt because I never took myself seriously. I did what I wanted to do, I said what I wanted to say. If they feel hurt and annoyed and start calling me names and condemning me, that is their problem, it is not my problem. I am finished, the moment I have said and done what I wanted to do, I am finished.
My teachers were always asking me, “What kind of man are you? We punish you, and you accept it as if it is a reward. That makes us so worried about you, whether something is wrong with you. Even after school we continue to think about you.” Whenever a teacher took his cane and hit my hands – he would stop hitting, but I would go on keeping my hands held out, and I would ask him, “Is that all? I was expecting much more. You can do it – if not for this act, then do it in advance for something that I am bound to do.”
Don’t take it seriously – rebellion should be hilarious. It should be with a laugh, then nobody can hurt you. You won’t have any sensitive part, vulnerable; your laughter, your hilariousness will be almost a steel cover over you.

Osho,
You come every day, dance with us, steal our hearts, smile and disappear. Are you a gypsy or something?
I am a gypsy or nothing!

============================================================

Osho,
For years you have talked to us of simplicity: simplicity in love, the simplicity of enlightenment, and now the simple solution to the power game between the United States and Russia. Why has man developed such complexity, and why does he show such mistrust and disbelief in the simple?
The simple is not a challenge to man’s ego; the difficult is a challenge; the impossible is really a great challenge. How big an ego you want can be known by the challenge that you have accepted, by your ambition; it is measurable. But the simple is unattractive to the ego. The simple is the death of the ego.
And man has chosen complexities even in places where there was no need of complexity at all, for the simple reason that with complexity he can go on growing and strengthening his ego. He goes on becoming more and more important in politics, in religion, in society – everywhere.
The whole of psychology is geared to make the ego stronger. Even those fools, the psychologists, stress the point that a man needs a strong ego. So education is a program to give you ambition by punishment and reward, to drive you in a certain direction. Your parents from the very beginning are hoping for too much from you. They think perhaps Alexander the Great has been born to them, or their daughter is nobody but the reincarnation of Cleopatra. Parents condition you from the very beginning that unless you prove yourself, you are good for nothing. The simple man is thought to be a simpleton.
The simple man has not been the goal of human society until now. And the simple man cannot be the goal, because you are born simple! Every child is simple, just a clean slate. Then the parents start writing on his slate – what he has to become. Then the teachers, the priests, the leaders – they all go on emphasizing that you have to become somebody; otherwise, you have wasted your life. Just the opposite is the case.
You are a being. You need not become anybody else. That is the meaning of simplicity: remaining at ease with one’s being, and not going on any track of becoming – which is unending.
There is no place where you will feel, “Now my journey is over. I have come to the highest peak that I had desired.” Nobody in the whole history of humanity has been able to do that, for the simple reason that man is moving in a circle. So somebody is always ahead of you in something or other.
You may become the president of America, but before Muhammad Ali the Great you feel inferior. You don’t have that animal strength. Muhammad Ali can give a good punch on the nose of Ronald Reagan, and Ronald Reagan will be flat on the ground. And you can go on counting one, two, three – Ronald Reagan is not going to get up again to get another punch. He is simply waiting for number ten, so that he can get up and go to the hospital.
You may become prime minister of a country, but encountering Albert Einstein you will look like a pygmy – not a prime minister, but a pygmy.
Life is multi-dimensional. It is impossible for you to reach in all directions, and to be the first in all directions. It is a sheer impossibility; existence does not work that way.
The ego is man’s disease.
The vested interests want you to remain diseased. They don’t want you to be healthy and whole, because your being healthy and whole is a danger to their vested interests. That’s why nobody wants to be simple, nobody wants to be nobody. And my whole approach is that you should be at ease with yourself, that you should accept your being.
Becoming is sickness, being is health. But simple, whole, healthy, blissful: you have not tasted that. Your society has not allowed a single moment for you, so you know only one way: the way of the ego. You have been told to become Jesus Christ. There are societies that are aiming for everybody to become a god. This insane world! You have to come out of all this programming. If you want to enjoy, relax, feel peace and the beauty of existence, that phony ego will have to drop.
I don’t want to take anything else from you. I want only to take your ego from you, which is anyway just a fantasy. It is not a reality, so I am not really taking anything from you. And I want to give you your being. Of course I need not give it to you: you have it already! You just have to be shaken and awakened to the tremendous beauty of innocence.
That is the moment when the camel has reached the state of the child.
Nothing is at risk. And you are running after shadows which you will never be able to catch, forgetting all the treasures that you have brought into the world with you. Before your ego is fulfilled, death will finish you. Life is too short, it is not to be destroyed in such foolish games as the ego.
And it is only a question of understanding. You are not supposed to stand on your head in a yoga posture. You are not supposed to contort your body in many ways for many years doing yoga exercises. You are not supposed to fast for months together to purify yourself. In fact, all these ways are also the way of the ego.
The man who can stand on his head for twelve hours makes a record. He is destroying his whole intelligence by standing for twelve hours on his head, because all the blood of his body will be rushing toward his head. It will be a flood, because gravitation will be pulling all the blood toward his head. In that flood, your fragile nerves, which are so small, so delicate – you have seven million in your skull – will be simply killed.
That’s why no yogi has contributed anything to the world. They have been parasites, and you have been foolish enough to reward them with great respect, for the simple reason that the man is standing on his head. He is an idiot.
If God wanted you to stand on your head, I can’t think why he allowed you to stand on two legs. In the very beginning he would have told Adam and Eve, “Just stand on your head.” And that would have been a far better strategy – by standing on their heads, I don’t think they would have reached the tree of knowledge or the tree of eternal life. But you have legs to walk with.
The scientific fact is, animals cannot create intelligence. They have brains – some animals have bigger brains than man. The dolphin has a bigger brain than you; the elephant, almost the same size brain as you. But why have elephants not been as intelligent as man? For the simple reason that the elephant cannot walk on two legs. In the circus, once in a while he sits on a stool. That is not going to help. It is certain he cannot walk on two legs for his whole life, that would be torture.
It is a very simple phenomenon: if your body is horizontal – as all animals are – then the gravitation is equally forceful all over your body. Man standing on two legs is not an ordinary thing. It is the greatest revolution that has happened in the whole of evolution.
When you stand on two feet, your heart has to pump blood against gravitation toward the head because the head needs continuously to be fed with oxygen. Only six seconds are needed – if your head does not get oxygen for six seconds, you are dead. You can be revived because your body is perfectly okay, but you will be just a vegetable; the head will be finished.
The brain has developed its delicacies – its very subtle system of nerves and cells which functions as the biocomputer, which collects all the information and stores it – because blood never comes as a flood. Only enough blood comes to keep the brain living.
The yogis have not produced anything, have not created anything, have made no contribution to the world. What have your ascetics given to the world? What have your so-called saints been doing all along, except being parasites sucking your blood? And these are the people you have been worshipping. And why have you been worshipping them? For the simple reason that you cannot stand for twelve hours on your head. Try it – even for twelve minutes it is difficult. In fact, when you first try you will fall many times; you may have a broken rib. The yogi is doing something difficult.
A man is standing naked in the snow in the Himalayas, and people come from thousands of miles to touch his feet. All that he is doing is getting frozen and dead. What is his contribution? Nobody goes to touch the feet of Albert Einstein, or Bertrand Russell, or Martin Heidegger, or Ludwig Wittgenstein – the people who have contributed to man’s knowledge immensely, who have expanded man’s vision almost to infinity. But you cannot see it, it is not something visible.
Bertrand Russell and Whitehead together wrote a book, Principia Mathematica. It takes them one hundred and sixty-five pages to prove that two plus two is really four. Who bothers to read such a book? One hundred and sixty-five pages, and the ultimate outcome is, two plus two is really four. Nobody reads that book.
Visiting all the universities of India – and perhaps India has the largest number of universities; one hundred universities – I was always going to their libraries to look at Principia Mathematica, whether anybody has read it. No – even the pages are not cut, they are joined. I inquired of the librarians, “Has anybody read this book?”
They said, “Nobody ever asks. People come once in a while, they look at one or two pages and that’s all.” And that was one of the greatest contributions to humanity. Bertrand Russell and Whitehead managed to make mathematics a solid foundation for any science to grow from.
You get easily interested…. Somebody is bicycling for twenty-four hours, and hundreds of people go to watch him. He will not eat, or he will eat while bicycling. Of course, he has a certain control over his bladder. He will not drink anything. Perhaps he has not drunk for twelve hours before he started the bicycling. It interests you; he is doing something difficult.
And he feels great. His ego is getting higher and higher. From twenty-four hours he will go to forty-eight hours, and so on and so forth. And the more he can manage, the more people will be coming to him. The people are mediocre, and these are their leaders – who are even more mediocre.
Simplicity will not attract anybody toward you. In fact, to become as simple as the child – instead of attracting people toward you and making you something great – may keep people away from you, saying, “He is only a child.” Perhaps they may become hostile to you, because your innocence can raise questions which they cannot answer. There is no answer to those questions. Your innocence will create curiosities which will be cutting the roots of their beliefs and their faith.
I used to go with my father to all kinds of discourses – religious, political, educational – and he used to take a promise from me that I was not going to ask anything, and I was not going to create a nuisance there. I always promised him, and I always did whatsoever I wanted to do. Coming back home, he would say, “You are not a man of your word.”
I said, “I am. But I wanted to go. I wanted to see that spiritual monk, to see whether he knows anything or not. Unless I promise, you will not take me. It was your fault to ask for the promise. You made me lie! After this, never ask for a promise. Why should you make me a slave? Leave me free.”
My whole town’s elders were afraid of me – and I was only a child. The man who was most respected in the town was a physician, and he was also thought to be a very learned, religious scholar. I used to visit him almost daily, and the moment he saw me I could see his face going pale, because he could not answer a single question.
I would put the Bhagavadgita in front of him, and tell him, “Put your hand on the Gita and say whether you have seen God or not.”
This was too much. If the Gita was not there, perhaps he might have lied, but to put your hand on the Gita and lie means a direct ticket to hell.
And he would say to me, “Are you some magistrate or what? Is my own house a court? I don’t want to put my hand on the Gita.”
“Then,” I said, “whatever you say will be a lie.”
His continual statement to me was, “Wait, you are too young. When you are a little older, you will understand all these problems. Right now you cannot understand.”
I went on becoming older, and each year I would come from the university to the town. Before going to my home, first I would go to the physician, knock at his door, and say, “One more year has passed; the question is still there.”
He would say, “Can’t you wait?”
I said, “You just give me the date! How long do I have to wait?”
Even when I became a lecturer in the university I used to come to my town once in a while on holiday. His house was just between the station and my house, so first I would stop at his house, knock on his door, and say, “Now I have even become a teacher of philosophy in the university. And what about your statement? How long do I have to wait now?”
And then one day when I was in the town, somebody came to my house – because my father was a friend of the man – and informed us, “He is just dying.”
I rushed – my father said, “Where are you going? The message is not for you!”
I said, “Don’t worry, you take your time. I am going because I have to ask him something before he dies.”
I was there with the Bhagavadgita in front of him. And I told him, “Now I have grown up, you cannot deceive me anymore. Put your hand on the Bhagavadgita – and at the moment of dying don’t lie; otherwise you will fall directly into hell.”
He said, “Can’t you forgive me?”
I said, “You have been deceiving me for almost twenty years. What was the need? You could have simply said, ‘I don’t know.’ The thing would have finished long ago. You have no obligation to know everything, but you pretended. You wanted to be known as the wisest man around, and you have been deceiving not only me, you have been deceiving everybody who has come to you. Now at the last moment, recognize the fact and say, ‘I do not know.’”
By that time my father had reached the house, other people had reached. They said, “This is not good. A man is dying and you are making a court here.”
I said, “If he dies without doing what I am saying, then I will be responsible for throwing him into hell. This is the moment I can still save him.” And at the moment of death one thing happens: now you know death is there, you cannot go on your ego trips anymore.
He put his hand on the Gita and he said, “I am sorry. Please forgive me, and tell everybody else also to forgive me. I know nothing. I was exploiting those people by pretending that I know and they don’t know.” That is a strategy of the ego.
The ego can find very subtle ways. It is always afraid of simplicity, innocence; hence, all the societies destroy your simplicity, distract you from your innocence. But it is a very simple thing to come back home, because you have never left it in reality. You have left it only in fantasy. You cannot really go anywhere away from your being.
All becoming is false, imagination. Being is the truth. And that truth can be known only when you simply accept your ignorance.
I must remind you of Socrates’ last statement on the earth. He said, “When I was young I thought I knew everything. I bragged, because I could argue better than anybody else. When I became a little more mature, I realized that there were many things I didn’t know, I was simply bragging. And because others could argue against me they thought I must be knowing, because my argument was weightier. And as I went on, slowly, slowly it became clear to me that I know nothing. Let this be my last statement on the earth: that I do not know.”
Socrates had become a child again, but he had risked all his wisdom, philosophy, his great intelligence, all his arguments, his whole life’s effort of winning against opponents in debates, discussions. He had become the topmost intelligent man in Greece. But he had the tremendous courage to say, “I know nothing.”
Nobody knows anything.
Existence is a mystery, it cannot be demystified.
And because existence is a mystery, it reveals itself only to the heart of the child. It reveals itself not to knowledge, because knowledge is an aggression. It reveals itself to innocence, because innocence is simply receptivity, not aggression; not violence but keeping your doors open, waiting. If the truth comes in, you are ready to welcome it.
Truth cannot be conquered. You have to be available to truth, so that truth can conquer you. This is the reason why simplicity is the most significant religious qualification. I want you to become just simple, innocent, not knowing anything – waiting.
Jesus says, “Seek and ye shall find.”
I say, “Wait! Never seek,” because seeking is interfering, poking your nose into the mysteries of existence. It is not graceful, it is just ugly. I say, “Wait! and you shall find.”
Jesus says, “Knock and the doors shall be opened unto you.” Wait. The doors always open for those who have patience, who can wait for infinity, but who will not trespass. Even knocking on somebody’s door is a trespass.
Jesus says, “Ask, and it shall be given to you.”
I say to you, “Ask, and forget about getting it, ever.” In your very asking you have destroyed the possibility of getting it. Do not ask. Don’t become a question.
Let me repeat: don’t become a question! And you are in for a great surprise, because you are the answer. If you had become the question, then you would have fallen into such a trap, there would have been no way out. You would have gone on questioning – and the more you question, the farther away you will be from the answer, because you are the answer!
In innocence, in simplicity, you simply find it; it is your very being.

Osho,
When you talked about trust, tears wouldn't stop coming. You said you trust us, and I feel so untrustworthy. Please comment.
Trust is never conditional. I trust you, not because you are trustworthy; I trust you because I cannot distrust.
Once in India I was traveling from Indore to Kanva. Kanva was a big junction, and I had to wait there for one hour. I was alone in my air-conditioned compartment. A beggar knocked on the window, and I indicated to him to come in.
He came in. He said, “My mother has died, and I don’t have even enough money to bury her.” I gave him one rupee. In those days that was even enough to get wood and burn your mother. The man looked surprised.
He was a professional beggar. I knew it, because I passed through Kanva many times, and it was always his mother who was dying. I could have asked, “What a great mother you have got. Is your mother a Jesus Christ?” But I never said anything to him.
That day, thinking me mad or something, he came again. He said, “My father has died.”
I said, “Great! Take one rupee more.”
The man could not believe that so soon…just five minutes before his mother had died, now his father has died. And that gave him courage enough to come again after five minutes.
I said, “Has your wife died?”
He said, “How do you know? Yes.”
I said, “Here is one rupee more. How many relatives do you have? Because it is unnecessarily disturbing me – these people will go on dying and you will have to come again and again. You just tell me the whole number, as if the whole family has died. How many relatives do you have?”
The poor man could not imagine more than ten. I said, “Okay, you take ten rupees. And now, get lost.”
He said, “Before I accept your ten rupees – three I have already taken – I want to know, do you believe me? So quickly my mother dies, my father dies, my wife dies, and now you are giving me an advance for my whole family.” He felt guilty that he was cheating. He said, “No, although I am a beggar, I cannot cheat you. You still trust me?”
I said, “You have done nothing wrong. I have money, you are poor; any excuse will do. And don’t you think that I am also immensely interested in your family? – because your mother has died many times before. I have been passing through this railway station so many times, and it was always your mother. How many mothers did you have?”
He said, “I want one thing to be clear; otherwise I will carry this wound in my heart forever. How could you trust me?”
I said, “I thought perhaps you went on forgetting that it is the same man you are asking for money: ‘My mother has died, my father has died, my wife has died.’ Perhaps you were thinking you were asking different people” – because he came with different clothes. One time he came with a cap, another time with a basket, the third time with a coat on – just so that he was not recognized as the same man.
I said, “I was wondering if perhaps you could not recognize me as the same man. And as far as trust is concerned, I trust you still. It has nothing to do with your trustworthiness; I trust you because I cannot distrust. It is my incapacity, it has nothing to do with your worthiness or unworthiness.”
He returned the thirteen rupees. I tried hard to refuse but he said, “No. I will not take these rupees knowing perfectly well that you are aware that I am cheating and still you trust me. You have given me the dignity of being a human being for the first time in my whole life. And I am not going to beg again – without saying a word, you have changed me.”

You say you could not stop the tears because I said I trust you, and you feel unworthy. That’s a great step, to feel that you are unworthy. It is a quantum leap. Those tears will take it away, wash you completely clean of your unworthiness. But as far as I am concerned, whether you are worthy or unworthy makes no difference to me: I trust you.
Somebody was asking me in a letter…because just a few days ago Shiva has written a letter: “Please forgive me. I have done everything wrong. I have said lies against you, and the burden of it all is so much it is killing me.”
The other person was asking, “If Shiva comes back” – because this letter may be just the beginning of the camel coming back from Santa Fe – “would you give him the same position that he used to have, your bodyguard?”
I said, “Certainly. I trust him.”
Trust is a miracle. If you trust even the person who is going to murder you, his sword will fall from his hands. If you trust the man who is going to shoot you, there is every possibility he may shoot himself. Trust is a tremendous power. Distrust makes you weak.
And how many people are you going to distrust? The whole world? That’s what you have been told and taught: never trust anybody; otherwise you will be cheated. But it is better to be cheated than to lose your immense power of trust. And what can you be cheated of? In fact, the people who have told and taught you, “Never trust people because they will take advantage of it,” are your enemies. They have destroyed your greatest power.
Trusting unconditionally, you will be relieved of the burden…. Such a big burden you are carrying on your heart, a Himalaya, because there are so many millions of people you have to distrust.
Machiavelli, the only significant political philosopher of the West, writes in his masterpiece The Prince: “Don’t trust even your friend, because tomorrow he can become your enemy, the possibility is there.” He also says, “Don’t say things against your enemy, because tomorrow he can become your friend.” These are the teachings he was giving to the princes from all over Europe. Princes were being sent to Machiavelli to learn politics, diplomacy, how to rule over people, how to conquer new lands, how not to be invaded.
But a strange thing…. One sannyasin told me she is a direct descendant of Machiavelli.
I said, “I wanted to see Machiavelli, but he died a long time ago. It is good you have come to be a sannyasin. Some part of Machiavelli is within you, and I would like to talk to that part, because I always wanted to ask Machiavelli about all these princes whom he had been teaching….” No prince, when he became king, accepted Machiavelli as his prime minister. He applied again and again. Those were his own students; now they had become kings, and he wanted to become their prime minister.
It seems so logical that the prince would like his own wise teacher to become his wise adviser. But none of his disciples accepted him, they all refused. They said, “You are too cunning, too clever; we cannot trust you. And this is according to your teaching. We are simply following the dictums that you have given to us. We don’t want to lose our kingdom” – because if Machiavelli is prime minister today, tomorrow he will be the king. Machiavelli died a pauper, poor – and he was the teacher of almost all the kings of Europe!
You teach people to distrust that means you are teaching them to distrust you too.
I trust you, with no conditions attached to it.
Your tears were beautiful. Your tears were real prayer. Your tears washed away all unworthiness. Don’t try to stop them, let them come and clean you. And don’t be worried that if I come to know of your unworthiness I will not trust you. That is impossible.
That is my difficulty, that is my problem; I have never distrusted anybody. I cannot, because I know the beauty of trust, the enormous blissfulness of trust. I cannot lose that blessedness by mistrusting, distrusting anybody. I cannot lose my Kingdom of God just because you are unworthy of trust. That is your trouble. Why do you want to create trouble for me?
Yes, if I could distrust you, tears would not come to your eyes. You know already that you deserve it. No, I want those tears in your eyes. I want you to recognize that there is a man who is going to trust you; even if you thrust a dagger in the man’s back from behind, it will not make any difference.
I will still trust the person if he tries to assassinate me. That is his problem. That is his act, and each act is followed by its consequences. My act is to trust, and it is followed by its own consequences. Just try to trust a little bit, so you can have a little taste. It is groovy!

Osho,
These days you are spreading the fragrance of nirvana while in the body. Isn't it true?
It must be. If you can smell the fragrance of nirvana, it must be. But I do not know. The tree itself never knows its fragrance. It is the people passing by who know. And you are not even passing by, you are just with me.
I cannot smell my own being, because even to smell you have to divide: the one who smells, and the one who is the object of smell. I am undivided. To observe anything I have to be separate; only then can I be the observer. To see something, I have to be separate; only then can I be a seer.
The same is true about fragrance. I don’t know, but if you are smelling it, if it is reaching your nostrils, it must be true – because there is no way for you to be aware of the fragrance of nirvana, you are absolutely unacquainted with it. Unless you really become awakened to it, you will not know. It is news to me.
I am here, available, with all the treasures that are possible in the innermost core of my being. If you are also receptive – not seeking; if you are also waiting – not knocking…. Please don’t knock! I am a fragile man, and if so many people start knocking, before you get the fragrance the flower will be gone. Wait. Don’t ask – because I don’t want anybody to be a beggar. You are all emperors.
Just the other night, one journalist was a little nervous to use the world “empire” in connection with me. He wanted to say, “your empire,” but then he became a little shaky, and he said, “Am I using the right word?” I said, “Exactly the right word.”
But one thing I have not told him, for the simple reason that he would have never understood it. My empire consists only of emperors. It is a very new kind of empire.

Osho,
Sometimes I think you are mad. Then, that you are the sanest man alive. The next moment I think you are a crazy prankster; the next moment that you are the most insightful, brilliant being I can imagine. And so it goes on. Obviously, I am a predictable man, but my being yearns for the freedom, the great wildness that I see in you each day. Please comment.
I am all that you can conceive: the madman, the awakened one, the crazy or the most sane. I am vast enough to contain all these contradictions in me. And these contradictions in me are no longer contradictions as far as I am concerned; they become complementaries.
You say, “So on it goes.” So, I am going too; let it go on! Soon you will realize that if the same man appears in all these contradictions, then these contradictions must not be contradictions, and you are carrying a wrong attitude about contradictions.
Life consists of contradictions, and the man who has arrived simply reflects life: the day and the night, the life and the death.
Do you conceive of life and death as contradictions? Yes, logically they look like contradictions, but they are not. They are almost like two wheels of a bullock cart going on together. You have been dying since the day you have been born – both the wheels going on together. It is not that death comes at a certain point when you are eighty or ninety, no. Death comes the same moment as life comes to you. They are two sides of the same coin.
As you are growing, you are dying too. Every moment both things are happening together: something is dying, something is becoming alive. Hence I say to you, if you can die each moment totally to the past, you will be born each moment totally new for the future. And that is the only life that can give you the freedom, the freedom of wildness you are asking for.
I am really wild. I just don’t kill you, because I have much more subtle things to kill. I leave your body alone, but I am continuously killing your ego, your jealousy, your competition-thousands of things you have inside you. I am wild. And certainly to be wild has a freedom unlimited.
You would like the same freedom? It is easy, the easiest thing in the world. Just please don’t seek it, don’t want it, don’t chase it, don’t go after it.
Sit silently, doing nothing, and let the grass grow by itself.

============================================================

Osho,
Every day you make a step descending from the pedestal of being a master to becoming a friend to us, the ultimate friend. And yet my reverence for you is increasing every day. How can this happen? Please explain.
The relationship between the master and the disciple is in a subtle way a kind of slavery. To cover it, the disciple reveres the master, adores the master. The master tries to be a fatherly figure to the disciple, but deep down the master is nothing but a politician. By increasing his followers he is increasing his power. He manipulates people. All the disciplines, rules, regulations – they are meant for you as psychological chains.
The disciple has hatred deep down in him, for the simple reason that he has to bow down to the master, because the master knows and he does not know. He is angry, enraged, but what can he do? To know as much as the master knows, he represses his feelings and creates a phony personality, hypocrisy, humbleness.
You will have to understand one thing very clearly: in all cultures the love relationship between brother and sister is absolutely prohibited. There is no bigger sin than a love relationship between brother and sister. Why? You may not have looked into it. The reason is, if there were no prohibition of that kind, the first love would be bound to happen between brother and sister.
To prevent it, they have done two things. They have made it a great sin, so that you are afraid. Secondly, they have raised the relationship between brother and sister to great heights of purity, pure love, spiritual love. But the fact is, both are strategies to hide the simple fact that if there were no inhibition, the love between brother and sister would be bound to happen – they are together in the same home.
All the cultures want the son to respect the father. Why? – because psychologically every son disrespects the father. The reasons are clear. The father is trying to mold him in a certain way that is not natural to him. The father is making him according to his own image, just as God did – he made man in his own image. Every father is doing that.
But who wants to be made by somebody else in his own image? Everybody wants to be individual. That is a very deep longing and desire in every being – to be himself. And the father is not allowing him to be himself. And the son is helpless, because he is dependent for everything on the father; hence, he has to suppress himself, be obedient.
Every father wants the son to be obedient. God wanted Adam and Eve to be obedient. Their only sin was that they disobeyed the father. And the great God – who is compassion, who is love, who is forgiveness – could not forgive his own son, his own daughter? And they had not done anything so big that for thousands of years to come the dependents should also be punished.
These stories are significant. There is no God and there has never been any Adam and Eve, but the story is very psychological; it is happening every day in thousands of places. The father wants the son to be just his mirror image; it fulfills his ego. But on the other hand, it hurts the ego of the son. Being helpless he has to compromise, being helpless he has to surrender; but the unconscious bears the scars.
It was one of the greatest things that Sigmund Freud said, for the first time in the history of man, that the father is respected by all cultures for the simple reason that in the beginning the first father was killed by his own sons. Every son is doing his best to remove that guilt.
Human relationship, because of religions, cultures, education, has become very complicated.
The relationship between master and disciple repeats the same circle. The master is your father figure, and the master is trying to create you in his own image. To disobey the master is the greatest fall for the disciple. And what is virtuous? To obey the master blindly without questioning, never thinking whether he is right or wrong. You have just to do it, whatsoever he wants; there is no question of asking why.
Can you really love such a man? Can you really respect such a man? It is impossible. You may show love, you may show respect, you may pretend humility, humbleness, but deep down just the opposite is the case.
Judas sold Jesus into the hands of the enemies for thirty pieces of silver. This is significant, because Judas was the only educated and cultured disciple among all the apostles of Jesus; the others were simply village fools. Why did he betray him? Every disciple wants to betray deep down, and all the great masters have been betrayed by their disciples. Gautam Buddha, Mahavira, Jesus – it cannot be just coincidence.
And why am I trying to be just your friend? I don’t want to become your father figure. I don’t want you to be split inside about me – on the surface all that is beautiful, and underneath all that is ugly.
I am descending every day from the throne where you have put me. It is a psychological revolution. And for the future I am making the path so that no master should be betrayed again, so that no disciple should be split again. The only way is that the master should not put himself higher than the disciples. He should come closer to the disciple, so close that they become friends. In that friendship the split personality of the disciple will disappear. In that friendship the politics of the master will disappear. He is no longer ruling over millions of people, he is just one among them – a friend, a fellow traveler.
That’s why the more I insist on being your friend, the more great reverence arises in you. This is true and authentic reverence. Because I am your friend there is no need to hate me in your unconscious. You cannot be a Judas to me. I am just your friend, you cannot sell me for thirty silver pieces.
It is a significant question. Ponder over it, meditate over it.
This breaks the whole history of the past, and makes the future discontinuous with it. Masters should be friends, disciples should be fellow travelers. Hand in hand, singing and dancing, they should move toward the real, the true, the beautiful.
Naturally, great reverence will arise in you, great humbleness will arise in you. But this is going to be authentic, not out of a personality split against itself; it will come out of your wholeness. And whenever anything comes out of your wholeness, it has a grace, a beauty, a splendor of its own. And that’s what I want to happen here.
I want to help you become what you are. I have no designs for you, no disciplines for you.
I will explain to you my consciousness and how consciousness dispels all darkness; and with that darkness, anger and hate, sexuality and jealousy, all disappear. But this I am going to do as your friend, hand in hand.
Perhaps for the first time in history, a disciple will love his master because the master is no longer pretending to be the master, and he is no longer forcing the disciple to be the disciple.

Osho,
Recently I heard you say that we have to fight our fears. I don't believe you. For years I tried to fight my fears and they became bigger and stronger. Now, if fear comes up, I go into it totally defenseless, stay with it and go through with it without doing anything – not even judging the situation. I've realized that fear is a tremendous energy, and sometimes I even enjoy this energy – like diving from the three-meter board into Krishnamurti Lake. Can you speak about fighting fear and facing fear?
It is good that you don’t believe in me. I am relieved, because if you believe in me, sooner or later you will take revenge. But if the thing had stopped there – that you don’t believe in me – everything would have been perfectly good.
You say, I have said fight fear. I cannot conceive myself saying that, ever. Fight is not my teaching. You must have heard something which has not been said. In fact, what you are doing is what I have been teaching: face fear, encounter it, be a witness to it. That’s the only way to overcome, and not only to overcome but to release all the energy that is hidden in fear, for better purposes, for more creative things.
Everything has energy: fear, anger, jealousy, hate. You are unaware of the fact that all these things are wasting your life. Your energy is leaking from so many holes. This way you are going to become, sooner or later, bankrupt. In fact, most people become bankrupt by the age of thirty. After that there is nothing. It is posthumous life, dragging on somehow toward the grave.
It is good that you have tried to face your fear. Do the same with anger, do the same with jealousy, do the same with hatred.
And another significant point to remember: if you witness anything – fear, anger, hate – they will disappear, leaving a tremendous amount of energy in you which you can use for creativity. You will have to use it, the leaking holes have disappeared; you will be overflowing with energy. But if you witness your love, compassion, kindness, humbleness, they will not disappear. They also have tremendous energy, but the more you witness them, the more they will become strong in you; they will overpower you, overwhelm you.
So this is the criterion to decide what is right and what is wrong. If by witnessing, something disappears, leaving all its energy to you, it was wrong.
I don’t give you ready-made labeled things – this is wrong and this is right, this you have to do, and this you have not to do. I don’t give you ten commandments. I give you the whole secret of spiritual life: witness. If the thing disappears and leaves a great amount of energy behind it, it was wrong. If by witnessing, the phenomenon becomes even bigger, love becomes more Himalayan, that means this is the good you have been searching for.
If you become more sensitive to beauty, to poetry, that means your love has blossomed. And all the energy that has been left by fear, anger and hate, will be taken over by your love, your sensitivity, your compassion, your creativity. This is the whole alchemy of changing base metals into gold.
This is what alchemists were really doing, but because of Christianity they could not say it openly. This is one of the sad things about religions, that rather than helping really religious people, they prevent them. So the alchemists in Europe had found a device to deceive the pope and his agents.
They had small labs in which there were many tubes and bottles, many-colored things, and stoves. It gave the appearance that they were doing something material, that they were scientists, that they were not mystics – because the mystic was dangerous to the pope, the mystic was dangerous to organized religion. These people were just trying to change base metals into gold. That was perfectly good. In fact, if they succeeded, then they would be in the service of the church. So with the blessings of the pope….
But this was only a facade. The reality was something else which was going on inside. Being scientists was just the superficial mask. They were not doing anything; not a single iota of base metal was changed into gold in thousands of years. Can’t you see? All those bottles and tubes and water with many colors passing from one bottle into another – that was simply to hide behind. And who is not interested in changing base metal into gold? Everybody was interested. Alchemists were respected for their facade.
What they were actually doing was of a different dimension. They were trying to change fear, anger, hatred, into love, compassion, creativity, sensitivity. They were trying to bring a transformation in the soul of man.
So this is the basic alchemy: you watch, witness without any judgment. There is no need of any judgment. That which is wrong will disappear, leaving a great energy behind. And that which is good will become bigger and will start absorbing the energies that have been left by wrong things. When everything that is ugly in you has left only a great fragrance of love, light, and laughter remains behind.

Osho,
I often experience that to relax and to trust existence is good. On the other hand, there is also a pressure to be responsible for everything in my life. Then I start brooding about decisions I need to make. I feel unable to unite “sitting silently the grass grows by itself” with “going for it.” Can you comment?
Please, don’t go for it. You may destroy the grass that was growing by itself. If you cannot sit silently and watch, go somewhere else, but not for it!
You say, “How to combine both?” That is impossible. Letting the grass grow by itself and going for it? You want to combine both together? Man, you must be greedy. But man, you are asking for the impossible – greed always asks for the impossible. Hence the greedy man always lives like a beggar and dies like a beggar. And I want you to be emperors, because that is your potential.
You have not understood what I have been saying to you. You have not become non-serious about life. Life is very non-serious, a beautiful song without any meaning, a colorful sunset without any meaning. The sky full of stars has no purposes.
The trouble arises in you because you are serious. You want the grass to grow. In fact, you want it almost like instant coffee. Now, this is asking too much from the poor grass. The grass grows by itself, in its own way, slowly. There is no hurry, the whole eternity is there. The grass can go on growing for the whole eternity. What is the hurry? But you are in a hurry.
And what do you mean by “going for it”? Will you start pulling it up so that it grows faster? You will destroy the whole game. Millions of people in the world have destroyed the whole game of life. Never do that! Pulling the grass upward you will take its roots out of the earth. What will be left in your hand will not be something living, but something dead.
Learn to wait. Be patient!
And why should you think yourself responsible? To think yourself responsible for doing some things – for example, for grass growing faster, quicker, with jet-speed – how do you manage to be responsible for such idiotic things?
The word responsibility is beautiful, but it has been made ugly by the priests, by the politicians, by the parents, by everybody around you. Responsibility does not mean responsibility to someone; it is not a duty, that you have to do. Responsibility simply means the capacity to respond. When the sun is rising, what is the responsibility? To make it rise faster? No. Responsibility to the rising sun is that you be silent and respond to its beauty. It has nothing to do with the sun, it has something to do with you.
Response means mirroring exactly what is happening. If the grass is growing slowly, you mirror it. And remember, mirrors don’t run after anybody. Don’t go for it. You will destroy the grass, you may even destroy the mirror. And that will be bankruptcy. You are finished; you lost everything for which life was an opportunity.
You listen to me saying, “Sitting silently, and the grass grows by itself.” It feels good, that if you can sit silently, and the grass can grow by itself, what more can you desire? But then suddenly you are overtaken by fear: “If the grass does not grow by itself, then? Who knows whether the grass grows by itself or not?”
In your life you have been doing everything. You have been taught from your childhood, “Do it! Go for it! Put your whole energy into it!” And I am asking something just the opposite. Please don’t do it! Doing is going to be your undoing! Just rest, relax. Don’t even bother whether the grass is growing or not. Forget all about grass! Your responsibility is to relax, so you can be a pure mirror. And you know perfectly well everything goes on moving, there is no need to push.
How did you become a young man from your childhood? Were your parents pulling you, one by the legs, another by the hands, to make you a young man? You would have been in the grave by now. But they allowed the grass to grow itself, although they poisoned the mind of the grass, telling you that in life you have to struggle for everything. Just to survive you have to fight, compete. It is from that conditioning that the other idea arises in you.
Yes, the grass grows by itself, but not the gold. So please, understand the meaning of grass. Perhaps you want to sit silently, doing nothing, while the gold grows into mountains by itself, and the dollars go on falling from all sides over you. Who then bothers about grass?
The man who wrote these lines, a mystic of Japan, Basho, was not interested in dollars, was not interested in gold, was not interested in the presidentship of the country. These things don’t grow by themselves, remember. These things, you have to go for – and to go with as much speed as possible, because many others are also going. Be cunning, be deceptive, lie as much as you can, promise things which cannot be fulfilled. Do everything that is wrong, only then do you become Ronald Reagan. The White House does not come closer by itself, you have to go for it!
That’s why the word running is used when somebody is standing for the presidency. He is running for president. Walking won’t do.
There was one question: “Osho, would you like to run for the president of the whole world?” I said, “Run? Never! I don’t even walk. I will be still sitting in my chair.” And I enjoy grass; who bothers about being a president? And basically I love to be lazy, to sit silently, doing nothing.
Running is not for me. Even if somebody asks, “Osho, run for God,” I am not going to do that. Running is just not for me. Sitting in my chair, certainly I am sitting more comfortably than Basho who wrote those lines. He was sitting in a yoga posture on a rock. It is not for me – even that kind of sitting is not for me!
I love my laziness, because the lazy people are the only people who have never done any harm in the world. Can you give me the name of even a single lazy man who created a war, murdered somebody, committed suicide, raped some woman? A lazy man? Impossible! Even if he finds Cleopatra, he will be still sitting silently and letting the grass grow by itself. He is not going for it!
It would have been a great blessing to the world if Adolf Hitler were lazy, if Joseph Stalin were lazy, if Benito Mussolini were lazy and went on eating spaghetti as much as he wanted. The world would have been a far better world. These people were very active – too active, madly active, running all over the place not knowing where they were going. The only thing they knew was that you have to run faster than the other. All these active runners, joggers – they have created this mess all over the earth.
So I don’t think the word lazy is in any way condemnatory.
Buddha was lazy – did nothing except sit silently under the bo tree, but found the greatest treasure, one that no president can find. Just relaxing all that was inside him, he became aware of it. And just sitting silently, that which was his potential started growing. That is the grass. And it is so satisfying, so utterly blissful that you cannot imagine anything better or beyond it.
So please decide. Both cannot be combined. You are trying to have wheels on your chair, with a motor, so you can relax in the chair and still the chair will be running for the president of America. Perhaps that may be possible as far as the president of America is concerned. But for the kingdom I am talking about, there is no way that you can do anything to gain it, except allow it. You just be on the receiving end, not a doer, but a patient waiter.
The greatest experiences of life come only to those who are ready to wait for infinity, for eternity.
Just this moment you are sitting silently. What is missing? You are full of silence, peace, a great opening inside which leads to the ultimate ecstasy.
It is in your hands, but please don’t try to do anything about it. Non-doing is the most difficult thing in life, because you have been prepared always for doing. Your whole education, upbringing, is for doing.
My childhood – it was a constant problem, and I know the same must have been the case…it happens to every child – everybody was after me to do this, to do that. And in India there are joint families. In one family you may have many members, and everybody is after you, “Do this, do that.” I simply declared to everyone, “If you say to me to do something, it is certain that I am not going to do it – whatever the consequences.”
First, they tried to put me right, but soon they found it was impossible: “This boy is crazy.” By and by they forgot all about me. It used to happen that I might be sitting in the room and my mother from inside the house would tell me, “If you see somebody – because I don’t see anybody in the house….” I am sitting there, and she does not see anybody in the house! With whom is she talking?
And she would say to me, “If you see somebody, just tell me that somebody is in the house, because I need some vegetables.” And the market was not very far away, just two minutes walk – not even running was needed. If you started running, you might bypass it; it was a small village. You had to go slowly so that you would reach the market.
But I was accepted as absent. They all thought, “He is absent-minded.” For me, it was perfectly good. They stopped asking me to do anything. But it took years for them to understand that “something is impossible with this boy,” because in the family there were many children, and they were all doing whatsoever was said to them.
Slowly, slowly that silence became so deep, even the Pacific is not so deep, became so vast that even the sky is not the limit. And I am enjoying, and the grass is growing all over.
You are my grass! I have dropped the idea of green grass – red grass, growing all over the world…. And I don’t go anywhere; just sitting in my room, the grass, red grass, goes on growing all around the world, even in countries like the Soviet Union. Nobody can prevent it from growing.
You can be the proof of it. I have not gone for you; I had no idea where you are, who you are. I did not have your name or your address, but suddenly from somewhere you have gathered around a lazy man. Just seeing me, just seeing my people, you can understand Basho’s lines.
Silence is a tremendous power. You cannot measure it in horsepower. Relaxation is a great opening toward reality.
So please, don’t try to mix both. If you are hankering to go for it, then go for it. But remember, you will spoil the whole game. And those who go for it never reach it. That is the sure way of not reaching it.
Those who simply sit patiently, trusting existence…. If existence can give you eyes, ears, if existence can do such a miracle…because your eyes are nothing but specialized skin. And what is your ear? – just a specialized bone. If such miracles go on happening on their own, don’t be worried about grass. It will grow.
You just shower it with your silence, with your peace, with your love, with your patience, and wait. The miracle certainly happens. I say it on my own authority.

Osho,
If Aristotle has influenced the national mind, Socrates and Xanthippe have set up the whole pattern for man-woman relationship so far. Is it just a dream of mine, that one day I'll find a woman who doesn't want to run my life? And do I really need a Xanthippe to reach the same level of intelligence as Socrates?
I don’t think anybody has known so many women as I can claim – closely, intimately. I can assure you, you will never find the woman for whom you are waiting. That kind of woman does not exist at all. A woman that will not run your life? What are you asking? That is one of the basic qualities of a woman, to run your life. If you fail, it is your fault. If you win, she is the one who made you run.
And you say Socrates and his wife, Xanthippe, have set the pattern for all the couples to come. That is not true. It is only half-true, because all the husbands are not Socrates. But with all due respect, every woman is a Xanthippe. Xanthippe is synonymous with woman. There is only one kind of woman, and that is Xanthippe. The faces may be different, the length of noses may be different, the color may be different, but something deep in the very womanhood is exactly similar to Xanthippe.
And thirdly, drop the idea that if you get Xanthippe, then you will become as intelligent as Socrates. Don’t be foolish! Otherwise, all husbands would have been Socrates by now. Socrates became not because of Xanthippe, but in spite of her!

Osho,
Is it significant that in Oregon there are two towns, one called Boring and the other, Fossil? And that in Madras, Oregon there is a place called Grim Drive?
We are living in the country of the dead. It is not coincidental that there is a town called Fossil. In fact, it should be the name of the whole state of Oregon.
Another town named Boring…. I know people from almost every country, every race, every religion, but nobody can defeat Oregonians as far as their great quality of boring you is concerned. They are bored, utterly bored. I see their faces sometimes on the television, and I cannot believe it. Is there some natural law that all the boring souls are born in Oregon?
And I wonder, where have we landed? Perhaps there is some existential purpose in it, because my people are the people who live, laugh, enjoy, rejoice, dance in ecstasy and in abandon. Perhaps existence has a purpose in landing us here in the country of the bored, fossilized, grim. Perhaps we have to bring some laughter to those who are grim, some excitement to those who are bored, some life to those who have been dead for centuries. And we are doing it.
Since we have come here, Oregon is no longer the same. The dead have come out of their graves, because your laughter is so loud. Natural curiosity – the dead want to know what is happening. For centuries no laughter was heard here, and now suddenly a strange species of human being has appeared, and they are laughing for no reason at all. They don’t even think of the dead people who are lying in their graves. They laugh so loudly that even the dead have to take another look.
We have made Oregon world-famous. And we are changing the name of their towns, so don’t be worried. Fossil cannot remain Fossil for long. We will give it some beautiful name: Resurrection! Just a question of time.
What kind of people must be living in a town called Boring? Even if it is boring, why name it Boring? But they must be utterly bored, and they want the world to know that “we are bored!”
We are going to take over all these places. Boring will become Laughter, Grim Drive will become Ecstasy Drive. We want to do everything for these dead people, but the dead are after all dead; they obstruct. They cannot do anything else, but they can obstruct. What can a dead body do? It can obstruct the way. And it is not one dead body, the whole land is full of dead people who are still breathing, walking – grim, bored, fossilized. But we are also determined! We have taken the challenge: to change Oregon into Orgasm!

Osho,
You have been critical of most of the masters, but I don't recall hearing your criticism of Gurdjieff. Is that significant? He talked about the sly man who stole his enlightenment from the master. I'm puzzled about how to do it. How can I steal your silence, your bliss, your grace?
Gurdjieff was really a remarkable mystic, one of the most remarkable who has ever walked on the earth. But to understand him is more difficult than to understand anybody else.
With Gurdjieff it was true – he was very secretive. If anybody wanted to get anything from him, it was not an easy job. Even if you read his book, you cannot read more than ten pages. It is a one-thousand-page book. All And Everything is the name of the book, but you cannot go on more than ten pages, for the simple reason that he writes in such a way that to find out what he is saying is difficult. One sentence goes on running over the whole page. By the time you end the sentence you have forgotten the beginning. And what happened in the middle, nobody knows.
He was inventing words of his own, so you cannot consult any dictionary. Those words belonged to no language, he simply invented them. And they are long words – sometimes half the sentence is only one word. Even to read it is difficult, to pronounce it is difficult.
In that book of one thousand pages, perhaps there are ten sentences at the most which are really profound. Gurdjieff could have printed them on a postcard, but that man was a category in himself. He wants you to find those ten sentences in that one-thousand-page book, which he has made as difficult as possible.
No book has been written the way Gurdjieff’s book was written. People go to silent places, holiday homes, beaches, mountains, to write books. Gurdjieff used to go to restaurants, pubs. And sitting in the middle of the restaurant where everything was going on – hundreds of people coming in and going out, all kinds of talk – he was writing his book, his masterpiece.
Every day, in the evening, his disciples would gather in his house, and one disciple would read what he had written that day. Gurdjieff would watch the faces of the other disciples, to see whether they were understanding it or not. If they understood it, he would have to change it the next day. If nobody understood it, it remained. It took ten years for him to write that book, and he has hidden the secrets in those one thousand pages. He is right: you have to steal. It is almost like stealing.
You enter a house you have never been in. In the darkness of the night – when even the people who live in the house cannot move, in case they stumble upon some table or some chair – the man who has come to steal has a tremendous artfulness. In the darkness, in a strange house, he manages not to stumble, not to make any noise. And miraculously, he finds the place where the treasure is. He has no map, he has no way to find out where the treasure is. But the master thieves have an insight.
Gurdjieff’s sly man is the man who has a knack for finding the right door when there are thousands of similar doors all around.
It is true that Gurdjieff was a difficult man, almost impossible to cope with. One of his disciples, Nicoll, was traveling with Gurdjieff in America. In the middle of the night, they went aboard a train, and Gurdjieff, although not drunk, started behaving like a drunkard, utterly drunk.
The disciple said, “What are you doing, master?”
Gurdjieff hit Nicoll, and he said, “Who are you? I have never seen you before.” He woke up the whole train, because he was stumbling from one compartment to another compartment, shouting obscenities, waking people who were asleep, throwing their bags out of the train.
Finally the train was stopped; the driver and the conductor came in. But Gurdjieff was a very strong man, solid rock, and nobody dared to catch hold of him; he might throw the man out of the window! And Nicoll, poor man, was trying to tell the people that he is a great master! The people started looking at Nicoll and they thought, “You are mad. He is a drunkard and you are mad. He is a great master? – in the middle of the night waking strangers, throwing their things around, shouting obscenities, speaking strange languages!”
Somehow Nicoll persuaded the conductor and the driver, “He is a famous master, but what to do? This is his way.”
They agreed to let him stay on board only if Gurdjieff and Nicoll went into the compartment and they locked it from the outside. Then whatsoever they wanted to do inside they could do – the great master and the great follower – “But don’t disturb the whole train.”
As the door was locked, Gurdjieff relaxed, laughed, and he asked Nicoll, “How was the scene?”
Nicoll was perspiring in the air-conditioned compartment. He said, “The scene? You almost killed me. They thought I was mad, and I knew perfectly well you were not drunk, because up to then you were absolutely alright. And suddenly…?”
Gurdjieff said, “It was a test for you, whether you can stay with me if I behave in such a manner. Can you still see the master in me?”
Nicoll said, “I am ready to go to hell with you. Whatever you do, there is a deep trust in me that it must be for something good. I knew it all the way, but what to do with the passengers, the conductor, with the driver? The whole crowd was against me, and I am not so strong a man as you are.”
Gurdjieff was Caucasian, and the Caucasus is famous for producing really strong men. Another Caucasian was Joseph Stalin. The word stalin in Russian means man of steel. But Gurdjieff was far ahead of Joseph Stalin.
This was a test for the follower. Just think of yourself – you would have escaped. Seeing the situation, that he is going to be caught and thrown into a jail…. That’s what the driver and the conductor and the engineer were all saying: “If you don’t stop, we are going to throw your master into jail. At the next station the police will be there, we have already informed them.”
But to trust a man like me is very simple. I will not put you in any such situation. You need not steal anything from me, because I am putting everything on the table before you. So Gurdjieff’s statement is relevant only to him and to his disciples. It is absolutely irrelevant to me and you.
I am not your master, I am not hiding anything from you. You need not steal. I am trying to give you the gift and you go on running! I am trying to present you the truth, as a gift. But truth – even to accept it as a gift – is a difficult phenomenon, because if you accept the truth, then all the lies that you have been living up to now have to be dropped.
Gurdjieff was his type. I am my type. And I know there is no need for me to hide anything, because you are hiding from me, and I am trying to push truth, love, compassion, meditation – everything – into your pockets. And you go on running away from me because you know that I am a lazy man and I will not run after you.
You have simply to receive with grace. There is no need to steal here. Why should you be reduced to thieves? Why should you be made the sly man? I want you to be the innocent child, who is ready and open and vulnerable.
And I am so full of my ecstasy that I want to rain on anybody without asking his qualifications, his characteristics. But you are so afraid seeing the rain cloud coming up, you rush into your homes just to save your clothes, afraid that they will get wet. Yes, it is true you are dry, and if you allow me to shower on you, you are going to become juicy.
People have asked, “We see the women here in the commune are becoming juicier and juicier, and the men are becoming more and more tight, straight, afraid.” The reason is simple: the woman is always ready to open her heart. The man thinks a thousand times before opening his heart. He takes all precautions, because “Who knows what a man is going to do when you open your heart?”
But the woman is more trusting, more loving, more feeling. That’s why they are becoming juicier and juicier. Soon they will all be rain clouds ready to shower.
Now, it is up to you, a great challenge to man. Are you going to save your clothes? Then you will remain dry bones, straight, tight, but with no juice.
I am available.
You just drink out of me.
The well cannot run after you, you have to come to the well. But there is no need to steal, because the well is available, waiting for you.
This is one of the fundamental laws of spiritual life, that the more you give, the more you have. And I can say from my own experience that the law is one hundred percent true. The more I have given, suddenly I have found, from unknown sources of existence, more juices have flowed toward me.

Osho,
The other day you talked about your beautiful white beard. What I like the best about your face are those gorgeous wrinkles around your eyes. I have read that they are called “buddha wrinkles.” Is that because buddhas laugh so much, and therefore have wrinkles around their eyes?
(Osho simply laughs and asks for the next question.)

Osho,
Why has sex always been included with anger, jealousy, cruelty, greed, possessiveness, violence, but never with fun, joy, love, playfulness, friendship and other great things that you have associated it with?
Sex has nothing to do with jealousy, anger, possessiveness. But man’s mind has been conditioned in such a way by the vested interests that they have exploited the very source of your life energy – sex – to fulfill their own interests.
For example, man is naturally polygamous – and by man I don’t mean only men but women too. Human beings are polygamous, but all the societies have forced monogamy. Now that creates the trouble. The trouble is not coming out of sex, the trouble is coming out of monogamy.
You find yourself tied together with a woman or with a man, and it is a natural longing once in a while to have some different food. The same man-the same stink; the same woman – the same geography which you have explored thousands of times. Again you have to explore it and there is nothing left to explore – all is explored. You get fed up. That is intelligent; only intelligence gets fed up. You would love to have once in a while another woman, another man.
If society were run by intelligent people, not by people who want to exploit you, but by people who want to fulfill your nature to its uttermost capacity, there would be no jealousy. The wife would understand that once in a while the husband needs some other woman, “just the way I need some other man.” And it is perfectly natural. We are all human beings.
What is wrong if you play tennis with one partner today, another partner another day? Is there any jealousy? There is no question of jealousy. And it is nothing more than tennis – two energies meeting and merging. And after the pill, the basic argument of all the religions is completely outdated.
All the religions were insisting that monogamy has to remain because of children; otherwise, who will be responsible for children? The pill has made it possible that now sex need not be a bondage, because children are not a problem any more. Sex is free from the bondage of biology. Hence I say again and again that after the discovery of fire, the pill is the greatest revolution, the greatest discovery.
When there is no jealousy there is no anger, and all the qualities that I speak of will come automatically. A woman who gives you freedom, a man who never tries to possess you – you are allowed to move in the world according to your own wishes – do you think friendship will not arise between these two persons? A man giving freedom to the wife, a wife giving freedom to the husband – there is bound to be great friendship, great intimacy.
The wife can tell her husband how the other man was. The man can describe to his wife how the other woman proved to be. He need not hide it. The friendship makes it possible to come closer, to be more intimate. But the societies of the past never wanted this to happen. They wanted people to remain bored: tie one woman to one man forever, and you have started a pilgrimage to the ultimate boredom. These bored people, suffering, cannot revolt. They cannot achieve their climax of intelligence; the boredom goes on destroying every possibility.
Why was Xanthippe angry with Socrates? Why did she use to beat him? Why did she once pour hot boiling water, which was being prepared for the morning tea, over Socrates’ head? Half his face got burned and remained black for his whole life. What was the trouble?
The trouble was that he was more interested in his disciples. He was talking to his disciples when this great incident of pouring hot water on his face happened. And his wife was telling him again and again, “Come in, breakfast is ready.” But to a man like Socrates, when there is great intellectual conversation going on, breakfast means nothing.
Finally she got mad, threw the water over him. But Socrates was one of the greatest men in history. He wiped his face and continued his conversation where it had stopped. One of the disciples said, “We cannot understand – how can you tolerate this kind of a woman?”
Socrates said, “I don’t tolerate her. She has helped me to learn many things – for example, patience. I am grateful to her. Right now, she has again given me another lesson, that even if hot water is poured over you, you can remain cool. Without her, it would have been difficult for me to discover these spaces.” Socrates was never angry toward his wife, he was always compassionate.
When two persons give freedom to each other, they both grow rich in experiences. Perhaps there was a treasure in your wife that you were not aware of. Making love to another woman, you discover it; the other woman becomes a tremendous help. Now your wife is not just the old geography: something new, some new opening, some new corner, some new space…. You start searching for that new space that you have found in the other woman – because each woman is unique, just as every man is unique.
A man should be allowed to come in contact with as many as women as possible. A woman should be allowed to come in contact with as many men as possible. Both will be richer, and rich in experience, intimacy, friendship; they will know the heights of love which otherwise are missing.
But the vested interests don’t want you to be intelligent, to be rich in experience, to reach to the climax of your potential, because that is dangerous to them. You can remain slaves only if you are poor in experience, if you are poor in intelligence. You can remain slaves only if you are a hen-pecked husband. You know perfectly well that you cannot even control your wife. You will never try to make any effort to rise higher in any field, you know your wife can pull you down immediately.
And the wife has been imprisoned in the house. On whom is she going to take revenge? Who is responsible for all this? She finds nobody other than the husband.
This ugly situation is our own creation.
My effort is to help you understand that love is not a commodity. You think that that if your wife goes with another man for a few days, she will be spent; when she comes back she will be hollow and there will be no love. Love is not a commodity. In fact, tasting, experiencing a different man, from different angles, she may become aware of different angles in herself. She may come back more loving because she is more experienced, and she may give you a surprise – you had never known her this way.
I am for richness in every dimension of life. I am against poverty in every dimension of life. And you have been kept poor psychologically, spiritually, physically, so that a few people can become presidents, prime ministers, kings and queens, a few people can become popes, Ayatollah Khomeini…. Just for a few people the whole humanity is sacrificed!
I want you to rebel against any effort that takes away your freedom.
Freedom to me is the ultimate experience, the most beautiful, the most divine.
Never, for any reason, let your freedom be disturbed. Whatsoever the cost, keep your freedom intact. That will make you real man, real woman. Right now, you are just puppets: nothing real in you, everything unreal. And because everything is unreal, you feel miserable.
Reality releases you from misery, and brings you into a new world of blessedness. That is the kingdom I am trying to move you toward.

============================================================

Osho,
Is it possible to be responsible for oneself without first learning to love oneself?
It is absolutely impossible to be responsible for yourself unless you learn to love yourself. Every child is born with tremendous love for himself. It is the society that destroys that love, it is the religion that destroys that love – because if a child goes on growing in loving himself, who is going to love Jesus Christ? Who is going to love the president, Ronald Reagan? Who is going to love the parents?
The child’s love for himself has to be distracted. He has to be conditioned so that his love is always toward an object outside himself. It makes man very poor, because when you love somebody outside of yourself, whether it is God, the pope, the father, the wife, the husband, the children – whoever is the object of your love – it makes you dependent on the object. You become secondary in your own eyes, you become a beggar.
You were born an emperor, utterly contented within yourself. But the father wants you to love him, the mother wants you to love her. Everybody around you wants to become an object for your love. Nobody bothers that a man who cannot love himself cannot love anybody else either.
So a very mad society is created where everybody is trying to love somebody – and they have nothing to give. Nor has the other person anything to give. Why are lovers continuously fighting, nagging, harassing each other? The simple reason is they are not getting what they were thinking to get. Both are beggars, both are empty.
A rightly brought up child will be allowed to grow in love toward himself so that he becomes so full of love that sharing becomes a necessity. He is so burdened with love that he wants somebody to share it. And then love never makes you dependent on anybody. You are the giver; the giver is never a beggar. And the other is also a giver.
And when two emperors, masters of their own hearts, meet, there is tremendous joy. Nobody is dependent on anybody else; everybody is independent and individual, well-centered in himself, well-grounded in himself. He has roots which go deep down within his being, from where the juice called love comes toward the surface and blossoms in thousands of roses.
This type of person has not been possible up to now because of your prophets, your messiahs, your incarnations of God, and all other kinds of idiots. They have destroyed you for their own glory, for their own ego. They have crushed you utterly.
You can see the logic. Either the messiah, the savior, becomes the object of your love, and you become just shadows blindly following him; or if you are fully contented, overflowing with love and blossoming in thousands of roses, then who cares to be saved? – you are already saved. Who cares about paradise? – you are in it.
The priest will die if you learn how to love yourself, the politician will not have followers; all the vested interests in society will go bankrupt. They are all thriving on a very subtle psychological exploitation of you.
But learning to love oneself is not difficult, it is natural. If you have been able to do something which is unnatural, if you have learned how to love others without loving yourself, then the other thing is very simple. You have done the almost impossible. It is only a question of understanding, a simple understanding, that “I am to love myself; otherwise I will miss the meaning of life. I will never grow up, I will simply grow old. I will not have any individuality. I will not be truly human, dignified, integrated.”
And moreover, if you cannot love yourself, you cannot love anybody else in the world. So many psychological problems have arisen because you have been distracted from yourself. You are unworthy, you are not what you should be; your actions have to be corrected. You have to be molded into a certain personality.
In Japan they have four-hundred-year-old trees, but their height is only six inches. They think that it is a form of art. It is murder, sheer murder! The tree looks ancient, but is only six inches high. It would have been one hundred feet high, reaching toward the stars. What have they done? What strategy have they used?
The same strategy has been used against humanity, human beings. They put the tree in a pot which has no bottom. So whenever the tree grows its roots, they go on cutting them, because there is no bottom to the pot. The roots they go on cutting, and unless roots grow deeper, the tree cannot rise higher. It grows old, but it never grows up. Exactly the same has been done with human beings.
Your love for yourself is a basic necessity for your growth. Hence, I teach you to be selfish-which is natural.
All your religions have been teaching you to be altruistic. Sacrifice yourself for any idiotic idea: the flag – just a rotten piece of cloth. You sacrifice yourself to the nation – which is nothing but fantasy, because the earth is not divided anywhere into nations. It is the politicians’ cunningness, to divide the earth on the map. You are sacrificing for the lines drawn on the maps! Die for your religion: Christianity, Hinduism, Buddhism, Mohammedanism. And they have managed it in such a way that the individual is caught.
If you die for your nation you will be called a martyr – you are simply committing suicide, and that too for a foolish reason. If you die for your religion you will reach paradise, you will enjoy eternal blessings. They have manipulated you. But one thing is basic in that manipulation, that is, don’t love yourself; hate yourself, because you are not worth anything.
Everybody is full of hate for himself. And do you think if you hate yourself you can find someone who is going to love you? Even you are not ready to love yourself; it is impossible for anybody else to love you. You have accepted the idea that unless you follow certain rules, religious dogmas, political ideologies, you are not of any worth.
When you were born, you were not born as a Christian, as a Catholic; you were not born as a communist. Every child comes into the world as a tabula rasa, completely clean. Nothing is written on him – the Bible, Koran, Gita, Das Kapital – no, nothing is written on him. He brings no holy book with himself. He comes in utter innocence. But his innocence becomes his greatest trouble, because all around him are wolves – hiding in politicians, in priests, in parents, in teachers. They all jump upon your innocence. They start writing things on you which later on you will believe is your heritage.
They have destroyed your heritage. Now it is possible for them to enslave you, to make you do anything they want. If they want you to murder innocent people….
They are doing that right now in South Africa. Fifteen percent of the population, white people, are destroying eighty-five percent, black people. The country belongs to the black people; all its gold mines, diamond mines, belong to the black people. These fifteen percent white people are just invaders, thieves. But do you know? – those eighty-five percent of the people have no voting rights. The land is theirs, the gold mines are theirs, but they are the poorest on the earth. They only work as slaves and servants. It is not only South Africa, it is all over the earth.
There are religious mafias, there are political mafias, and they go on exploiting you. They may be enemies to each other, but on one point they all agree: that a man should not be allowed to love himself. That cuts his roots from his own being, and then he is helpless, rootless, just a driftwood, so whatever you want to make of him you can.
The people of this country were killing innocent, poor people in Vietnam. What business was it of theirs? And it was not one-sided. You were sending your own, who have not tasted anything of life, to kill and to be killed in the name of democracy, in the name of America. But why should one sacrifice oneself in any name? Mohammedans and Christians have been fighting, killing each other, in the name of God. Both are fighting and killing in the same name – God. A strange world we have created!
But the strategy is very simple: destroy the person’s natural love for himself. Then he is so unworthy in his own eyes, he is ready to do anything for a gold medal, just to feel a little worth – that he is also somebody. Do you see on your generals many colored stripes? What kind of stupidity is this? Those stripes go on growing as the general goes on killing himself, destroying himself.
You can have all those colors on your shirts. I don’t think there is any law that can prevent it, but you will look simply foolish. Those generals, they don’t look foolish, they are respected; they are great heroes. And what have they done? They have murdered many people of your country, they have murdered many people of other countries. These murderers are rewarded.
Have you seen any society rewarding its lovers? No, lovers are to be condemned. No society allows lovers any respect; love is an anathema to society.
So the first thing all these vested interests have to do is distract you from love – and they have succeeded up to now.
Millions of years…and man has remained a slave, feeling a deep inferiority complex in himself, unworthiness, because he is not able to fulfill all that is required of him. In fact, whatever is required is so unnatural that there is no way to fulfill it. And on your worthlessness the messiahs go on becoming bigger and bigger, because they say, they promise that they are the saviors; they are going to save you. You cannot save yourself. They never allowed you to learn swimming. On your own you can only be drowned.
The politicians go on giving you hope that soon there will be no poverty – and poverty goes on growing. It is not decreasing, it is increasing. The politicians go on saying that soon you will have a classless society. In Soviet Russia they have managed to create forcibly, against all human values, a classless society. But the people who had promised the classless society had promised that there would be no poor, no poverty. What has actually happened is that nobody is rich in Russia, all are equally poor. Great equality!
And the hypocrisy that the society is classless has to be understood. Yes, old class differences have disappeared because the rich are no longer there, so you cannot divide the society into the bourgeois and the proletariat. But a new class has come up: those who have power – the communist bureaucracy – and those who have no power. Just the names have changed.
Now, as a member of the communist party you have special powers – just the same way that in other countries rich people have special powers, and there is the rest of the country, powerless. This is not a classless society; new classes have replaced the old classes.
In Ethiopia thousands of people are dying every day. And you will be surprised, in America there are half a million people who are suffering from overeating, obesity; they go on becoming fatter and fatter. In Ethiopia people are shrinking, starving and dying. In America people are dying from overeating, in Ethiopia they are dying because they have nothing to eat.
Do you think this world that we have created is sane?
Half of India is going to face the same fate as Ethiopia soon – and India’s government is selling wheat, exporting wheat to the outside world. Their own people are going to die – not in small numbers: fifty percent of India is just on the borderline. Any moment it can become a bigger Ethiopia. But the political leaders are selling the wheat to other countries because they want nuclear plants, atomic energy, so they can also compete in the foolish race that is going on.
Anybody can see that it will take at least three hundred years for India to be a nuclear power equal to America or the Soviet Union. And do you think for these three hundred years America and the Soviet Union will simply wait? They will be growing in the same direction of destruction and death.
All this has happened in the name of altruism.
I want you to become absolutely selfish. Love yourself, be yourself. Don’t be distracted by any type of people – religious, political, social, educational. Your first responsibility is neither toward religion nor toward nation. Your first responsibility is toward yourself.
And just see: if everybody is loving himself, caring about himself, his intelligence will come to its peak, his love will be overflowing. To me, the philosophy of selfishness will make him really altruistic because he will have so much to share, so much to give, that giving will become a joy to him, that sharing will be a celebration to him.
Altruism can only be a by-product of self-love.
Because you don’t love yourself, you feel weak – because love is nourishment, it is your strength. Naturally, how can you feel responsible? You go on throwing your responsibility on somebody else’s shoulders. God is responsible, fate is responsible, Adam and Eve are responsible. The serpent who seduced Eve to disobey God – that serpent is responsible.
Can you see the idiocy of all this dumping your responsibility on somebody? – a serpent, perhaps millions of years ago…. I have tried hard to make some little conversation with a serpent, with a snake – they don’t speak. In fact, they don’t even hear. I discovered that serpents don’t have ears, ears are not part of their physiology. And if they cannot hear, how can they speak? And how could they persuade Eve?
But we have to dump our responsibility on somebody else. Adam dumps it on Eve. Eve dumps it on the serpent. The serpent – if he could speak – would dump it on God. This way we go on throwing our responsibility, without understanding that unless your are responsible for yourself you are not truly an individual.
Shirking responsibility is destructive to your individuality. But you can accept responsibility only when you have tremendous love for yourself.
I accept my responsibility, and I rejoice in it. I have never dumped my responsibility on anybody else, because that is losing freedom, that is becoming enslaved, at the mercy of others. Whatsoever I am, I am wholly and solely responsible for it. This gives me a great strength. It gives me roots, centering. But the source of this responsibility is, I love myself.
I have also been through the same type of mass exploitation. But from the very beginning I made it clear that if I am going to be pushed into heaven I will refuse it. Of my own will I am ready to go to hell. At least I will have my independence, my choice.
My parents, my teachers, my professors struggled with me. But I said, “One thing is certain: I cannot accept any bribery to become a slave. I would rather suffer for the whole eternity in hellfire, but I will remain myself. At least that much joy I will have – that this is my choice, nobody has forced me.”
Taken as a prisoner into paradise, do you think you can enjoy it? Going into paradise following Jesus Christ, or Moses, or Buddha, or Krishna – what kind of paradise will that be, where you are expected to be blind believers; you cannot ask a question, you cannot inquire about anything. That paradise will be worse than hell.
But people have been distracted from their very source.
I want you to come back home. Respect yourself. Feel the joy and the pride that existence needs you; otherwise you would not have been here. Rejoice that existence cannot be without you. In the first place that’s why you are here: existence has given you an opportunity, a life with tremendous treasures hidden within you – of beauty, of ecstasy, of freedom.
But you are not existential! You are Christian, you are Buddhist, you are Hindu. And I want you only to believe in one thing: existence. There is no need to go to any synagogue or any church. If you cannot experience the sky, the stars, the sunset, the sunrise, the flowers blossoming, the birds singing…. The whole of existence is a sermon! Not prepared by some stupid priest – it is all over the place.
You just need to trust yourself; that is another name for loving yourself. And when you trust and love yourself, obviously you have taken all the responsibility of whatever you are, whoever you are, upon your own shoulders. That gives such a tremendous experience of being that nobody can enslave you again.
My sannyasins are not my followers – that would be very disrespectful toward you. And to be disrespectful toward the people who love him is the ugliest act anybody can do.
I want to be just a fellow traveler with you. I am not your leader, I am not your savior. I don’t take any responsibility on myself, and I don’t want you to dump your responsibility on anybody.
Can you see the beauty of an individual who is capable of standing on his own feet? And whatever happens – joy or sorrow, life or death – the man who has loved himself is so integrated that he will be able not only to enjoy life, he will be able to enjoy death too.
Socrates was punished by his society. People like Socrates are bound to be punished, because they are individuals and they don’t allow anybody to dominate them. He was given poison. He was lying in the bed and the man who was going to give him poison was preparing it. The sun was setting – that was the right time. The court had given the exact time, but the man was delaying in preparing the poison. Socrates asked the man, “Time is passing, the sun is setting – what is the delay?”
The man could not believe that somebody who is going to die is so particular about the right time for his own death. In fact, he should be thankful for the delay. The man loved Socrates. He had heard him in the court and seen the beauty of the person: he alone had more intelligence than the whole of Athens. He wanted to delay a little more so Socrates could live a little more. But Socrates would not allow him. He said, “Don’t be lazy. Just bring the poison.”
The man giving poison to Socrates asked him, “Why are you so excited? I see such radiance on your face, I see such inquiry in your eyes. Don’t you understand? – you are going to die.”
Socrates said, “That’s what I want to know. Life, I have known. It was beautiful; with all its anxieties, anguishes, still it was a joy. Just to breathe is joy enough. I have lived, I have loved; I have done whatever I wanted to do, I have said whatever I wanted to say. Now I want to taste death – and the sooner the better.
“There are only two possibilities: either my soul will go on living in other forms as the Eastern mystics say – that is a great excitement, to go on that journey of the soul free from the burden of the body. The body is a cage, it has limitations. Or perhaps the materialists are right, that when your body dies everything dies. Nobody remains afterward. That too, is a great excitement – not to be!
“I know what it means to be, and the moment has come to know what it means not to be. And when I am no more, what is the problem? Why should I be worried about it? I will not be there to worry, so why waste time now?”
This is the man who loves himself. Even the responsibility of death he has chosen – because the court had nothing against him; it was just public prejudice, the prejudice of the mediocre people who could not understand the great flights of intelligence of Socrates. But they were in the majority, and they all decided on death for Socrates.
They could not answer a single argument proposed by him. I think they could not even understand what he was saying – answering was out of the question. And he destroyed all their arguments; still, it was a city democracy – the people decided that this man is dangerous, he should be given poison.
What was his fault? His fault was that “He makes our youth rebellious, he makes our youth skeptical, he makes our youth strange. He creates a gap between the older generation and the younger generation. They don’t listen to us anymore, they argue about everything – and it is because of this man.”
But the judges were a little better than the common people. They said to Socrates, “We give you a few alternatives. If you leave Athens and promise never to come back again, you can save yourself from death. Or, if you want to remain in Athens, then stop speaking, go into silence. Then too we can persuade the people to let you live. Otherwise, the third alternative is: tomorrow as the sun sets you will have to drink poison.”
What did Socrates do? He said, “I am ready to take the poison tomorrow or today, whenever the poison is ready, but I cannot stop saying the truth. If I am alive I will go on saying it till my last breath. And I cannot leave Athens just to save myself, because then I will feel always a weakling who became afraid of death, who escaped death, who could not take the responsibility of death also. I have lived according to my own thinking, feeling, being; I want to die that way also.
“And don’t feel guilty. Nobody is responsible for my death, I am responsible. I knew that it was going to happen, because to talk about truth in a society which lives on lies, deceptions, illusions, is to ask for death. Don’t blame these poor people who have decided for my death. If anybody is responsible, I am. And I want you all to know that I lived on my responsibility, and I am dying on my responsibility.
“Living, I was an individual. Dying, I am an individual. Nobody decides for me; I am decisive about myself.”
This is dignity. This is integrity. This is what a human being should be. And if the whole earth is full of people like these, we can make this earth so beautiful, so ecstatic, so abundant in everything….
But the individual is missing, and you have to take responsibility for yourself. But you will be able to take it only if you start loving whatever you are: this is the way existence wanted you to be. If existence wanted another Jesus Christ, it would have created one. To be Christian is ugly, to be Mohammedan is ugly, to be Hindu is ugly.
Be yourself, just yourself, simply yourself. And remember, you are taking a great risk when you declare that you are simply yourself. You don’t belong to any crowd, any herd. These are all herds: Hindus, Mohammedans, Christians, communists. You are declaring yourself an individual, knowing perfectly well that it is risky. The crowd may not forgive you at all. But it is so beautiful to take the risk, to move on the razor’s edge where every step is dangerous.
The more dangerously you live, the more you live. And it is possible to live, in a single moment, the whole eternity, if you are ready to live with totality, risking all and everything.
I don’t want you to be a businessman, I want you to be a gambler. And when you are gambling, put everything at stake. Don’t save anything for the next moment. Then whatever happens will bring great blessing to you. Even if you become a beggar, your being will be far more dignified than that of an emperor.

Osho,
I have a feeling that you already have two hundred enlightened people. Is this true?
It is true, but please keep it a secret!

Osho,
To break our habitual ways of acting, feeling and thinking, and to start witnessing instead, some effort seems to be required. But ultimately all effort, including the effort toward enlightenment, has to be dropped. Can you please speak on effort and non-effort, and how they relate to witnessing?
Don’t be bothered about the future. You have not started making an effort, and you are worried that ultimately you will have to drop making an effort also. Just start – make every effort.
I can only say one thing to you: when you have made every effort – and all the efforts will fail, as far as the ultimate experience of enlightenment is concerned – when all the efforts fail, you are not required to make no-effort. When all the efforts fail, there is no-effort. You have done everything that was possible, humanly possible, and everything has failed.
And everything fails as far as enlightenment is concerned. It is not your doing. But when everything fails, and you have not been miserly in making efforts, you were total – what remains? A great silence. That is the no-effort. You don’t have to do it. If you do it, it again becomes an effort. It is a non-doing that comes of its own accord; you cannot bring it.
But before it can happen, you will have to risk everything, make every effort possible. When you are finished with making efforts, a great silence descends, a great relaxation comes over you. That is the moment of no-effort, and in that very moment you find the light you have been seeking for many lives.
So please don’t be worried about no-effort. Just take care of all the efforts possible. Leave no-effort to existence itself! When you have done everything, suddenly existence becomes so compassionate toward you that flowers start showering on you. With your effort you were not able even to get a single flower. And with no-effort you suddenly find flowers are raining all over you.
And that’s why it can be said, enlightenment is not an achievement. you don’t become enlightened. When you are not, enlightenment happens. The moment your efforts fail, you fail.
And this is the mystery of religious experience: in your utter failure is your ultimate success. When you are not, for the first time, you are.

============================================================

Osho,
I trust you unconditionally, and now I'm no longer a sannyasin simply to rid myself of my fears. I am now here without any need, hope, desire or expectation. I am no longer feeling dependent on you. I am with you without any reason, just for fun, and I trust you without belief. Is this the state of being a true disciple?
Yes and no. Yes, because what you have described is authentically the state of a disciple. No, because you cannot cheat me. The description is right, but it is not about you. And my logic is very simple. If you were really independent, trusting me unconditionally, not out of fear or greed, without any desire or expectation, then this question would not have arisen in the first place.
The implication of the question is that you still want my approval and that is dependence. You are asking me, “Is this the true state of a disciple?” Why are you asking me? If you are experiencing it, the experience itself will be the answer. But you are not experiencing it. You may be imagining and you need my approval, you want me to say, “Yes – great, groovy.” But that will make you dependent on me.
I would love you all to be independent of me, because if you are dependent on me, in some way you will go on resenting me. Nobody loves a man on whom you are dependent, who has taken away your freedom, your independence, who has possessed you. You are imprisoned. Who loves the jailer? And I don’t want to be anybody’s jailer.
Please, don’t be dependent on me, because your dependence is dangerous to me. Behind your dependence will be great resentment, hatred. It is poisonous. I want you to be completely independent of me, so that I can be completely free from any resentment, hatred – at least from my sannyasins. You should understand my situation.
The whole world is hostile toward me. All the religions are full of hate toward me. All the politicians are agreed upon one point: that I should be removed as quickly as possible, that I should not be allowed to wake people anymore. The American government and the government of the Soviet Union may be enemies on every point, but on one point they are friends – that is me. Just think of the hostility all over the world, of all kinds of people….
Your love is protecting me, keeping me alive. But if your love is that of a dependent person it is no longer love, it is hidden hostility. So if you become independent I am freed from your resentment at least.
And I am concerned only with my world of sannyasins. Their love is my nourishment, their love is keeping me in the body. Otherwise, as far as I am concerned my work has been completed long ago. There was no need after that to go on living in the body, with all its troubles. But looking at you, I feel to hang around a little more.
But your dependence hurts me, even your dependence on getting approval from me.
Who am I? Meditate over your question again and you will see the implication: why have you asked it? You may not have been aware that you were asking for approval. But if your state needs my approval, my certificate, it is not freedom.
The true disciple trusts, but has no resentment, because he trusts of his own accord. He is not being forced to trust. He loves because only love is left in him, he cannot do otherwise. He is free and independent because now he feels himself for the first time an integrated individual. He is no longer a beggar – he has become an emperor.
I want you all to be emperors.
The more you are independent of me, the more you can help me to continue to be in a fragile body. After enlightenment it is really difficult to remain in the body because the function of the body is finished.
You are born again and again into new forms, new bodies, only for one thing: because each time you go on missing the train. And existence is very compassionate. It will go on giving you new bodies, fresh bodies, and it trusts that sooner or later you will catch the train, you will become enlightened.
After enlightenment, nobody is born again. It is impossible. There is no way to be back in the cage. Experiencing the expanse of the whole sky, experiencing all the stars moving within you, sunrises within you, sunsets within you - all that is, is contained within you. Who would like to enter a cage and destroy the beautiful experience of continuous expansion?
After enlightenment nobody is born again. After enlightenment, to keep oneself in the body becomes more and more difficult. The reason is very simple. Enlightenment is exactly what the word means, as if a lightning has fallen upon you. Your being and your body are no longer bridged. You are in the body but your connections with the body are destroyed. That lightning destroyed all connections with the body.
The body is affected by gravitation, but when all connections with the body are destroyed you are no longer under the law of gravitation. There is another law which science perhaps may never be able to discover. But the scientist has to understand according to his own rules, that every law has its opposite law to balance it. Everything has its contradiction, to keep the balance of existence. The law of gravitation they have discovered, because it is an objective phenomenon, but they know nothing about the law of levitation.
The moment you are disconnected with the body, your body is under the law of gravitation being pulled down, and your being under the totally contradictory law of levitation - it is being pulled upward. It becomes a tug-of-war. Hence most people die after enlightenment. There have been many enlightened people but very few masters, because just to be enlightened is not enough to be a master. You have to remain in the body, to have contacts, connections with other people who are in their bodies, who know only one law – the law of gravitation.
I have been able to remain in the body, with all the difficulties, in spite of all the difficulties that were bound to happen because the body is no longer in my control and I am no longer in the body’s control. If I have been able to remain in the body for these thirty-three years, it is because of your love – love which demands nothing, trust which is not based on any reason.
You are connected with the gravitation of the earth. Through you I can keep myself still connected with the gravitation of the earth. But through you it is possible only if you give me a passage, clear, and you don’t ask for any expectations, demands, desires to be fulfilled.
Your description of the disciple is absolutely true. But because you have asked it, you again missed the train. You are back to zero again. Don’t be sad, start the journey again. And when you start feeling what you are describing, please don’t ask for approval. Enjoy it!
Do you ask somebody, “Am I in love with you?” Either you are or you are not – no question of approval or disapproval. Do you ask, “Is this sunset really beautiful?” Your very question indicates that you are not feeling the beauty. You are asking others, as a support, so that your imaginary beautiful sunset becomes more real.
But nobody’s approval can make anything real. Even if the whole world denies your enlightenment you will still be enlightened, there will be no difference. Or vice versa: even if the whole world approves your enlightenment and you are not enlightened, all that approval is not going to make you enlightened.
You have beautifully described the real state of a disciple. But by asking the question you missed the mark.

Osho,
The other day you spoke against homosexuality and lesbianism. What about bisexuality? A few years ago you said that bisexuality was the hope for the new man, the only freedom in sex. Is it still so?
There are many questions involved in that one question. First, never bother about what I have said before. My memory is not that good – and that has been a great blessing to me. I don’t know what I have said on the yesterdays stretching backward thirty years. I know only what I am saying to you now. This has given me freedom to tell you the truth even if it goes against my past.
I am not confined by my yesterdays. I have never read any of my books and I don’t know what kind of things I have been saying. But whatever has been said was true for that moment, and exactly the same is the case now.
Never compare my statements with the past statements; otherwise instead of getting enlightened you will find yourself in an insane asylum. I have contradicted myself so many times, that anybody working for a PhD thesis on me will go crazy. He will never get the PhD. Nobody can make a consistent philosophy out of my statements. I have been consistent only in one thing, and that is inconsistency.
So first you have to drop all the yesterdays. The past is dead. And I am dying every moment to the past so that I can live in the present. You cannot do both things together – living in the past and living – it is not possible. Existence gives you only one moment at a time. Either you can waste it in remembering the past or you can waste it in fantasizing about the future or you can live it now.
My most emphatic thing is that now is the only reality there is. Past is no more, future not yet.
But your question must be troubling you. I have to tell you the truth. First, homosexuality and lesbianism are both against nature. I have in the past not said it so clearly for a simple reason: not to hurt many gay people who are around me. I don’t want to hurt my people. Just to avoid wounding them, I can lie. That is not a problem, because my experience of truth is far above any lies: no lies can disturb it.
So I have been either silent or telling you that whatsoever you are – homosexual, a lesbian – accept it, don’t condemn it. I never want to create any guilt feelings in anybody, particularly my people. I want them to be completely guiltless, because all other religions have done just the opposite. They have created guilt in you, and through guilt they have enslaved you, because when you are guilty you want to be freed, saved from the guilt. The messiah, the savior is needed. His agents go on creating guilt in you and then he comes to save you.
I am not a savior. Nobody has ever been a savior, that is all hocus-pocus. All that I can do is not to make you feel guilty. That’s why either I have been silent, or I have told you to accept.
I can lie for you. My love is enough to make me capable of lying for you. And it does not make any difference to me – I am beyond it. So once in a while I have even appreciated your homosexuality, your lesbianism-just to free you of the guilt. Homosexuality was not the point, the point was how to make you free from the guilt.
I have gone even to the extent of saying in the future the new man will be bisexual – neither heterosexual nor homosexual. A man who is heterosexual has a limitation: he cannot be homosexual. The man who is homosexual has a limitation: he does not feel any attraction to women. The bisexual man is one who has no limitation. He can be in love with a man, he can be in love with a woman.
Yes, I had gone even to that extent, knowing perfectly that it was a lie. But how to make you guilt-free? I have made statements as if homosexuality and lesbianism are progressive steps: the people who are not homosexual are still lagging far behind those who have entered the gay world. But all these are lies, used to erase your guilt from you. But how long can I go on lying to you? One day or other I have to tell you the truth: otherwise I might not have told it at all.
AIDS is the ultimate development of homosexuality, and it has no cure. You have gone so far away from nature that there is no way back, you have broken all the bridges behind you. That’s the disease AIDS.
Medical science cannot help you. It can only confirm that you have the disease, and at the most you have two years to live. That is at the most, because AIDS is a totally new kind of disease. It cannot be categorized with other diseases. Even cancer can be cured, can be operated on. But AIDS does not allow any treatment.
It has to be understood, what it is. AIDS somehow makes you drop, deep down, the desire to live. And the moment somebody gets to the point where he loses the desire to live, he becomes vulnerable to all kinds of infections: he does not create antibodies to fight with disease. He has dropped out of the game of life. No medicine can give back the desire to live. And when you are absolutely vulnerable to any kind of infection – two years is just the longest possibility guessed by the medical profession – most probably within six months you will be gone.
And the danger is, when you know that within six months or one year you are going to leave, you would like to make love to as many men, as many women, as possible – because now you cannot postpone, you may die tomorrow. Tomorrow has never been so uncertain. You have to do whatever you want to do now – today, as quickly as possible.
And when a man is going to die within six months he becomes irresponsible, careless. He starts making love and having contacts with many people – he has to compress his whole life of sexuality into six months. And there may be something biological in it also. It has been a known fact that when somebody is crucified, before he dies his semen escapes from his body immediately. The man is dying; those people who are there in your semen, millions of people, they don’t want to die; they have not even lived, they have not even been born.
Inevitably the dying man on the cross ejaculates before death. Perhaps those poor people hidden in his semen think they may find some way – at least there is no harm in making an effort. This fact has been known for centuries, because whenever a man was put on the gallows this has happened without any exception. Now, AIDS is almost the gallows. Yes, the time period is a little longer – six months, maybe one year. Perhaps if you happen to be in one of my communes, two years.
But knowing that you are going to live only for such a little time, why not make the most of it? And your biology also supports you: “Before you leave the body, let all the living beings hidden inside you be released. At least this favor you can do for the unborn.”
And the people who have AIDS outside my communes are capable of bribing the doctors so that their disease should not be made public…because just the knowledge that you have AIDS creates such a condemnation by the society – the same society that has created AIDS, the same society that has created homosexuality.
You will be condemned by the priests, by the bishops, by the pope. And these are the people who are behind AIDS. These people are the virus. Homosexuality is a religious discipline – putting men into one monastery, not allowing them to meet with women, creating all kinds of barriers so they can remain celibate; putting women into nunneries where no man can enter so that they can remain celibate…. Man is intelligent enough – if he cannot find the natural way, he is going to work out some unnatural way.
And we cannot condemn those monks and nuns who invented homosexuality and lesbianism. That was the only way left for them. That is why I say homosexuality is a religious discipline. It is a by-product of the stupid emphasis on celibacy.
It is not possible. You go on eating food, you go on drinking water, you go on doing exercises; your body goes on creating blood, new cells, bones, and in the same way it goes on creating semen. Your body has never heard about celibacy; celibacy is not a program in your body. Your mind has decided to be celibate, but what has the mind to do with it?
Your mind may decide never to urinate again. What then? There is going to be trouble. You go on drinking water, and the mind has fallen into the hands of a certain religion where urination is the worst sin. So you pretend that you don’t urinate. And the people who follow you for the simple reason that you don’t urinate make a great saint of you, because what is impossible for them you have made possible; you have done it.
Now you will have to find some way – perhaps a tube inserted from your side to the bladder so that secretly you can manage to release all that has accumulated in the bladder; otherwise you will go insane. Your urine contains many chemicals, eight chemicals. If they go on accumulating and no way out is given, they will poison you. Urination is a way of getting rid of all these poisons that you are unknowingly eating, breathing; anything that is against your life, urination takes out.
Celibacy is absolutely absurd. Nobody except the impotent have been celibate. And one thing to be remembered: no impotent person has been known all down history to have become enlightened. Very strange! In fact, all impotent people should become enlightened before anybody else; they are naturally celibate, with no effort. Even if they don’t want to be celibate they have to be celibate. Their bodies don’t create possibilities for sexual relationship. But impotent people have not become enlightened, not a single one. On the contrary, the people who became enlightened were oversexual.
Sex is energy, and when you are oversexual then just sexual relationships cannot give you contentment. They are not enough, you have more energy than they can absorb. That superfluous energy takes you into new inquiries, new spaces, which ultimately culminate in enlightenment.
You will be shocked to know that Buddha was oversexual, Mohammed was oversexual. About Jesus I am not so certain, for the simple reason that he was a Jew, most probably a homosexual. And those twelve apostles always hanging around him, day in, day out…. It was a playboy club. And as far as Jews are concerned, homosexuality is their contribution to the world. They have contributed many things. In the Old Testament, which in the West is the oldest scripture available, there is a story about two cities, Sodom and Gomorrah. Sodom has become in your language “sodomy.” Sodomy means making love to animals. In the city of Sodom people were making love to animals.
The Jewish god is not love, compassion – no. The Jewish god himself declares, “I am a very jealous god – I am not nice, I am not your uncle” – exactly these words. He became very angry at Sodom and Gomorrah.
I wonder why Gomorrah has not become a name for a certain type of sexuality. In Gomorrah there was homosexuality, lesbianism. Whenever I think of the word Gomorrah, I am reminded of gonorrhea.
God became so frustrated with these two big cities that he decided to destroy them; and the Old Testament says those two cities were absolutely destroyed. They had come to a culmination of perversion. God is a myth, but Sodom and Gomorrah are historical facts. It was not God who destroyed those two cities, it was their perverted sex.
Perhaps those two cities are the pioneers in experiencing AIDS. It is not mentioned, but just a little reasoning can make it clear. There is no God to destroy anything – but those two cities have existed, their ruins are still there. What happened to those two cities? – because in those days nuclear weapons were not available, atom bombs were not there.
What happened to those two big cities? They suddenly evaporated. My conclusion is that they suffered from AIDS. Certainly their medical profession was three thousand years behind ours; they may not have been able to figure out what was happening, but people went on dying.
By the way, if you allow me a little drift…. There is a Hassidic story…. Hassids are Jews, but not accepted by the orthodox Jews. There is something in Hassids which I appreciate. Hassids are the only people who can be said to be our predecessors. Their religion consists of celebration, dancing, drinking. And their dances are really graceful, their singing is beautiful. Their being drunk cannot be called a sin because out of their drinking they have never committed any crime. They have just danced more joyously, more fully.
The story is…it must be a creation of the Hassids because their history is not that old, only three hundred years. Gomorrah and Sodom are three thousand years old. But the story is beautiful – that’s why I wanted to drift. The story says that when God decided to destroy Sodom and Gomorrah, one Hassid – now this is pure fiction because Hassids were not in existence there. One Hassid approached God and told him, “I have a few questions, and you have to answer them, because it is a question of the lives of thousands of people.”
God was willing; he said, “You can ask.” The Hassid said, “You have decided to destroy Sodom and Gomorrah, but have you thought that there are a few people in both cities who are absolutely innocent? I know them, I am one of them. There are one hundred Hassids in both of the cities – are you going to destroy these innocent people too? They have not committed any crime. Are you ready to take this responsibility? Won’t you feel guilty?”
God said, “I have never thought about it: one hundred Hassids, innocent people…Perhaps I will have to change my decision to destroy Gomorrah and Sodom.”
The Hassid said, “I have to ask another question. For a hundred innocent people you are ready to change your decision, but in fact there are only ten Hassids. Does the quantity make any difference? Will not ten innocent people be enough to save Sodom and Gomorrah?”
God thought for a moment, and said, “You are right. It is the quality, not the quantity. Even if there are ten people who are innocent, I am not going to destroy the cities.”
The Hassid said, “I have a third question. In fact there is only me who is innocent. Six months I live in Gomorrah and six months in Sodom. Is that going to change your mind? Again it is a question of quantity: from one hundred to ten, from ten to one – the same proportion. And how can I give a guarantee for a hundred people, that they are innocent? How am I to know about ten people that they are innocent? You are asking me inhuman questions. I can absolutely guarantee one thing: that I am innocent. Now tell me what you are going to do.”
The Hassidic story says God had to concede to the Hassid – because it is the quality that matters. Millions of criminals can be saved, but one innocent person should not be destroyed. Innocence is so valuable, it is so rare and unique. This is a Hassidic story. It is not in the Old Testament, but it is a beautiful story.
A single man of innocence can change the course of existence. Gomorrah and Sodom certainly were destroyed. No Hassid interfered – no Hassid was there.
There is no God, so it creates many problems for me and for the queen of England. For me, because I cannot find out what could have destroyed these two cities, except AIDS. And I don’t think the queen of England can find even that much explanation. If there is no God, then who is going to save the queen of England? I don’t think anybody is going to save the queen of England – so homely, so ugly. It is better that she is not saved. And now it is possible, because there is no God; the queen of England has to disappear soon.
Because of AIDS which is a new development in human sexuality – I condemn all perversions concerning sex. And I can do it now, because now I have my own people. Even if they are gay they will not feel guilty. They are only victims of history. They will not feel that they are condemned. I am condemning the popes, the priests, Ayatollah Khomeiniacs.
And if you are homosexual or lesbian, it is simply a question of changing your mind. And the change is simple because you are changing from the unnatural toward the natural. If you could manage to change yourself from the natural into the unnatural, I trust you, that you can do the opposite very easily. You have done almost the impossible, you have changed the natural into the unnatural – now, please, come back to the natural.
I find it absolutely berserk – a man making love to another man while there are so many beautiful women. Love needs contrast, polarity. Man and woman are two polarities of sexual energy. Just as love will go out if there is no polarity between plus sexuality and minus sexuality, between positive sexuality and negative sexuality, the same is true about electricity: the positive electricity and negative electricity. They both have to be there for the lights to remain on. If you want just one pole, the positive electricity or the negative electricity, there is going to be no electricity at all.
Sexual energy is very close to electrical energy. Perhaps for sexual energy the right word is “bioelectricity.” And it has been known at least in one case, but one case is enough proof…. A woman in Sweden became a problem: she was very beautiful, but whosoever made love to her got electric shocks. And one shock was enough, nobody wanted to make love to the woman. Soon it became common knowledge to avoid that woman. The shock was so much that one felt one was almost dying.
The doctors became interested – what was happening? They persuaded somebody for experimental purposes – in the service of humanity – to make love to the woman. They put a five watt bulb in the hands of the woman, and they were shocked, because the bulb lit up. The man got a shock and fell out of the bed, but the bulb lit up! Sex is bioelectricity.
You have to come back to your natural polarities. If you want to avoid a catastrophe destroying the whole humanity, you have – just in the service of humanity – to change your mode of making love man to man, woman to woman. That is not right, and it can never be satisfying.
Yes, it is less complex, that is why people have fallen for it. Two men in love are happier than a man with a woman. It is not accidental that these people are called “gay.” They are the only happy people on the earth. Wife and husband – you cannot call them gay. They are tortured by each other so much, nagged, harassed…pillow fights every night – that finally a few intelligent people decided that this arrangement was not working. And man is an experimenting animal. They started trying man with man, woman with woman, and found that this is less troublesome.
Yes, there cannot be any orgasmic experience because there is no polarity. There are not two opposites attracted toward each other and meeting. The meeting of the opposites creates orgasm. But you have to pay for that orgasm twenty-four hours a day. And one gets tired, one thinks, “Forget all about that orgasm.”
It is good with two men. Of course there is no orgasmic experience; they settle for less but there is no trouble. They don’t harass each other, they don’t nag each other. A woman in love with another woman, a man in love with another man, are more understanding about each other – naturally, because both are men, both have the male energy, the male mind. There is much more understanding between two men.
Between man and woman understanding is impossible. Misunderstanding is the law, because they are opposite polarities. The woman has a totally different kind of functioning than the man. You can see it in any dialogue between a husband and wife….
I have been a guest in hundreds of homes, and I have been a witness to many couples’ conversations. And I was surprised: the man says one thing, the woman understands something else; the woman says something, the man understands something else. They are both using the same language, the same words, but their interpretations differ.
Every talk ends in a fight. Every talk becomes argumentation. It seems as if there is no possibility between man and woman for beautiful conversation. Conversation I have never seen between men and women – only fight, argument. And they are so different, their reactions are so different. The woman cannot argue as well as the man. But she can scream better than the man.
People ask me, “Why are there so many women in your communes?” Today I tell you the truth – it is because of dynamic meditation. One hour of huffing and puffing and screaming and throwing tantrums releases the woman for twenty-three hours; she has done enough.
The man can argue, and argue rationally, but the woman does not bother about argument. Her counterargument is throwing things, breaking plates, screaming loudly. And you can be sure she is the winner. All that rationality and argumentation the man forgets. He simply starts cooling the woman down: “The neighbors will wake up…. I’m sorry, I was wrong.”
Every man, every day, is saying that to the woman, “I am sorry, forgive me – but keep quiet.” He knows he is right. The woman knows he is right. But who bothers about right? The question is might, and the woman has real might for making tantrums, throwing things, screaming, shouting, doing Dynamic Meditation in the middle of the night.
For centuries upon centuries this has been going on. Finally, a few people decided that this was too much; it is better for a woman to love another woman because they understand each other’s mind, they can have a conversation very beautifully. And they both know screaming won’t help because they can both scream better than the other. Throwing things will not make any difference because both can throw things better than the other. It is useless.
Two men find friendship very easily because they understand each other’s mind, reasoning, argument. They can converse. But this conversation between man and man, woman and woman, has brought AIDS into the world.
My people at least – because I can only ask my people – can make the effort of going back to the natural way. And I can ask my sannyasins not to repeat the old pattern, settled for centuries, of fighting. Be friendly to each other.
A man and woman in deep friendship will give the best result of two persons meeting. Their love will be orgasmic because they are polar opposites. Their conversation will become more and more friendly, understanding that their minds function differently, that they have different strategies to win. They should both drop their strategies and open their hearts to each other. And if lovers cannot open their hearts to each other, then who is going to do it?
In the outside world you can be certain, either they are going to be destroyed by nuclear weapons – that is the heritage of all the politicians of the past – or they are going to die and disappear by the other alternative, that is AIDS. And that is the ultimate conclusion of all your religions. Politics has brought nuclear weapons, religions have brought AIDS.
There is a possibility that nuclear weapons may not be used, because all politicians are trembling; because the war is not going to decide who is the winner and who is the loser. The nuclear war will be total war; the victorious and defeated both will die. Not only man, but life as such on earth will disappear. There will not be trees anymore, nor roses anymore, nor birds singing in the morning, nor animals. Anything that has life will be destroyed. It is pointless.
I am happy that they have come to nuclear weapons. That way, war has committed suicide. It is impossible for politicians to go for a nuclear war; it is meaningless. One goes into war to be victorious, to come back with glory. But in this war there will be nobody left behind even to write the history as to who was the winner, America or the Soviet Union.
This war will be the end, the end of all that man has created for centuries – the poetry, the painting, the music, the dance. All that millions of people have created for thousands of years to make this earth beautiful will be simply erased.
Nuclear weapons – just because of their total danger, their total death – are out of the question. They cannot be used. I challenge the politicians to use them, start the third world war. They cannot do that. But AIDS is a different matter. Politicians can see the danger. But the viruses that spread AIDS are worse than politicians: they don’t understand what they are doing.
In the outside world, anybody who has AIDS will try to hide it because he will be condemned by the priests – who are really the cause of it – and he will be condemned by the society. People with AIDS will become untouchables. Everybody will avoid them. This will be worse than death.
So in the outside world everybody is going to hide the fact that he has AIDS. And that is very dangerous, that means he will go on spreading it. it can be caught through sexual contact. It can be caught just by kissing. Kissing should be absolutely prohibited, it should be declared the most criminal act possible.
I know the French will suffer the most, but what can we do? French kissing is the worst. But there are already people on the earth…. Eskimos rub their noses, they don’t kiss. In India there are tribes, aboriginal tribes, very primitive, five thousand years back – they don’t kiss. They became aware of kissing only when Christian missionaries reached their mountains and forests to convert them.
They could not stop laughing, seeing these idiots kissing each other. They are not civilized people, they don’t know much, nothing about medicine, but this much they know, that saliva carries all kinds of germs. And when two persons are kissing each other it means they are mixing their saliva and transferring sicknesses to each other.
I suggest to my people: stop kissing completely. And don’t be worried that rubbing noses will not be so exciting. It is more exciting because it is a novelty, something new, a discovery. So two things: become natural and stop kissing. Rub noses, it is good exercise for noses. Jews are going to defeat you – they will be known as the best lovers. Chinese, Nepalese, the Mongol races will not find it exciting. Flat noses…what can you rub? They will have to find something else.
Because men’s and women’s bodies have many erotic parts, there is no problem. For example, you may not be aware that Vatsyayana, the first sexologist of the world, has written five thousand years ago that the earlobes are the best erotic points. Try it! Rub each other’s earlobes, and you will be surprised that Vatsyayana is never wrong. Whatever he has written in his book has proved right. If your noses are flat, don’t be worried. I am here to suggest something else to you.
And in our communes all over the world no sannyasin should try to hide that he has AIDS, because there is no condemnation. In fact, the moment we find that somebody has AIDS, he becomes the focus of all our love. He is going to live a very short time, he deserves all our kindness, friendship, all our compassion.
All sannyasins should go through medical tests to find out whether they have any possibility of AIDS and spreading it to our own people. And if they are found to have AIDS, then they have to do two things: one, they have to give the names of all the contacts they had so all those other people can also be checked if they are here.
And we are making a beautiful place, the most scenic place, in Desiderata, where two people who have AIDS are already living. There is no condemnation for them, there is only tremendous compassion. We are giving them everything that they need, because they are going to live so short a time. They should know the best of everything. If they smoke they should get the best cigars. If they drink they should get the best wine, not the wine that Jesus created out of water; that wine was bogus. They should get everything they need.
And in Desiderata we will create more places. If there are other AIDS victims, we will keep them together. They can be very creative while they are living. They can paint, they can sculpt, they can write poetry. They can read, they can see films, they can read novels.
And one thing more, if they want to make love to each other they are free to, because nothing more can happen. Only one thing is possible…. Medical science has not yet been able to find any cure, and they think there is no possibility of finding it either; they are not hopeful.
As I see it, if people having AIDS start making love to each other, perhaps their AIDS will disappear. If these people live longer than two years we have proved the point. And perhaps we will be the people to give the cure to the world. No medicine is needed, just put two AIDS victims together. Make a small colony of AIDS victims. Let them make love, let them do whatsoever they want among themselves. And I have this certainty – I know not from where it comes – that that is the only possibility of the disease disappearing.
So whatever I have said in the past, forget all about it. What I am saying today, listen to it.
Act with responsibility.
Act with consciousness.
Act with compassion.
And remain absolutely certain that the commune is going to take care of you with respect, because you are a victim of the priests, monasteries, nunneries. They are the criminals, you are the victims. So by having AIDS nobody loses respect, he gains more respectability. And we will take care of you. We will see that you live more luxuriously than anybody in the commune, because you are going to live for such a short period. Every luxury should be made available to you – the best scenic spot, the best houses, the best food; everything for you.
I am trying to make it possible that around the world all sannyasins should move to the communes. No sannyasins should live outside the commune anymore, it is not safe. I am congregating small centers into bigger communes. There are centers, there are ashrams, and there are communes. Centers are very small; they are where people simply come to meditate, or a few sannyasins live. Ashrams are bigger; many sannyasins live and work there. And the commune is the whole society, self-sufficient. So I am dissolving the centers and ashrams and turning them into bigger communes where we can take care of everything. And we will make all these communes exactly the same – the same standard of living, the same facilities. And now, because I am speaking, I am available around the world on the screen. They are not missing me anymore. Perhaps they can see me better than you can, far away. If I cannot see your face, I know you cannot see my face. But these communes will be having the largest screens possible; they are not going to miss me.
Here, I have told Sheela that it is sad that I see people sitting so far away – they cannot see me, they cannot see my eyes, and the changes that come into my eyes. They cannot see my gestures. They can only hear my words which is one-third of the whole thing, because my hands are speaking, they are not silent. My eyes are speaking. When I am speaking, my whole being is involved in it.
I had asked Sheela, “Why don’t you put a big screen also by the side?” But the problem was that it would be a distraction: to look at me, or to look at the screen? So you have to make this compensation. Here I am alive. There I will be on the screen, available to everybody – but it will be only a picture. So you are both compensated: they can see me, you can feel me. And every commune is going exactly the way we are going.
This commune is the prototype for all the communes around the world. I can help you to save yourself from AIDS.
And I am not worried any more about nuclear weapons and the third world war. I was worried in the beginning because there was a possibility four years ago that either America or Russia could have won – at a very great cost. Most of humanity would have gone. But four years ago there was a possibility of somebody becoming victorious. Now that possibility is finished. They are going on piling up more and more nuclear weapons. Already they have so much that they can kill every single individual seven hundred times.
And you know, even the only begotten son of God, Jesus Christ, missed resurrection. We are ordinary people, we are not in any special relationship with God. Your mothers were not made pregnant by the Holy Ghost. Dying one time is enough. Seven hundred times seems to be just stupidity. Whom are you going to kill? Who is going to kill seven hundred times? So now a third world war is out of the question. Forget about it, it is not going to happen.
Now the only problem that is facing us is AIDS. And from that we can manage to save at least our people. So spread the message to all the sannyasins who are still living in the outside world. Perhaps they have their vested interests there – salaries, positions, employment; forget all about that because AIDS is also there. And it will catch you sooner or later – more probably sooner than later.

============================================================

Osho,
When I look around your commune and see people hugging the way they do, and feel the energy I have when I hug someone here, I wonder why this doesn't happen in the outside world. Please comment.
It cannot happen in the outside world, because for centuries man has been conditioned against the body. It has been told by all the religions that if you want to become spiritual you have to become anti-body. If you want to achieve the other world you have to renounce this world. And hugging is a very sensuous, physical experience of tremendous importance. But what to say about hugging? – even touching has been tabooed.
These religious programs that have been given to you are so inhuman that if we can simply drop out of all religions and forget the past completely, you will see an immense explosion of warmth, love, hugging, touching, and for the first time you will feel alive.
The whole effort in the past has been to make you as little alive as possible, more dead, just surviving somehow, breathing somehow, dragging yourself to your grave, waiting for death to come to release you.
And your body is such a beautiful phenomenon. It is you. It is your circumference, and if you deny the circumference you can never find the center of it. The center is your being; it is not against the body. It cannot survive without the body for a single moment; the body is its nourishment.
You see in the whole world people almost dead, somnambulists walking in their sleep, miserable, suffering for thousands of reasons; but the whole thing is based on a simple phenomenon: you have been turned against your own body. Your center and your circumference have been cut off from each other. But to reach you one has to pass the circumference.
You have seen in the East, saying hello to someone, you don’t shake hands. That is against spirituality. You are coming in contact with the body of the other person, the warmth of the other person. In the East nobody hugs anybody, because hugging is thought to be something sexual. It is not. Certainly it is sensuous, but not sexual. And you have to understand these two words clearly.
The alive man is sensuous. It means all his senses are functioning at the very peak. He sees better. His touch is not like holding a dead branch of a tree in your hand. His touch is alive; it is a language, it has a message. His energy is transferred to you, your energy is transferred to him.
The meeting of two energies is always a rejoicing. It is just like two dancers dancing in rhythm, two musical instrument players playing in rhythm, complementary to each other. But even in the West, where people shake hands, energies don’t meet. Christianity is the cause. You shake hands but your energy, rather than going to the other person, shrinks back. The fear of being sexual, the fear of being sensuous, the fear of being interested in the other person’s body – that is thought to be unspiritual.
It has been discovered that if you look at a woman for more than three seconds, it is unspiritual. Three seconds is casual. Just passing on the road, you cannot avoid it; a woman comes there, a Cleopatra walks by – three seconds is casual. Beyond that, your eyes are touching the woman – a distant touch, like a remote control. And if you stare in the eyes of the woman more than three seconds, she will feel offended; you have already penetrated her body through her eyes. And it is not allowed by etiquette to look back again and again at the woman.
But do you know the meaning of the word respect? It means looking again. Respect does not mean honor, respect means you are enchanted. It is re-spect; you would like to see again…again…. Perhaps you will change your route and follow the woman.
In a more humane society the woman will not feel offended. And deep down she does not feel offended now. Even after thousands of centuries’ conditioning, her feeling of being offended is superficial. Deep down she rejoices, deep down the undercurrent of nature is there. Not to look at a woman again, not to look back, is certainly an insult. Not to look in the eyes of a man or woman for more than three seconds is humiliation. You have rejected the person, you have not been nice to the person.
Hugging is closer than seeing. If seeing makes people offended, if in shaking hands people shrink their energy back…. People use the phrase “a warm welcome,” but it rarely happens. It is always a cold welcome because your energy moves back. Your hand is just cold, not radiating warmth. There are dangers for the religious people: if your hand feels warm and the other person is also open to receive and give, things are not going to stop there.
If just two hands meeting in a warm glow give you so much joy, hugging the whole body will be a thousandfold more. And making love…? These are just steps. Hugging the body, you are close but still separate. Making love means you have entered into each other.
Your so-called phony saints, messiahs, prophets, have all been very cunning. They did not allow you the first step, because one thing leads to another, and finally it is going to end in a very deep sexual orgasm.
So you will not find the same quality, the same intensity in the outside world. If people hug, it is just out of etiquette, but they keep as distant as the stars are – millions of light-years distant. And have you watched, when you hug? You feel…not joyous, you are doing some duty. You have to hug your mother, your father, your sister on some occasions, but both of you keep aloof. The fear of sex has been so deeply programmed in you that anything that can lead toward sex is prohibited.
To me, to my people, warmth is life. In your sharing it, it grows. The more you share it, the more you have it. And each individual has a unique quality in his warmth. If you are sensuous enough-and that is what I want you to be – you will be surprised that in shaking hands with different people you find differences in energy. The quality, the force, the intensity, the flavor, the fragrance of it – everything is unique with every individual. But when you shake hands in a cold way, or hug a body as if two skeletons are meeting in a graveyard, then there is no difference.
Life gives you uniqueness; death destroys your uniqueness. Two dead bodies are exactly the same, just dead, but two living bodies are never exactly the same. Existence does not believe in carbon copies. Existence believes in originals; it creates only originals.
If you are sensuous you will be surprised how many riches you have been unaware of. Even a beautiful dress touching your body will give you a feeling of well-being. The cloth is not alive, but you are alive and sensuous. Your senses are functioning at their climax. Have you watched it? Wearing some clothes, you feel dirty, although the clothes may be clean. Wearing their clothes the way businessmen wear their gray suits in the marketplace – they don’t feel anything for their clothes. They cannot feel human beings, how can they feel clothes?
But I say to you on my own authority, that if you are sensuous enough, even ordinary things – clothes, a cold drink, a hot cup of tea or coffee, the smell of the coffee, the fragrance of tea boiling in the kettle, the aroma that it creates…. You will feel all these things, and they will all make you richer and richer, more and more alive – and there is no limit to it. How alive you can be – and how rich you can be, there is no limit to it. It all depends on you how many programs you are courageous enough to drop.
Christians, Hindus, Mohammedans – their religious doctrines may be different, that does not matter. That is simply a verbal game, logical gymnastics, but the base is the same: to make you as dead as possible. They will not say this to you, “We are making you dead.” No, they will use beautiful words: renunciation – renouncing the mundane, the profane.
And it is strange that you have not been able to figure out a simple thing. On the one hand they say renounce the world, its pleasure, its warmth, its love, its riches, so that you can have a millionfold of the same riches, of the same warmth, of the same love, of the same joy, in paradise. On the other hand they go on saying, “Don’t be greedy!”
I cannot figure out what nonsense they have been teaching to you. And you have been listening, learning, being programmed by their nonsense, so much so that you cannot see a simple contradiction: they are teaching you to be greedy! Here renounce, so after death you can get a millionfold.
Great! Is this some kind of spiritual lottery? It cannot be business. In business you can get a few percent profit, but a millionfold? So the greedy people have become religious. And the rewards for your sacrifices are immense. Christians, Mohammedans, Jews – all these three religions believe only in one life. One life means just a small life – seventy years. Those few years don’t count in the world of eternity, they will pass soon. To sacrifice seventy years to gain the joys of eternity is a simple thing. You are just greedy.
And you are not seeing a simple phenomenon: if these things are sin here, then your saints in paradise are committing sins a millionfold. You will commit sins only for seventy years and not continuously, because you have to eat, you have to bathe, you have to shave, you have to earn your bread and butter, you have to fight with your wife, with the neighbors, you have to go to the court, you have to be in some politics, you have to go to the churches, synagogues. What is left out of seventy years? Even if you can get seven hours, that will be too much.
You have to sleep one-third of your life; eight hours per day you sleep. And you have to do many other things. You have to see the football games, you have to see the Olympics. You have to go to the movies, you have to play cards. Just count, and you will be surprised: not even seven hours are left! For seven hours of joy, warmth and love, you are getting eternity – and what an eternity!
I have heard…. A master died, and after a few days one of his disciples also died. Perhaps he could not live without the master, perhaps there was no point in living anymore. He had risked everything to be with the master. He lost the lust for life – he died.
Of course, he was absolutely certain that he would be taken to paradise. He was no ordinary man. He was a great disciple of a great master. And certainly he was taken to paradise. As he entered, he could not believe his eyes: he saw his old master sitting under the shade of a tree, with Marilyn Monroe naked in his lap. The disciple closed his eyes.
He said, “My God! What is happening?” But then he remembered, those who renounce in the world will get a millionfold in the other, so there was nothing wrong. He fell at the feet of the master and said, “Great master, you have proved what you have been saying all along, that those who renounce in this world will get one thousand or one millionfold in the other world.”
Before the master could speak, Marilyn Monroe said, “You idiot! I am not his reward, he is my punishment!”
Religions have just been telling you stories. I can manage my own – far better. They have been giving you hope in the other world and taking everything from your life in this world. And this is the only world there is; there is no other world. Yes, this world extends to infinity, multidimensional infinity, but this is the only world, there is no other world. And this seventy-years’ life is a training period.
If you are befooled by the religions, by your political leaders, and destroy these seventy years of joy, blessing, love, ecstasy, one thing is absolutely certain: paradise is not for you, because you have not even graduated from this seventy-year life. In seventy years you trained for hell! All your religions are giving you training for hell. Suffering, torturing yourself, fasting, celibacy; no smoking, no drinking, no taste while you are eating.
Hinduism makes it one of the first fundamental principles: tastelessness. Now how can these people teach you sensuousness? Taste is a sense.
You cannot taste food the way I taste. I can say it because once I was also a camel like you, so I know both kinds of taste. When I see a sunset you may be standing by my side, but you cannot see it; your eyes have lost their sensitivity.
Listening to Mozart you may fall asleep, but listening to jazz music you start jumping, shouting, screaming. Jazz is simply crazy! It is not music. These Beatles are really beetles, not human beings, but they appeal to you. To understand the classical music of the East you will need very sensuous ears, very trained, disciplined; the music is so subtle. The same is true about all your five senses.
Five senses are the accepted number of senses around the world, although we should change it now because there is a sixth sense hidden in your ears. But old habits die hard. And that sixth sense is far more important than any other; that’s why it has been kept hidden in your ears, so nothing can disturb it. That is the sense of balance.
When you drink too much, that sense gets affected; you cannot walk in a straight line, you wobble. Above all, don’t wobble! When you are hit on your head, and you see the whole world moving around you, and you fall, that sense of balance has been hit.
If all your six senses are functioning, ready to be receptive, you will have a rich life.
When I say I am a rich man’s guru, I don’t mean that Rockefeller, Ford, Morgan, and the Kennedys are my disciples. When I say I am a rich man’s guru, I mean real riches. Dollars are bogus! What richness is there? Richness comes through your senses.
I want you to become more and more sensuous.
That’s why you feel a difference when you hug somebody here, because the person who is hugging you is absolutely open, vulnerable, available to you; you are open, vulnerable, available to the other person. And when these two vulnerabilities, two opennesses, two skies full of stars meet together, for a moment you are not two; you become one. Your circumferences overlap each other. You feel life throbbing within you with a double force. Nobody is a loser, both are gainers, because both feel the same way – life doubled.
In my commune hugging is a way of becoming rich. It is a way of understanding life.
It is a way that leads ultimately to the goal of love, and there is no other God than love.
I contradict Jesus. He says, “God is love.” He has misunderstood. No, I say to you, “Love is God,” When you say God is love, it means love is only an attribute of God, and there may be thousands of other attributes. When I say love is God, I have really finished God completely: only love is.
My communes are universities to learn the ways of a rich life, of love, beauty, warmth, compassion, humanity.
We are not gathered here in search of some dodo God who always sits on the roof – I don’t know why; can’t he come down a little bit so people can see him? If you go on the roof, he disappears from there. He has been disappearing constantly. First, he used to live on the peaks of mountains. Then man reached there, and found nobody. God has moved his luggage to the moon, because the silly priests could not think that sooner or later man is going to reach to the moon.
One cannot expect much intelligence from priests, for the simple reason, that if they were intelligent people they would not be priests in the first place. They waste their life in teaching nonsense. They destroy other people’s lives, because other people become conditioned by that nonsense. According to me, all your religious prophets and messiahs are criminals. They have only supplied you with consolations, hopes, and they have taken all that is real from you.
I want you to drop all hopes.
That does not mean that you become hopeless. You can become hopeless only if you have hope. Hopelessness is the shadow of a hope that has failed. The moment you drop hopes you have dropped hopelessness, the moment you drop expectations you have dropped frustrations - two birds with a single stone.
And if you are courageous enough to drop your consolations, reality is yours.
My people hugging are not two skeletons rattling their rib-bones with each other. My people are flesh, blood, everything that is real. And they know the secret: radiate warmth and love around you, and you will be getting more and more from existence.
Existence understands only the language of reality. The moment you are real, you are in a communion with existence.
It is not only a question of hugging, it is a question of accepting your body as a beautiful phenomenon. It is the most complex, delicate thing in the whole of existence.
You don’t know what is going on inside your skin: continuous work twenty-four hours a day, millions of living cells doing thousands of things. Hairs are growing in the night when you are asleep. Breathing is not dependent on your mind; otherwise you can forget sometimes. Particularly in sleep, who will remember to breathe? And if you have to remember to breathe, how can you fall asleep? Breathing is your life. And your body is supplying you with everything you need.
The functioning of the inner body is so miraculous that Jesus walking on water looks just stupid! You eat food. Have you ever imagined how it becomes blood, flesh, bones? Who is doing all this work? How does your body manage to select only that which is nourishing and reject that which will be an unnecessary burden on you? It is continuously throwing all kinds of poison out of your body, and you are not even thankful toward it.
And your religious prophets go on saying things against you body without even understanding the simple fact that what they are saying is being said by the body.
I want my people, for the first time in the whole history of man, to be lovers of themselves, their bodies.
Take care of the body, it is taking care of you. You cannot repay it, there is no way. It is doing so much for you, what have you done for it? fasting, celibacy, standing naked in the burning hot sun, or standing naked in the freezing cold. And these maniacs have been worshipped down the centuries as the greatest heroes of humanity.
Get rid of these heroes. They all need to be imprisoned. They all need psychiatric treatment, they are simply mad. But the line of mad prophets and messiahs has impressed strange ideas on your delicate mind.
They are all against sex. Why? Because sex is the source of life. They are against life, that’s why they have to be against sex; otherwise, what is so great about celibacy? They are preventing you from giving birth to new life, to more life, to better life. They have stopped you marrying faraway people. Russians won’t marry Americans, Christians won’t marry Hindus, Chinese won’t marry Africans.
And that’s how it should be – they should marry someone who is far away from their own lifeline, because crossbreeding has proved in plants, in animals, a significant fact: out of crossbreeding comes a better generation, better than both father and mother. If these religions and nations and races had not prohibited people in these ten thousand years, then we would not be still dragging – sad, burdened, frustrated, still going to the church and to the synagogue.
And remember, if crossbreeding becomes normal, all world wars will become impossible, because in one family you will find a Chinese, a Hindu, a Christian, a Mohammedan, a Jew. Who is going to fight whom? – we will all be so intermixed. And that’s my commune. Nobody bothers who you are-black or white, English or German, American or Russian. There are Russian sannyasins here. Nobody even thinks about your race, your religion, your color.
We are a life-affirmative religion. And this is happening for the first time in the world: all other religions have been life-negative. That’s why you feel the difference. You will find differences in everything.
People talk outside; have you ever watched what they are talking about? If you are in Britain, they are talking about the weather. But strange…because both are there and they both know what kind of weather it is. What is the point of conversation? There is some secret in it, because it is the most non-controversial thing. If you start talking about anything political, immediately conversation stops, argumentation starts. If you talk about anything religious, conversation stops – you are a Catholic and the other one is a Protestant.
You cannot talk even about significant things of life; you can talk only about weather. Just watch in the outside world, people are not conversing with each other; in fact, they are all trying not to be in a real confrontation. They are not opening their hearts, they are not saying what they always wanted to say.
One German film actress had come to India to my commune there. Her image in Germany was falling down; she was getting fewer and fewer films to work in. She wanted some attention so she could again become a great star.
She came to my commune, She did a few groups, meditated, and then suddenly – not saying anything to anybody – she disappeared. And while leaving Bombay airport, she gave a press conference in which everything that she said was a lie: that she has been beaten, she has been raped, that they were going to kill her; somehow she has escaped. In Germany, she became again a great famous star.
Her husband wrote a letter to me. I want you to know what was in that letter. Her husband wrote, “I don’t believe what my wife is talking about, because every day she goes on adding more and more against you and your commune. I don’t believe that any such thing has happened to her. If it had happened, she should have gone to the police department nearest to your commune. There was no need to go to, one hundred miles away, give the press conference and get into her plane.”
But he said, “I don’t believe any of these things have happened, but if they have happened I am immensely pleased, because this is what I have always wanted to do to her but I could not gather courage. She is a bitch!”
What kind of life are people living if the husband carries such ideas about his own wife? And the wife must be doing things to him; otherwise, why should he carry these ideas in his mind? No, no husband and wife have any conversation. They only argue, they fight. What kind of love is this? And the whole world is in the same rut. The reason is that life has been denied, condemned – naturally, if it is condemned, who wants to learn the art of it?
My religion is nothing but the art of living, the art of loving. And if you can manage two things – total life, total love – the third thing, enlightenment, will come of its own accord. You have earned it. You need not seek it, you deserve it. It is a reward from existence to those people who have respected life, loved, lived, danced, enjoyed.
So it is not only a question of hugging, it has many implications. People in the outside world are not really living. Perhaps hippies were right, when they said, “Don’t believe anybody who is more than thirty years old.” I agree with them, because it is nearabout thirty years of age that people die. And after that they may live fifty years, but that is a posthumous existence. They go on living because they have got into the habit of living. Just the way they go on smoking, they go on living – how to drop the habit?
But life is not a habit, life is a continuous inquiry, exploration. Life is a journey of discovery, and unless you have discovered the ultimate truth of your being, don’t stop anywhere. There are many stopping places – very beautiful, very charming, alluring, magical. Remember one thing, that unless you have come to realize who you are, there is no stop. Yes, you can rest a little bit on every stopover, but keep moving, keep flowing. Remain available to all kinds of experiences.
Don’t live like a coward! In other words, don’t live like a Christian! Live like a man, not like a gentleman; just a man is enough. Live like a woman, not like a lady. The lady is dead – when a woman is dead she is called a lady. When a man is programmed completely by the society, he is called a gentleman.
I want only raw men, raw women – natural, unpolished, free from the mind. And if you can live that way, everything in your life will become a rejoicing. And everything in your life will make you richer.

Osho,
Although you keep telling us to enjoy sex and to have fun, I often find myself feeling serious and not very alive when I have sex. Somehow I'm afraid to just have fun. I don't understand it. Can you explain?
Everybody understands it, including you.
It is your conditioning. You have been told so many times that sex is sin, that, whenever you make love, immediately that conditioning comes in between you and your lover. You start feeling guilty and serious. You start thinking, “What am I doing? I am doing something against Jesus, against Buddha, against Confucius.”
You are doing something against all the great religious people of the world. You are alone, a tiny, small human being, and you are going against the whole history of thousands of prophets and messiahs of all the countries, of all the nations. Naturally you become serious, and your seriousness makes you feel dead.
Seriousness belongs to the dead. Have you ever seen any dead man laughing? Or even smiling?
Laughter belongs to life; seriousness is part of death. The living person is always playful, not serious. And because I say making love is nothing but fun…. You have been told it is sin, and I am telling you it is fun. The difference is so much that you become puzzled. It is not sin. If it were sin, existence would have created you without your genitalia. What was the need? Nature would have found some other way to produce children.
I have heard about one couple…They were traveling to a faraway star – the story must belong to the twenty-first century. They reached the star. They wanted to know everything, because it was a living planet: human beings, trees, birds, animals. Although it was a bit different, it was recognizable. They wanted to understand as much as possible about the new place because soon they would have to leave and report on the earth what they had found.
They entered into the first house. The people were very loving, they asked them, “Would you like something – a cold drink, a hot drink?”
They said, “No, all that later on. First, we want to inquire about a few things on this planet.”
The host was also interested to know about the earth. He said, “That’s good, because I also want to know about your planet. And the first thing I want to know: how do you create children?”
The couple was a little embarrassed because such questions are not asked on the earth. But seeing that nobody was going to report what they said or did, the man said, “An explanation is difficult, so I will make love to my wife, and you can say this is how we create children.”
When he started making love to the woman, the host and his wife just went mad laughing. They could not believe that this is the way of producing children. In the first place, the poor woman is under this huge animal – and he is doing pushups! Strange kind of exercise!
And because of their laughter, the people from earth were even more embarrassed. First, they were making love; secondly, those two persons were standing there laughing – just going mad. He stopped making love, and he asked, “What is the matter?”
The man said, “We are laughing because this is the way we make coffee! As far as children are concerned, we have a very simple method.”
They took them to their fridge and opened it. In one jar there was some liquid of a green color, in another jar liquid of a red color, and they mixed both the liquids in a third jar and closed the fridge. The earth people could not understand how a child was going to be born. He said, “Within nine months those two liquids will give us a child. In fact, in our world the most difficult thing is to make coffee – children are very easy.”
If existence wanted sex to be a sin, it would have given you some other arrangement for creating children. Existence is not against sex. And you have to be aware of the fact that it does not concern only humanity…. Your saints appreciate flowers – they are ignorant, they don’t know what they are doing. They are appreciating sex, because that flower is not for saints to appreciate, it has nothing to do with the saints.
Saints or no saints, poets or no poets, the flower has seeds. And in plants there are male plants, female plants. Of course, those poor fellows cannot walk and hug each other and make love to each other – which would have been far more pleasant. They have to use butterflies to take their sperm to the female eggs, and leave it there with the female eggs. These flowers are very sexual.
Why are they so colorful? And why is there so much fragrance? Not for you. The fragrance is to attract the butterflies, the bees. The colors are to attract. If they were colorless, without fragrance, then no butterfly, no bee would be so stupid as to come to them. They have to create a magnetic force for them to come. This is a sexual phenomenon. The birds, the animals, the whole existence depends on sex for giving birth to life.
Your religions are against existence. They are telling you sex is sin, and celibacy is virtue. And everybody knows what kind of celibacy is happening in the monasteries, what kind of celibacy is maintained by the bishops, priests.
Just the other day I had the information that one Christian minister has been jailed for one and a half years because in the pulpit he was preaching celibacy, and with a fifteen-year-old boy he was making love. Now other boys have also informed that he has been doing the same with them.
One of the popes before this polack was a homosexual. He was a bishop in Milan, and everybody knew about his homosexuality because his boyfriend was always hanging around with him everywhere. When he became the Pope, the boyfriend moved from Milan to the Vatican, and became his secretary. These people will go on talking about celibacy, and they will drive you mad; they have driven the whole of humanity mad.
That’s why I say sex is playfulness, it is fun. You cannot accept the idea of fun because of your conditioning that it is sin. It is a quantum leap from sin to fun! But what can I do? It is fun.
You will have to drop your conditioning. And you will not be a loser, you will be profited by dropping the idea of sin. Even though you know it is sin and you know celibacy is virtue, you are still making love. What does that show? – that these ideas cannot prevent your nature, but they can cloud your mind. When you are making love your mind is clouded with all these ideas.
The priests have not been able to abolish sex from the world, but they have poisoned it. A man is in a split state, the woman is in a split state when they are making love. Their minds are clouded with all kinds of theologies going against sex, and their bodies are making love. They are not totally there.
It is not a psychological disease that men suffer from premature ejaculation. It is a religious disease, because the mind is so afraid that you are committing a sin – so be quick! Commit it soon and be finished! The whole credit goes to Jesus, Mohammed, Mahavira. You cannot take the credit for premature ejaculation; it is a very religious thing. You could not manage to remain celibate, nature forced you. You cannot make love joyously, playfully, because the mind is continuously disturbing you from both sides, telling you something is wrong.
You should have a film of yourself making love to your wife or girlfriend, and once in a while look at the film. You will be surprised that your face looks so embarrassed. You look in such a hurry. You seem as if you have been forced, that somebody is keeping a gun behind you: “Make love, otherwise….” And look at the face of the woman: she seems to be going into a fit, her face is distorted. This is not orgasm, this is sheer stupidity.
The woman thinks you are a dirty old man. Because she is your wife, it is her duty; so she is fulfilling her duty knowing perfectly well that this is sin. How can the woman come to orgasm? She is not there. She is lying there in the bed almost as a corpse. And no man wants the woman to be very active, because then she is no longer a lady.
The word “lady” means a good lay: peaceful, silent, dead – “You do your thing and be finished.” You are in such a hurry, and your mind is so much troubled, you cannot have an orgasm either. Just ejaculation is not orgasm. It is a sheer wastage of energy.
And the woman has a different pace. In nature, the male and the female have the same pace. They come to the orgasmic state at the same time, because the animals have not heard that making love is sin, so they are not in a hurry.
Your mind is against what you are doing, it is pulling you – you are in a hurry. And the woman has a slow pace. She is a far more delicate mechanism, and her whole body is erotic. Man is poor in that way. Only his genitalia is erotic; the whole body is just attached to the genitalia to keep it functioning.
But the woman’s whole body is erotic. Naturally, the whole body takes a longer time to start vibrating with joy, to start feeling the warmth. By the time she starts feeling anything, the man is snoring. He has finished the job, closed the file, fallen asleep – not only that, he is snoring. Many woman have told me that after making love they cry and weep. Who would not cry and weep with this type of man? The woman has not come, and the man is finished.
Because of your religious teachings, sex has become for man only a kind of sleeping pill. Relaxed, the energy gone out, you don’t have any more energy for the mind, for it to go on and on and keep you awake – you fall asleep. This is not the purpose of sex. Sleeping pill? You can get any brand you want, any type you want – a woman is not needed. This is insulting, to make woman just your sleeping pill.
And because the woman cannot experience any orgasm in such a hurry…. In India, perhaps ninety-eight percent of women don’t know what orgasm is. In the Hindustani language there is no word for orgasm. In the West it is only within these thirty years that woman has become aware of her birthright. But her birthright goes against the whole Judaic and Christian tradition. If a woman has the birthright to experience the most beautiful ecstasy, the orgasmic feeling, ego disappearing, time stopping, utter silence descending on her, and so much joy that she cannot contain it – if this is woman’s birthright, and it is, then man will have to be trained again.
He has to learn foreplay – playing with the woman’s body before making love – so that the body becomes warm, starts throbbing with excitement. And when he feels that the whole body is ready, then he should make love. And while he is making love, don’t keep the Bible in between. I don’t think anybody can make love with the Bible in between.
Forget all that nonsense that you have been told and conditioned by, and make love delicately, slowly.
You will call a man an idiot who drinks a cup of tea in one gulp and is finished. He will burn his mouth, the tea is wasted. He does not know how to drink tea; it has to be sipped, not gulped!
Go slowly. Wait for the moment when the woman is also ready, and allow the woman her womanhood. Please, take away this label of lady. Let her also be active, because if she is active, she will be coming sooner to the point of orgasm. With her lying dead you cannot hope….
And remember the third thing: when the orgasm has happened and you both are so full of joy, then the last part of it is still to be completed – the appendix, the afterplay. The woman has given you so much joy, the man has given you so much joy-yet without even saying thank you to each other you go to sleep, with no gratitude. The only way to show your thankfulness is to play with the woman’s body again – afterplay, let the woman play with your body….
And don’t think that only prostitutes are active and only prostitutes play with your body. Every woman would love to play with your body but is afraid she will be thought of as a prostitute. And can’t you see a simple fact, that people who have beautiful women as their wives still go to prostitutes. For what? Because among prostitutes there is no lady.
Now this whole strange situation they have created themselves. The prostitute is more satisfying than any wife, for the simple reason that she is being paid to make you utterly satisfied; she is a professional. Your wife is an amateur, just the way that you are an amateur.
Now there are male prostitutes also available, particularly in California. So don’t be worried; if you go to a prostitute, your wife can also go to a prostitute – a male prostitute who gives her more satisfaction because he is just a man – professional, skillful, knowing all the ways to make the woman come to the peak. But this should happen to every lover!
My own understanding is, if sex becomes fun, prostitutes will disappear from the world. There is no need for any woman to fall so low as to sell her love. At least leave one thing, love, out of the market-place – just one thing which is not a commodity. It has no price label on it. It is immensely valuable, but it has no price.
The man who goes to the prostitute is falling in his own eyes. The woman who is functioning as a prostitute is deep down condemning herself, because she is selling something which is priceless.
But remember, priests and prostitutes will disappear together.
It’s the priests who have forced millions of women to be prostitutes, because they have created the idea of sin in your mind. All these things are interconnected. And I always go to the very root. That’s why I emphasize, let sex be a playfulness, a fun.
And since the invention of the pill, there is no problem, you need not be worried about children. Now it is completely fun, with no responsibility, with no trouble following it. Enjoy it! Put your mind aside. Tell the priest, who is continuously in your mind talking to you – yakkety-yak, yakkety-yak – to go to hell. You are making love and the priest is giving his Sunday sermon!
No, love is such a beautiful phenomenon that you should learn the art of love, just as you should learn the art of life.
If you can afford it, your room for love should be separate, because it is a temple. And when you enter the room of love, you should leave your shoes out – and your heads too; just put them in the shoes. And before you make love, have a good shower, be clean. Meditate for a few minutes. Make it a beautiful experience.
Let the room be lighted not by electricity, but by candles. Let there be some fragrance just as it is in the temples; burn fragrance. And in the room of your love, never do anything else – no fighting, no argument. If you are not in a good mood, then it is better not to go to the room of love.
You are unaware of many things…. The same bed in which the husband and wife sleep, they fight there, they argue, they throw pillows at each other, and then they make love too, on the same bed. They don’t understand that each act, each thought, each feeling has its own vibration. The room of love should be full of the vibration of love.
I want love to be your only God.
And with God you need not be serious.
You have to be playful, joyous.
It is simply a question of understanding what is happening to you, and the very understanding will change the whole thing.

Osho,
You recently described yourself as the last barrier to our freedom. I have always felt glad that being in love with you is a way to become ultimately free. But my heart is flooded, and my eyes are full of tears with the realization that I no longer wish to cross the last barrier. I am so in love with you that I don't care for the freedom that costs us your departure. I just want to go on sitting with you forever. Could you say something?
Baby, you have already passed the barrier. Don’t be worried!

Osho,
My father, who is currently visiting here, shocked me yesterday by saying that none of his children were wanted, we were all mistakes. Can I use this as an opportunity to go back and remember and clear up some past conditionings? Do you think that my father, who I feel I resemble at times, is still affecting me today?
Don’t feel any resentment toward your father, because everybody is a mistake.
There is no way for the father and mother to know who is going to be born to them – Adolf Hitler, Joseph Stalin, Mao Zedong? In each sexual intercourse the man releases millions of living cells, and they all rush fast, just the way men are – speedy, more speed…. All men in some way are Americans. But you have to forgive those living cells, because they have only two hours of life. If they don’t reach the female egg before two hours have passed, they are gone forever.
And the trouble is, those one million or more living cells are in a great car race, because only one will be able to reach first. Sometimes two reach at the same time – that’s why twins are born; very rarely, three, even more rarely four. The record is nine, but that has happened only once. The rule is that out of these one million living beings – which are all unique; nobody knows their potential, what they could have become if they had been born – one reaches. And once one cell has reached the female egg, the egg closes. The others are left out just to die.
And it is not a small passage for those poor people who are hanging between life and death. It is not a simple question. If the living cell was the size of a man, six feet, then the track he has to move along will proportionately be two miles. Two miles they have to go and what a rush, what a competition! And everybody is trying to drag the other back.
Whoever reaches first is accidental. Everybody up to now is a mistake. So don’t be offended by your father. He has told you a simple truth, be grateful to him.
It will be possible only when we start producing children by scientific accuracy, in the lab, in the tubes, that we can figure out what potential the female egg has and what potential the male egg has…. Every hospital should have banks, just as they have banks for blood: banks for semen, banks for female eggs. And out of those banks they will choose the right combination, which can give a genius to you – healthy, long-living, never getting old, never falling sick. Everything can be managed, just the right cells have to be chosen.
My own proposal is that it is going to happen in my commune soon.
You cannot be allowed to produce accidental people, mistakes.
It is time to understand. Out of millions of people there is one Albert Einstein, out of millions of people there is one Mozart. This is just ugly. We can have as many musicians, dancers, poets, scientists, novelists, sculptors, computer engineers, electronics people, painters – whatsoever we need.
You just have to drop the old unnecessary idea: that your child has to be from your cell and from your wife’s egg. What nonsense! Eggs are just eggs, semen cells are just semen cells. You have to become accustomed to blood transfusion, because blood is blood. If it matches with your blood it becomes your blood.
So whenever a couple wants a child, they should not produce the child themselves. Love they can make as much as they want. That is fun, it is nobody else’s business to interfere. But if they want a child they should simply go to the medical center and give their specific requirements, what kind of child they want. And it is very simple, it can be managed. They can tell you that after a few months you can come back and have the child. But the child will be born out of the jars, remember.
You can go on making your coffee, that’s okay, but don’t create so many mistakes around the world: mediocre people, retarded people, blind people, crippled people. This is your responsibility. All this could have been avoided. There is no need for any Adolf Hitler to be born. There is no need for any Joseph Stalin or Mao Zedong to be born. We can simply throw those cells into the garbage can. Choose the best. And you have so many cells of unique qualities that it is stupid to leave it to a blind race.
No, man has to live more consciously.
Your father is right, and he must be respected for that. He has accepted it. Other fathers are not so courageous as to say, “You are a mistake.”
And there is no need to feel any resentment. Just feel happy. Rejoice that you came before my laboratories started working; otherwise, there would have been no chance for you. And you are resentful? Be thankful to your father. Touch his feet: “Father, you made your mistake at the right time! Just a little later and I would not have been anywhere to be found.” There is no need to feel resentful. This is how children have been born down the centuries.
But I would like to change this whole thing so no father, no mother can say to their child, “You are our mistake.” They will have asked for the child. Everything – the color of the hair, the color of the eyes, the shape of the face – everything can be filled in on a requirement form, and then it is for the medical people to figure out. And that too is not difficult; computers can do it very easily. You just feed the computer the information, “We want such a kind of child. You figure out and tell us the numbers of the bottles, which two bottles will be used to make the coffee.”
Be happy, rejoice, and that will make your father also happy, because he must be feeling bad that he has been going on committing mistakes. All his children are mistakes! No, let him feel happy: “You did well. You did it at the right time. If this crazy man had come before, there would have been no chance for us. If you can commit a few more mistakes, do it soon, because the accidental man is going to disappear by the end of this century.”
The twenty-first century will know exactly what kind of people are going to live on this earth.
I am introducing you to the twenty-first century.

Osho,
When you talk about yourself and the natural way for us to be, my heart aches and I feel shaky and joyous. Then when you talk of politics, religion and other more abstract topics, I feel distant and find it hard to relate to them. Is this just my mind getting in the way of the arrows from your heart?
You don’t have any mind, that’s why, because when I am talking about religion, philosophy, theology and other abstract subjects, they go above your head. You don’t have any mind. You are unnecessarily bragging that your mind is disturbing you. But you are not losing anything.
Let them go above your head. You just rejoice when I am talking about myself, about you, about love, about things that stir your heart.
But I am not speaking for one person, you have to remember that. I am speaking to one million sannyasins around the earth, and many I can approach only through philosophy, through religion, through theology. But that is not your problem.