---
title: Guida Spirituale 01
series: Guida Spirituale 01-16
talk_number: 1
url: https://oshoworld.com/guida-spirituale-01
language: English
duration: 01:52:20
author: WESTERN MYSTICS
scraped_at: 2026-01-03T09:15:25.200749+00:00
---
Hear then the wisdom of the wise:
Go placidly amid the noise and the haste, and remember what peace there may be in silence.
As far as possible, without surrender, be on good terms with all persons.
Speak your truth quietly and clearly; and listen to others, even to the dull and the ignorant; they too have their story.
We enter today into one of the most beautiful worlds – that of a small document called Desiderata. It is strange because it has appeared many times and disappeared many times, hence nobody knows exactly who wrote it. Truth has the capacity to appear again and again. Because of human stupidity it is lost again and again too.
Desiderata seems to be one of the most ancient documents available today, but it is copyrighted by a poet, Max Ehrmann. In his book of poems it is given as a poem authored by him and copyrighted in 1927 in America. But in the first edition he talks about the legend that this small document was discovered on a plaque installed in St. Paul’s Church in Baltimore when built in 1692 But it was lost: there is no proof anymore whether it was installed as a plaque in St. Paul’s Church or not. The legend is there, it has persisted. It seems Max Ehrmann had a vision of it – it came to him as a vision. He is not really its author but only a receptacle, a medium.
This has happened to many other documents too. It happened in the case of Blavatsky’s The Voice of Silence. She is known as the authoress of the book, but the book is very ancient. She discovered it in her meditations, it appeared to her.
Many parts of Friedrich Nietzsche’s Thus Spake Zarathustra are also very ancient, and the same is the case with Omar Khayyam’s Rubaiyat. Mabel Collins’ Light on the Path is of the same category, Kahlil Gibran’s The Prophet also.
I have looked into all Max Ehrmann’s poems but no other poem has the same quality, not even a single poem. If Desiderata was written by him, then many more poems of the same quality would have flowed. It has not happened. In fact, Desiderata seems to be so different from all his poems that it is impossible to believe that it has come from the same person.
The same is true about Mabel Collins’ Light on the Path. These are strange documents. The possibility is that they have always existed, again and again lost visibly, but truth manifests itself. Whenever there is a vulnerable soul, a receptive person, truth again starts flowing through him. And of course the person will think, “I am writing it.”
It is because of this fact that the Upanishads have no names of authors; nobody knows who wrote them because the people who received them were very alert and aware. They were mystics, not only poets.
This is the difference between the poet and the mystic: when something happens to the mystic he is perfectly aware that it is from the beyond, it is not from him. He is immensely glad, he rejoices that he has been chosen as a vehicle, as a medium, but his ego cannot claim it. In fact, you become a mystic only when you have dropped the ego. But the poet is full of the ego – not always, but almost always. Once in a while, when he forgets his ego, he touches the same world that is the mystic’s world; but the mystic lives there. The poet once in a while gets a glimpse of it, and because his ego is not dead, he immediately claims it as his creation. But all the ancient seers were aware of it.
The Vedas, the Bible, the Koran, the three greatest scriptures of the world, are known not to have been written by anyone. The Vedas are known as apaurusheya – not written by any person. Certainly somebody wrote them, but they are from existence, from the beyond, from some unknown source. The mystic becomes possessed by it, he dances to its tune. He is no longer himself – he is it. The poet once in a while gets a glimpse of it, a faraway glimpse.
In Sanskrit we have two words for the poet; in no other language is it so, because no other part of the world became alert, very alert about this fact. In Sanskrit one word is kavi. Kavi means exactly the poet. The other word is rishi; rishi means a mystic poet. The difference is great. The poet has a deep aesthetic sense, he is very sensitive, he can penetrate into the very core of things. He has a way of knowing which is not that of the scientist. He does not analyze, he loves; his love is great, but his ego is alive. So when he looks at a roseflower he comes closer than the scientist, because the scientist immediately starts dissecting the flower – and to dissect something is to kill it. The very effort of knowing is an effort to kill.
Hence whatsoever science knows is about dead things. Now even scientists are becoming aware of the fact. When blood is taken out of your body and is examined, analyzed, it is no longer the same blood that it was when it was circulating in your body. Then it was alive, then it was an organic part of your life. Now it is not the same. It is like your hand, or your eye; when it is part of the organic unity of your body it can see, but take the eye out and it is dead, it cannot see. It is no longer alive, it is something else, it is a corpse.
The greatest scientists are becoming aware of the fact that whatsoever we have known up to now is basically, fundamentally wrong. We only know about dead things – the alive things we miss. That is why science cannot say there is something in you which is beyond the body, more than the body. Science cannot say that you are more than the sum total of your parts, and unless you are something more than the sum total of your parts you are not. Then you are only a machine – maybe very sophisticated but that does not matter. You are a computer, you don’t have a soul; you are just a by-product, an epiphenomenon. You don’t have any awareness, you are only behavior.
Science reduces man to a machine, not only to an animal – remember. Those days are gone when science used to think, like Charles Darwin and others, that man is nothing but another animal. Now Skinner, Delgado, Pavlov don’t say that man is another animal – because there is no anima, no life, no consciousness – they say man is another machine.
Religion says man is more than the body, more than the mind, but science cannot believe it because of its very methodology. The way it tries to know things prohibits it from going deeper than the material, than the dead.
Hence the poet reaches closer than the scientist. The poet does not dissect the flower, he falls in love. He is immensely glad, he rejoices in the flower, and out of that rejoicing a song is born. But he is still far away from the mystic, the rishi. The mystic becomes one with the flower. The observer becomes the observed; there is no distinction left.
It happened once…

Ramakrishna was crossing the Ganges in a small boat with a few of his disciples. Suddenly in the middle of the river he started shouting, “Why are you beating me?”
The disciples were puzzled. They said, “Paramahansa Deva, what are you saying? We, and beating you?”
And Ramakrishna said, “Look!” He uncovered his back and there were marks on it as if somebody had beaten him badly with a stick. Blood was oozing out.
The disciples were puzzled. What had happened? And then Ramakrishna pointed to the other shore: a few people were beating a person. When they reached the other shore they went to the person, they uncovered his back and the marks were exactly the same as on Ramakrishna’s back – without any difference, exactly the same! Ramakrishna became one with the person who was being beaten. He was not an observer, he was not separate; he became one with the observed.

This is the meaning of the English word empathy. Sympathy the poet knows, empathy the mystic knows. When the mystic sings, it is a totally different flavor, a different beauty, because it is not a faraway glimpse of the truth – he is inside the truth, at the very core of it.
But there are many things to be understood. The mystic may not be able to sing at all because he becomes so at one with the truth that he may forget to sing the song. It has happened to many mystics: they have never said anything. It is as if you ask the sugar, the sugar may not be able to say that it is sweet. A little difference is needed to know the sweetness of the sugar. The mystic becomes the sugar.
Once in a while the mystic is also a poet. That is a coincidence. Whenever it happens – as in the case of Lao Tzu, Zarathustra, Mohammed – then we have something of the beyond available to us. But a mystic is not necessarily a poet; to be a poet is a different talent. One can be a mystic without being a poet, one can be a poet without being a mystic.
When a mystic is a poet an Upanishad is born, a Shrimad Bhagavad Gita is born, a Koran comes to the Earth. But it is not always so. So many times it happens that the truth has to find the way through the poet because the mystic is not available.
That’s what happened with this small document, Desiderata. No mystic seems to be available who can sing this song; hence Max Ehrmann is chosen to be a vehicle – but he is an unconscious person. He thinks he is writing a poem of his own; it is not his own, it has nobody’s signature on it. And as you enter into this small document you will understand, it cannot be from a poet. It has the same quality as the Koran, the same quality as the Upanishads.
It is also a strange document because in such a small space it says so much. It is really made of sutras – just a few hints. Nothing is said very solidly: just a few hints, fingers pointing to the moon. It is so small that after Adlai Stevenson’s death in 1965 it was discovered that he had intended to send out Desiderata as a Christmas card to his friends. It can be printed on a small card, a postcard, but it contains infinity – a dewdrop that contains all the oceans.
It can be of immense help to you on the path; hence I call it Guida Spirituale. It begins:
Hear then the wisdom of the wise…
Jesus used to say to his disciples again and again: “If you have ears, listen. If you have eyes, see.” He says it so many times, as if he was not seeing people as having ears and eyes. And that’s my experience too: you all have eyes, but very few people are capable of seeing. You all have ears, but it is rare, very rare, to come across a person who is capable of hearing – because just to hear the words is not hearing and just to see figures is not seeing. Unless you see the meaning, the content, unless you hear the silence which is the soul of the words, you have not heard.
One has to listen in deep silence, in deep agnosia. Remember Dionysius’ word agnosia: a state of not-knowing. If you know, your very knowledge is a disturbance. You cannot listen. That’s why pundits, scholars, are incapable of listening: they are too full of rubbish, their minds are continuously chattering inside. Maybe they are reciting shastras, scriptures, but that makes no difference; what is going on inside is of no value.
Unless you are absolutely silent, not even a thought stirring inside, not even a small ripple in the lake of consciousness, you will not be able to hear. And if you cannot listen, then whatsoever you think you hear is going to be wrong.
That’s how Jesus was misunderstood, Socrates was misunderstood, Buddha was misunderstood. They were speaking very clearly. It is impossible to improve upon the statements of Socrates; his statements are very clear, almost perfect, as near perfect as language can be. Buddha’s statements are very simple, there is no complexity in them, but still misunderstanding arises.
Where does all this misunderstanding come from? Why have all the great prophets, tirthankaras, all the great enlightened masters been misunderstood down the ages? – for the simple reason that people cannot listen. They have ears, hence they believe they are capable of hearing. They are not deaf, they have the instrument to hear, but behind their ears there is so much noise. Their minds are standing behind their ears to interpret what is being said, to compare, to analyze, to argue, to doubt. They get lost in all the processes.
Just a small word, and watch your mind, what happens – not even a word, just a sound. This airplane passing by and watch your mind. You cannot hear it simply, you start thinking of many things. Maybe you are reminded of your own journeys, some friend who died in a plane crash, somebody you loved very much, and all the memories associated with the person, and you have gone far away into the memories. And one thing leads to another; you are no longer herenow. You have not heard the plane passing by. This plane simply triggered a process in you of thought, of memories, of desires. Maybe suddenly you thought, “It would be nice if I had a plane of my own.” Or maybe you simply thought, “What a distraction! This noise is a disturbance. I was listening so silently, and here comes this stupid airplane!”
It is not the airplane that is disturbing you; it is your own mind which is calling it stupid, a distraction, a disturbance. If you don’t call it anything, nothing is disturbed. If you simply hear the noise, you will be surprised: it deepens your silence; it is not a distraction at all. When it passes by you fall into a deeper valley of silence than you were in before.
Hence the first word of the Desiderata: Hear then the wisdom of the wise… A strange beginning, particularly from a Western poet, from an American poet. This is how all the Eastern sutras begin. Just a little difference is there, and that seems to be because of the Western medium. He has not been able to relate exactly what was happening in his innermost being.
All the great Eastern sutras begin with now: “Athato brahma jigyasa.” The Brahma Sutras begin this way: “Now the inquiry into the ultimate” – not then but now. The Bhakti Sutras of Narada begin: “Athato bhakti jigyasa. Now the inquiry into the universe of devotion.” It is never then, it is always now. In fact, then does not exist, only now exists.
There does not exist, only here exists. You will never find there and then anywhere. Wherever you go you will always find now and here. If it had come through a mystic there would have been no then, there would have been now. Hear then the wisdom of the wise…
And that makes more sense. But the logical mind functions in a different way, and when you use a logical mind as a vehicle it interpolates something of its own: then, therefore… Now is never part of the logical mind, now is part of the meditative mind. And Ehrmann is not a meditator, is not a mystic, hence he has missed with that word. He says: Hear then the wisdom of the wise…
Just change then to now, and see how the quality becomes totally different: Hear now the wisdom of the wise… because except now there is no time and except here there is no space. Then and there are part of our noisy mind. When the noise ceases and the mind is put aside, what is left? – just herenow.
Swami Ramateertha used to tell a beautiful story:

There was a very great atheist and he was continuously talking against God. He had written on the wall of his drawing room in big golden letters, “God is nowhere.” And then a child was born to him, and one day he was playing with the child and the child was learning language. He was not capable of reading such a big word – nowhere – so he divided it in two. The child read the sentence: “God is now-here.” Nowhere was too big a word, he divided it in two: now-here.
It must have been a rare moment for the atheist. In fact, when you are playing with a child you forget your seriousness, you forget your ideologies, you forget your religion, you forget your philosophy, you forget your theology. When you are playing with a child, something of meditativeness happens to you, hence playing with children is of great value. Playing with a child, for a moment you become a child. And remember Jesus’ saying again and again: “Unless you are like small children you will not enter into my kingdom of God.”
In that moment something happened. The child said, “God is now-here,” and the father was taken unawares. He heard it and he was in a playful mood with the child. And you cannot argue with a small child by saying, “There is no God.” And because he was playful, silent, enjoying, the statement from the child became something of tremendous importance, became very pregnant, as if God had spoken through him.
He looked at the wall for the first time. His whole life he had been looking at that sentence. It was never, “God is now-here,” it was always, “God is nowhere.” He had never conceived that nowhere could be divided into now-here, that nowhere consists of now-here. He was transformed. It became almost a satori. He was no longer an atheist.
People were puzzled. They could not believe what had happened because he had been so argumentative and he had had so much proof against God. What had happened? And when they asked him, he would shrug his shoulders. He would say, “I can also understand why you look so puzzled. I myself am puzzled. Ask this child – he has done something. Hearing this sentence from him, something has changed in me. Looking into the eyes of the child, something has been transformed in me. And it is not only logically that I am a different person, I am existentially different too. Since then I have been seeing God now-here: in the wind passing through the trees, in the rain falling on the roof, I hear his footsteps, I hear his song. The birds sing, and I am reminded God is now-here. The sun rises, and I am reminded God is now-here. Now it is no longer a question of argumentation, it has become something of my experience.”

Mind is always going somewhere else. It is never now-here; it is always then-there. Mind exists only in then and there. That’s why Max Ehrmann has missed. He says: Hear then… Then looks more logical, but it is not existential. Now is existential, although very illogical – because you cannot catch hold of now with logic. The moment you think you have caught hold of it, it is already gone, it is already past. You can be in the now, but you cannot try to understand, to know now. By the time you try to understand, it is no longer there. It is like a river flowing continuously.
Heraclitus says: “You cannot step in the same river twice.” And I say to you: you cannot step in the same river even once because when your foot touches the surface of the river, the water underneath is rushing by. By the time you touch a little deeper it is different water, the surface is rushing by. By the time you reach to the rock bottom of the river, so much water has flowed by that you have not touched the same water even once!
And such is life: except change, nothing is permanent. Only change is eternal. It looks paradoxical, that’s why I say it is illogical.
Hear then the wisdom of the wise… A strange statement, in fact: …the wisdom of the wise… seems to be tautological. Of course, wisdom can only be of the wise. What is the point of repeating it? Why say, “wisdom of the wise”? Can wisdom be of the unwise too? But there is a very subtle point to be understood because there are so many knowledgeable people in the world and the knowledgeable person appears almost as if he is wise, and he is not. He speaks in the same way. The scholar who has studied the Shrimad Bhagavad Gita his whole life speaks the same language as Krishna. But when Krishna speaks it, it is the wisdom of the wise, and when the scholar, the pundit speaks, it is not the wisdom of the wise, it is the wisdom of the unwise. It is mere knowledge, it is not even wisdom. How can it be wisdom?
Remember the distinction between knowledge and wisdom. Knowledge is a pseudo coin. Knowledge is easy, it can be borrowed from anybody. You can go to the university, to the library, you can ask the knowledgeable people, and you can accumulate it. It is very cheap. You need not go through any transformation, you need not be reborn for it. You will remain as you are, and knowledge can be accumulated. It will be added to you, but it will not be of any value because you will remain the same. In fact, it can even be dangerous. It will deceive others, they will think you know. And if many people think you know, you can fall into a self-deception. You can also start thinking, “How can so many people be wrong? If they think I know, I must know.”
I have heard a story:

A journalist died and reached heaven. St. Peter opened the door and told the journalist, “Please, our quota for journalists is full. We have only twelve journalists in heaven, not more than that. Even those twelve are almost always unemployed because there is no news. Nothing happens!”
What will happen in heaven? No riot, no rape, no politicians, no toppling of governments, no divorces, no murder. Nothing happens there. George Bernard Shaw has defined news as: “If a dog bites a man it is not news, but if a man bites the dog then it is news.” Now in heaven who is going to bite the dog and for what? In the first place where will you find a dog in heaven? And to find the person who will bite the dog will be almost impossible. So there is no newspaper there, or maybe just empty sheets distributed early in the morning, and saints sit and look at the empty paper and feel very happy that nothing has happened – good. Nothing is always better than something.
So St. Peter said, “Please go to hell. There are thousands of journalists and hundreds of newspapers, and there is so much news.”
But the journalist was adamant, as journalists tend to be. He said, “No. Give me at least twenty-four hours time, please. And if I can convince one journalist to go to hell then one place will be vacant. That you can give to me – just twenty-four hours’ time – otherwise I will go to hell.”
St. Peter saw the logic of it and he said, “Okay, you can try.”
And the journalist tried. Journalists are experts in lying. Truth is not their business, truth cannot be their business because truth is so simple and so plain. You cannot make a story out of it; there is nothing much in it, it is simply so. Lies are very complicated and you can make many stories out of them, and you can go on making stories from one story to another. But as the foundation you need a lie, not truth.
The whole art of journalism is the art of lying in such a way that people think it is true – so he was an expert. He started spreading a rumor. The moment he entered he started saying to people, “Have you heard that a new newspaper, a very big project, is being started in hell? A chief editor is needed with a great salary and all the facilities. Assistant editors are needed, news reporters are needed.” And he created so many rumors around that in twenty-four hours’ time when he came back to the door to ask St. Peter, “Has any journalist left for hell?” St. Peter closed the door and said, “Get in! Now you cannot go out. All twelve have escaped! And we should have at least one journalist in case something sometimes happens. So now I cannot allow you out.”
The journalist was mad. He said, “This is not right, this is not according to our contract. I asked for only twenty-four hours. I want to go to hell!”
St. Peter said, “Why? For what? – because you spread the rumor. It was all lying, you invented it!”
He said, “Yes, I invented it – but there must be something in it when twelve journalists have believed it. There must be something in it! It may be a coincidence that I invented it and a big newspaper is really going to begin. I cannot stay here! When twelve people have believed it, a great doubt has arisen in me. Maybe it was not a lie at all.”

This you can experience in your own life. Start telling a lie to a few people and when they start believing it you will be surprised that slowly, slowly you are believing it too. Hence I say that many people live in lies knowing perfectly well that they are lies, but just because so many people believe – how can so many people be wrong?

Once George Bernard Shaw said something and then he argued against it. He was a beautiful man, in many ways his insights were great. He used to say that science is all wrong. The Earth does not go around the Sun, the Sun goes around the Earth – and he was telling this to a friend.
The friend said, “What nonsense are you talking? What proof have you got? Now science has proved it completely and I cannot believe a man like you – so intelligent, so contemporary – is believing in such nonsense, that the sun goes around the Earth.”
Bernard Shaw said, “Yes, the Sun goes around the Earth. It has to because Bernard Shaw lives on the Earth! My Earth cannot go around the sun.”
The man said, “But now almost the whole world, so many people, millions of people, believe that the Earth goes around the Sun.”
Bernard Shaw said, “When so many people believe in a thing I always suspect it must be a lie. Otherwise, how can so many people believe in it?”

Truth has always been in the possession of very rare people. Only once in a while is there a person who has truth; otherwise the masses live in lies, all kinds of lies. But if they have been propagated for centuries they become truth.
Adolf Hitler says in his book Mein Kampf: “The difference between a truth and a lie is only that of time, nothing else.” The truth is a lie which has been propagated for a long time; the lie is a new truth which will become a truth finally if somebody goes on propagating it.
You believe in hell – have you ever thought it is a lie? You believe in heaven – have you ever thought it is a lie? You believe in a thousand and one things without ever giving it a thought that they may be lies, only lies given to you by others. Authoritative people have given them to you so you believe them: your parents, your teachers, your priests, authoritative people, those who have power. “Such people cannot lie.” In fact, such people always lie, their whole power depends on lying. Truth is humble, not powerful. Lies become very powerful; they are very competitive. Lies are all politicians, struggling, fighting, trying to prove, “I am the truth.”
Knowledge is nothing but lies you have collected from others. Remember, unless something is of your own experience it is a lie. Truth has to be your own authentic experience.
Buddha says, “Don’t believe because I say so, believe only when you know. Don’t believe because it is written in the scriptures, believe it only when you know.” And I say to you too, if you are a real seeker of truth you will not believe in knowledge. Knowledge is very superficial. One can talk about God without knowing anything of godliness, without ever tasting anything of godliness. One can talk about love without ever knowing through experience what love is – even a blind man can talk about light and can explain to you the whole physics of light. That does not mean that he is not blind – he is still blind. And these scholars and pundits, ayatollahs, imams, popes, they are all knowledgeable people. They pretend to be wise – they are not wise.
Unless one is fully awakened, unless one’s whole being becomes awareness, unless all darkness, all unconsciousness disappears, you are not wise. Knowledge is information, wisdom is transformation. Hence it is meaningful: Hear then the wisdom of the wise… Not “of the knowledgeable.”
Go placidly amid the noise and the haste, and remember what peace there may be in silence.
A very significant sutra. This is how the seeker of truth begins his journey. The first thing is: Go placidly… don’t make much fuss. Go peacefully, don’t create much dust. There is no need.
Sufis say, “If you really want to pray, pray in such a way that nobody knows that you are a man of prayerfulness.” In the middle of the night when even your wife is snoring, sit silently in the bed and be prayerful, and so silently that nobody comes to know. Don’t make a fuss.
The real man of prayer hides and prays and the pseudo makes much noise about it. In fact, his prayer is nothing but noise – he goes to the temple shouting. In India every temple has a big bell; he rings the bell so the whole neighborhood knows. And if there are many people in the temple, then his prayer becomes very long; if there is nobody he finishes quickly. What is the point? – there is nobody to see. If there is a photographer, then see how prayerful he is, how his face becomes divine! If the news reporters are there, then he will really pray. You will see his humbleness, his simplicity. He will fall down on the ground, he will roll on the ground, he will cry and weep – and all are crocodile tears, because when nobody is there he does not care a bit.

I have heard about a man who used to say a prayer every night to God, just one word. He would look at the sky and say, “Ditto!” and cover himself under his blanket and go to sleep. What is the point of repeating the same thing again and again? Isn’t God intelligent enough to understand ditto? Once, at some time he had prayed; now what is the point of repeating the same prayer again and again? And God knows it anyway. Just to remind him, “I am praying,” he said, “Ditto.”

Sufis say to pray in such a way that nobody knows. Why? For the simple reason that ego is very cunning. It wants to brag; it even wants to brag about religion, about spirituality, about prayer, about meditation. It wants to brag; it does not matter what it brags about. It will brag about money, it will brag about meditation, it will brag about power, it will brag about prayer. The ego wants to brag: “I am doing something special, something great, something extraordinary. Don’t think that I am nobody – I am somebody!”
Go placidly amid the noise and the haste… The world is full of noise and haste. Why is the world so full of noise? – because each mind is noisy, and the world consists of minds; hence there is so much noise. The whole world has become almost a madhouse. Everybody is shouting and nobody is hearing. Everybody is talking almost to himself; the other is only an excuse.

A psychologist was observing two of his patients; both were professors of philosophy. Because they were both friends and had gone mad they were put in a single cell in the madhouse and the psychologist was watching them. He was very puzzled. The most puzzling thing was that although they were absolutely insane, about one thing they were very sane: when one was talking the other would remain silent, when the other started speaking the first would be silent. This is strange – two madmen! Why should they bother whether the other is silent or not, whether he is talking or not? So he inquired.
He said, “I am very puzzled. Why when one talks does the other become silent?”
They said, “We know how to converse. That’s how we used to do it when we were thought to be sane – it is just old habit.”
“It is not really that I am silent,” one man said. “Just on the surface I have to be silent because I know the rules and regulations of conversation. Inside I am chattering, talking, waiting for the right opportunity, for when this fool stops; waiting for the right moment when he says something which I can use as an excuse to start on what I want to say to him.”

In fact, that’s what you all are doing. Just look at your conversations: when the other is talking you are simply pretending to listen, just pretending to listen. Inside you are working on your own. And then you will find a word, a sentence, a statement that you can use as a jumping board, and then you start talking. Your talking has nothing to do with what he has said; it has a connection with what was going on inside you, it is a continuum inside you. He is just an excuse.
That’s why people never agree, because they never listen. Husbands never listen to what their wives are saying, wives never listen to what their husbands are saying, children never listen to what their parents are saying. Nobody listens; everybody at the most pretends. The world is full of noise because the world is full of insane minds.
The world can be really silent only when there are many, many meditators. Only when the world consists of a great majority of meditators will there be a profound silence, an almost tangible silence. You can touch it, you can taste it, you can smell its perfume.
We are living out of noise and everybody is in a hurry. There is great haste, everybody is rushing. Nobody knows where, nobody knows why – just a deep restlessness. You can’t sit; if you sit, others won’t allow you. They will say, “Don’t just sit there, do something!” And I say to you, “Don’t just do something, sit there!” Nothing is better than something. But people say just the opposite; they say, “Something is better than nothing. Do something!”

One woman was saying to another woman, “I have heard that your son has become a sannyasin. He meditates?”
The other woman said, “It’s better than doing nothing.”

Now the poor woman does not know what meditation is. Meditation means doing nothing. That’s what I teach here: doing nothing, just sitting there, just being.
Why is there this hurry? Are you really trying to reach somewhere? Are you conscious about the goal, the target?

A pilot said to the passengers, “All our engines are okay, the plane is functioning perfectly well. There is only one bad piece of news, otherwise everything is good. The bad news is that we have lost contact with the Earth so we don’t know where we are and we don’t know where we are going. The good news is that we are going at full speed!”

Everybody is going at full speed; that is the good news. Who cares? Who has time to think about where he is going? When you see the whole world rushing, you start rushing.
We force children to run. That’s what our whole educational system is meant for, from the primary school to the university. Twenty-five years we waste on every person, almost one third of the life, to teach him to rush. Then twenty-four hours in his day it is rush hour. He is never anywhere for a single moment. He cannot see the beauty of the trees because he cannot sit underneath the trees – Buddha must have known the beauty of the trees. He cannot see the beauty of the stars, he cannot see the beauty of people. In fact, when he is in Kabul he is rushing to Kathmandu, when he is in Kathmandu he is rushing to Pune, when he is in Pune he is rushing to Goa! He is never where he is; his mind is always ahead of him, planning how to reach there. And if you ask him, “For what?” he will say, “We will enjoy.” And he is not enjoying this moment, how can he enjoy any other moment? He has lost all capacity to enjoy herenow; his only enjoyment is planning, always planning, planning to enjoy.
There are people who are working their whole lives and just waiting for their retirement; then they will relax and enjoy. And they know perfectly well: six days they work in the office and wait for the seventh day, the holiday, and hope, “Soon Sunday will come and we can relax and enjoy.” And they cannot relax and they cannot enjoy – in fact, the holiday seems to be so long and so boring; they have to fill it with something.
They go for a picnic. The same things that they would have eaten at home, relaxedly, now they rush toward a picnic spot miles away to eat. And they are sitting in the grass, and ants are very clever; they know perfectly well where the picnic spots are. Their astrologers tell them, “Go ahead, that is the place!” And the mosquitoes, they are always there waiting for you. They say, “Hello, so you have come!” And then quickly people finish because they have to reach home; and they rush and cars are going there bumper to bumper. And many more accidents happen on Sunday than on any other day, many more deaths on the road than on any other day. Strange – some holiday!
The whole city is going toward the same picnic spot, the same beach. I have seen pictures of beaches and I cannot believe what is happening. There is not even space to walk! They are packed – no marketplace is so packed – and all kinds of fools are there. Six hours it takes them, six hours to reach the beach, then for one hour they lie down amidst this whole mass of fools under the sun, and then back home… And the whole way they are quarreling with the wife and the wife is quarreling with… This you can do more at ease at home, relaxed in an armchair – nag each other, do whatsoever you want! What is the point of going to the beach? Nobody is seeing the sea, nobody is seeing the sun. Nobody has time.
These same people think that when they are retired they will rest – they cannot. Sixty years of habits, how can you drop them? Impossible: the habits have become so deep-rooted that people suffer more when they are retired than they have ever suffered, because nobody knows how to rest, how to relax. This is sheer madness!
These people go on saying beautiful things. They say, “Time is money.” They have beautiful proverbs to drive you crazy: “Time is money, so save time.” And everybody is always looking at his watch – as if they are missing something. They have to reach somewhere, and there too they will do the same thing. If the train is five minutes late everybody is complaining, all are angry.
I had been traveling for twenty years all over this country and I was puzzled. If the train is just one hour late, everybody is so angry and condemning the government and the society and everything. Why can’t you rest? If the train is one hour late it is a great opportunity. One hour is yours – you can rest. You have at least an excuse: “The train was late, what to do? So I rested, relaxed.” But no, they cannot; they become more and more boiled up, they start spitting fire.
These same people when they reach home will sit before the idiot box, TV, for five hours. The average American is doing that for five hours per day. There is a great danger for America because of this idiot box. If you look at an idiot box for five hours, it has a hypnotic effect – you are bound to become idiotic! Only an idiot can look at a box for five hours, and they are glued to their chairs; they cannot get up. I have heard they eat their food just sitting in front of the TV. Not only that – they will even make love just in front of the TV so they can do both the things, making love and watching the TV because something may be missed!
Now these idiots are in the majority. And they will play cards and if you ask why they will say, “Killing time.” One minute the train is late and they are angry, and then what do they do with the saved time? They kill it! Going to the movie, killing time – sometimes going to see the same picture again. Stupidity seems to be infinite. Now what are you going for – the same picture again? But the time has to be killed.
They will go to the Rotary Club, to the Lions Club. And all these clubs exist for people to kill time, to meet the same fools, to say the same foolish things, to gossip about the same old nonsense – to kill time. They will go to the restaurants, to the hotels, to the parties to kill time.
And look at their faces – they are bored everywhere. Whatsoever they are doing they are bored, obviously, because they are not into it. They are somehow trying to finish it to save time, and then they have to kill time. Killing time, saving time, killing time, saving time… The whole of life is gone! And you come empty-handed into the world and you go empty-handed.
Go placidly amid the noise and the haste, and remember what peace there may be in silence. The only thing worth remembering again and again is: …what peace there may be in silence. Give a little time, energy, to silent moments because only in silent moments will you know what peace is. And the person who has tasted something of peace is rich, is immensely rich – all others are beggars – because he starts knowing the inner kingdom of God. Peace is the door to the inner kingdom of God. Silence helps you to know peace and peace leads you into godliness.
As far as possible, without surrender, be on good terms with all persons.
Just to avoid unnecessary troubles. As far as possible, without surrender… Don’t compromise, don’t surrender to people. That’s why Desiderata says: As far as possible… – without any compromise – because if you compromise with the mass mind, you will never be able to become that which you are here to become. You will remain ungrown-up, you will remain retarded. You will never come to a flowering, you will never know fruitfulness. Your life will be barren, uncreative.
As far as possible, without surrender… So two things have to be remembered. Don’t surrender to the mass mind; but that does not mean continuously fight with people, that everything has to be argued about – because if you do that then you will be wasting your time.
Be exactly in the middle. Without compromising, avoid unnecessary quarrels. …be on good terms with all persons as far as possible, without selling your soul, without compromising on any ground, without surrendering at all. But there are many things which can be avoided. In fact, ninety-nine percent of the problems which create fighting, argument can be avoided.
The child asks you, “Daddy, can I go out and play?” and the immediate response of almost all daddies is, “No!” Now the quarrel starts. And all children know how great your patience is. They will stamp their feet in front of you, they will go into a tantrum, they will cry, they will start throwing their toys, tearing their books. And then finally you will say, “Go out and play!” This you could have done before, you could have said yes because there was nothing wrong, but somehow our whole upbringing is quarrelsome, argumentative.
The wife says, “We should go to this movie,” and the husband immediately says, “No, that is not worth going to. We should go to another.” And the husband knows perfectly well, the wife knows perfectly well, that when the wife has spoken she has spoken – it has to be done. But now before it is to be done there will be a few hours’ argumentation, nagging, and a thousand other things will come up which could have been avoided. And finally you will see the husband following the wife to the same movie, just hiding his tail between his legs, following the wife. Now you are going to the same movie, so what was the whole fuss about?
It seems we never learn anything. Just watch and you will be able to cut out many unessential things in your life. The word desiderata is beautiful: it means the essentials.
Mahavira has said: “The most fundamental quality needed by the seeker is to know what is essential and what is nonessential.” He calls it vivek, discrimination, because if you don’t know what is essential and what is nonessential you may be lost in the nonessential. The nonessential is ninety-nine percent and the essential is only one percent. The nonessential is a vast, thick jungle; once you get lost in it you may never find the essential. And people get entangled in every way with the nonessential.
Just watch how many things can be avoided without compromising, then avoid them; how many words can be avoided without any trouble, then avoid them, because each single word uttered may bring some trouble for you. In fact, except words, what brings trouble to you?
You say something and the wife jumps up, and she says, “Why did you say this?” And you go on explaining, “I didn’t mean that,” and now it is impossible to come to a conclusion. Soon there will be a banging of doors and throwing of pots and pillows. And you simply uttered a word which could have been kept inside; there was no need to utter it. Just a single word can cause so much trouble which was not essential at all. If it is essential utter it, say it; otherwise avoid it.
Speak your truth quietly and clearly; and listen to others, even to the dull and the ignorant; they too have their story.
The man who is in search of truth learns to listen not only to the wise; he learns to listen even to the unwise – or the otherwise – because everybody has a story to tell and everybody has passed through a life, and something of his life may be of tremendous help to you, may give you an insight.
It is easier to have an insight into your own life watching others because others are like mirrors. Every other person is a walking mirror around you. If you are capable of listening you will see some of your own qualities reflected in them which you were not aware of directly, but via the other you become immediately aware. You can see the stupidity of the other person more easily than your own stupidity. But seeing his stupidity you will become aware that, “These are the things I have been doing myself. This is the foolishness that I go on and on doing myself.”
When somebody else is angry you say he is insane. It is easy to see that he is insane; it is a momentary insanity. But how many times do you get angry? Then you are so much involved in the anger you cannot watch it. Watching others is a way of watching yourself, and it is easier because you are not involved.
That’s why a very strange thing becomes possible: the psychotherapist can help his patient but he cannot help himself, because he can see the faults of the patient very easily but he cannot see his own faults. He can give good advice to the patient, he may not be able to follow that advice himself.
You can watch it. Everybody is a good adviser to others; when it comes to his own life he is as much a fool as anybody else. Much can be learned by observing, by listening, by seeing, even from those who are ignorant because you are also ignorant; even from those who are dull because you are also not very intelligent. And this will be the beginning of intelligence, the beginning of wisdom.
The intelligent person is one who learns from every opportunity, who never misses a single opportunity to learn something, who makes his whole life a school, a learning, a discipline, a search, an inquiry.
But remember not to compromise, not to surrender. As far as the essential is concerned, beware. Even if you have to risk your life, risk it, but don’t surrender as far as the essential is concerned. And as far as the nonessential is concerned, don’t even waste a single moment on it – agree.
This was one of the agreements between me and my father. When I was a very small child I told him, “Listen, I will agree to every nonessential thing. You can tell me what clothes to wear, what shoes to wear, what to eat, what not to eat, you can tell me. But as far as any essential is concerned, beware – I am not going to agree to it.”
Slowly he watched and he was convinced, because whenever it was a nonessential thing I was always ready to agree with him. He would say, “Go to this college, not to that.” So, okay, because to me each college is like any other college – they are all stupid, so it doesn’t matter. I will go to this college. He would say, “Study this subject.” Okay, because what does it matter? – economics or politics or history or geography or philosophy or psychology; anything will do.
But as far as any essential was concerned I told him, “This is an essential point, I will not agree with you, so you had better not say anything about it because that will be an unnecessary misery for you.”
When I came back from the university it was a natural thing to ask whether I wanted to get married or not. I told him, “This is an essential,” and that was the last time he inquired about it; then he never inquired again. “If it is an essential then you have to leave it to me – I will not compromise. I will not compromise at any cost.” He never asked again; he kept his contract. “For nonessentials,” I told him, “you can tell me anything – I will do it.”
Any fool would come into the house and he would say, “Touch his feet,” and I would, because he was an old fool, an old relation: “Okay, it doesn’t matter, it is just an exercise.”
Once you become very clear about what is essential and what is nonessential, things are never as confusing as they seem. You go on fighting for nonessentials, wasting your energy and others’ energy, and then, when the question of the essential arises, you don’t have any energy to fight. And then sometimes you have to compromise on the essential.
This has been my approach: As far as possible, without surrender, be on good terms with all persons. But as far as possible… That does not mean that I have to be absolutely on good terms. I am on good terms with everybody, but as far as possible… Whenever the question of the essential arises, then it is not a question of being good or bad, it is a question of life and death. Then I can rebel, then I can fight back, then I can sacrifice everything.
The advice of Desiderata is of great significance to all those who want to find truth, because the very finding needs great energy. If you become a reservoir of energy, only then is it possible to know, to be, to come to the ultimate realization of life’s mystery.
Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
Can you tell us more about the essential?
Man is also a seed, a possibility, a potential, a hope, a promise. But the seed is not yet the flower. In essence it has the capacity for millions of flowers, but not in reality. Those flowers have to be actualized. The essential is that which you are born with – which is your very being.
That is exactly the purpose, or should be the purpose, of education: to help you to seek and search your essential, to help you to grow it. The word education means to draw out. That which is in has to be brought out – just as you draw water from a well. But something has gone basically wrong, the whole educational system is doing just the opposite of this. Rather than drawing anything out of you, it forces, imposes things upon you.
That which is imposed upon you is nonessential; it creates your personality. The essential is your individuality, the nonessential is your personality. In other words, the essential is your very soul, your being; the nonessential is your ego. All that helps the ego is nonessential, all that helps you to become egoless is essential. Ambition is nonessential, greed is nonessential, desire, any kind of desire, is nonessential.
Meditativeness is essential. To be silent, to be still, just to be alert, aware: that is the first step, the door into the essential. And once you have found in deep, profound silence what you are meant to be, you have found your destiny. And then life has a sense of direction not imposed by others but discovered by yourself.
The function of the master is educative – not informative but educative, educative in the original sense of the word. He is not to give you a certain character because that will be imposed upon you. He is not to make you a Christian or Hindu or a Buddhist. He has to help you to know what you can be, because that which you can be you already are in essence, in the potential. You can be a Christ, you can be a Buddha, you can be a Krishna – but you cannot be a Christian; Christianity is something imposed from the outside. You cannot be a Hindu. Nobody is born a Hindu, it is nobody’s destiny to be a Hindu; it is the effort of others to lead you astray from your destiny. Nobody is born to be a communist or a fascist, but everybody is born with a certain direction in which he will find fulfillment.
Maybe you are a painter, but you are functioning in the society as a doctor. You will remain unfulfilled your whole life, because you listened to your parents and the society and the greed and ambition. Everybody was saying, “Be a doctor. It is a good profession, respectable, and you will be able to earn more money than if you become a painter.” Who knows? – a painter may not be able to earn money at all, because painting is not something which has any utilitarian purpose. And by being a painter you may remain a beggar. You may never become famous because painters become famous only once in a while.
If you are a musician, a poet, you cannot fulfill the ambitions of your parents, of your society, of all the well-wishers. But one thing is certain: you will be tremendously happy whether you are known or unknown, whether you are poor or rich. You will have a tremendous contentment because you are fulfilling something very fundamental at the deepest core of your being. Unless you start moving in the direction of your essential you remain miserable.
Bliss is a consequence, a by-product. Whenever the river starts moving toward the ocean there is bliss. And one never knows what is hidden in you. No astrologer can help you, no palmist can help you. Except with deep meditation you will never be able to feel what is possible for you.
As I see it, almost everybody is in the wrong place. The person who would have been a tremendously happy doctor is a painter and the person who would have been a tremendously happy painter is a doctor. Nobody seems to be in his right place, that’s why this whole society is in such a mess. The person is directed by others, he is not directed by his own intuition.
Meditation helps you to grow your own intuitive faculty. It becomes very clear what is going to fulfill you, what is going to help you flower. And whatsoever it is – it is going to be different for each individual. That is the meaning of the word individual: everybody is unique. And to seek and search your uniqueness is a great thrill, a great adventure.
Your question is significant in many more ways too, because it is not only a question of finding the essential in the individual. In life we are burdened with the unessential, in religion too, in every dimension.
The religious person goes on doing certain rituals which are taught to him by others. He never finds his own religiousness, a quality which cannot be imposed on you, a quality which can only be helped to grow in you. It is not like a plastic flower that can be given to you from the outside, by the priest. It is a real roseflower, and for that you have to be very alert, very aware.
The Christian goes to the church every Sunday. It is a formality, it does not make him religious but it gives him a false sense of religiousness. The Hindu goes on chanting the Gita. It does not make him religious at all, on the contrary it prevents, because by reciting the Gita he becomes very knowledgeable. He becomes a parrot or a computer. He can recite the whole Gita, but he understands nothing because he has not experienced anything. He knows words; he has not encountered the meaning of those words. People go on being imitative.
For example, Mahavira lived naked, that was his individuality. Nobody else is supposed or expected to live naked, unless one finds it an inner, intuitive vision, unless one finds that that is the only way he can be true to his self. Then it is another matter. But the Jaina muni, the Jaina monk, practices nudity – just an imitation, a carbon copy. And remember, imitation is always ugly because it creates a false person, it never gives you authenticity.
Mahavira was not naked because anybody had told him to be naked. He felt the immense urge to be just like a child and he followed his urge, and he suffered for his urge. He was chased from one village to another, mad dogs were sent after him, he was stoned – because people thought he was destroying their morality, that he was a dangerous man.
In an orthodox country like the India of twenty-five centuries ago, a man walking naked would have been certainly a nuisance to people, to their conventional way of living, to their traditional style of thinking. Krishna did not live naked, Rama did not live naked, no Hindu avatar has lived naked. This man is destroying the whole tradition, culture, religion. Of course he has to be punished.
But Mahavira was immensely blissful. The Jaina muni does not seem to be blissful at all because he is simply an imitation. He is really torturing himself, forcing himself to be naked, because in his mind now greed has arisen: unless he looks like Mahavira he is not going to attain the ultimate liberation.
Now nakedness has become an essential thing – which it is not. Nakedness is not an essential thing. Buddha attained without being naked, Jesus attained without being naked, and you can attain. And I am not saying that Mahavira did not attain by being naked – he attained. But these are individual things.
Buddhist monks go on following Buddha. They sit in the same way, they talk in the same way, they behave in the same way. That is not going to help at all; that is not going to make you religious; that is not going to make you another Buddha. You are simply being stupid. And the more stupid you are, the better you can imitate because imitation needs no intelligence. In fact, only a mediocre mind can be imitative. The more intelligent you are, the more you want to be simply yourself – whatsoever it is. Now the whole thing is nonessential. For Buddha it was essential to sit that way; that was his intuitive feeling.
When Buddha dropped the ideas imposed on him by others, his followers left him. He had five followers – before he became very famous he had only five followers; that was before he became enlightened. Those five followers were very devoted to him for the simple reason that he was behaving just like any other Hindu ascetic – only with great stubbornness, doing all kinds of austerities, following all kinds of rules and regulations given in the scriptures. He was so particular about everything that these five followers thought that he was the greatest master.
Then one day he understood the whole stupidity of it: he is not following his own intelligence, he is simply following others, which may be right, may not be right. One thing is certain: they are a different kind of people and he is not that kind. He was suffering, but he was thinking it is necessary to suffer, that this pain is necessary to grow.
The day he realized it, he dropped all ascetic practices. He relaxed. That was the first time he ate in the night and he ate food offered by an untouchable woman. All five followers immediately left him, thinking that he had gone astray. First, eating in the night is not right; secondly, the food offered by an untouchable, a poor woman, is not acceptable to a holy man. He is no longer holy.
That very night Buddha became enlightened. Those five fools missed his enlightenment. That very night he became enlightened, and he became enlightened for the simple reason that for the first time he relaxed into his being and simply followed his essential core.
All religions are destroyed by the nonessential. Your whole life is destroyed by the nonessential. But nobody else can decide for you what is essential and what is nonessential.
Remember that I cannot say exactly, “This is essential and this is nonessential.” Each individual has to discover it. Each individual has to be a light unto himself or herself.
All that I can suggest is: be silent so that you can hear the still small voice of your heart. And it is always speaking, but you are so noisy you go on missing its message.

The second question:
Osho,
The shankaracharya of Shardapeeth, Dwarka, is reported to have said that your ideas about spirituality do not conform with the sanatan dharma which gives great importance to self-control and prescribes rules of conduct given in the ancient scriptures. The shankaracharya also remarked that wherever you and your ashram move, it will spoil the spiritual environment of that place.
Osho, this is perhaps the first time that the shankaracharya has openly criticized you and this place. Would you kindly say something?
The shankaracharya is right in a way: I do not conform with his ideas about spirituality. Why should I conform to anybody else’s ideas of spirituality at all? Spirituality is not an ideology in fact. It has nothing to do with ideas. It is a state of no-mind – how it can be an ideology? The shankaracharya has no experience of meditation at all, otherwise he would not have spoken this way.
Spirituality simply means that you have gone beyond the mind, and in that transcendence all ideas are transcended – Hindu, Mohammedan, Christian, communist – all ideas. Ideas as such are transcended. There is only silence, and two silences can never be different. They are like two zeros. What difference can there be?
Buddha in his deep meditation is not different from Mahavira. Mahavira in his deep meditation is not different from Zarathustra. Zarathustra in his deep silence is not different from Lao Tzu. And I call this the sanatan dharma.
The word sanatan means eternal, and dharma means Tao, the law, the ultimate law. “Aes dhammo sanantano,” Buddha repeats again and again: “This is the eternal law of life.” But by sanatan dharma the shankaracharya means Hindu religion. Hindus think that their religion is the eternal religion: that is sheer nonsense.
Religiousness is eternal, but no religion is eternal. Every religion is born and dies in its own time. No religion is beginningless and no religion is endless. Everything that is born in time is bound to die sooner or later, and it is good that it dies because it creates space for something new to arise. Sanatan dharma – eternal religion – cannot be identified with any religion in particular.
Jainas believe that their religion is far older than the religion of the Hindus, and it may be far older because their first tirthankara, Adinatha, is remembered in the Rig Veda, the first Hindu scripture, with great respect. That shows two things: that Adinatha must have already been an established, accepted spiritual leader; he must have preceded the Rig Veda, and the Rig Veda is the ancientmost scripture of the Hindus. Jainas say their religion is far older, but older does not mean eternal.
Thousands of religions have existed on the Earth and have died, and when they were alive they had millions of followers, but now they have completely disappeared. The followers have disappeared, the priests have disappeared, their gods have disappeared. When they were alive, they also used to think they were eternal. But whatsoever happens in time always dies; nothing can be eternal in time.
My meaning of sanatan dharma, eternal religion, is that religiousness is eternal. For example, life is eternal – people come and go. We were not here a few years before and after a few years we will not be here, but people were here and people will be here. Life will continue, the forms will go on disappearing and appearing, but that which appears and disappears, that which becomes sometimes manifest and sometimes unmanifest, is eternal. It is religiousness.
Jesus becomes Christ through that religiousness. Buddha becomes Buddha – enlightened – through that religiousness. It cannot be identified with Hinduism.
The shankaracharya is right: if sanatan dharma means Hinduism, then I cannot conform with its ideas. But if sanatan dharma means eternal religiousness then there is no question of conforming – I am living it, I am it. And my whole effort here is to help you to be religious – neither Hindus nor Christians nor Mohammedans nor Jainas.
Now this may be the only place in the whole world where all religions are meeting and merging into a new kind of religiousness, a totally different quality. Nobody bothers here whether you are a Christian or a Parsi, whether you are a Taoist or a Buddhist, because we have found the source. And once you know the source it does not matter from what shore you drink, in what kind of bucket you draw the water from the source. The bucket is nonessential, the water is essential. We have found the eternal religion: it can only be a religiousness, a quality, a fragrance.
My meaning of sanatan sharma is totally different from the shankaracharya’s meaning. The shankaracharya of Shardapeeth, Dwarka, simply represents a tradition, a convention which is already dead. All traditions are dead.
What I represent is a living experience.
The shankaracharya is only an imitator of the Adi Shankaracharya, the original shankaracharya. One thousand years have passed. The original shankaracharya had experienced; now this shankaracharya is only a priest. These people are the people who destroy spirituality, but they will condemn me, they will criticize me because I don’t conform to their stupid ideas about spirituality. As far as I see, their spirituality is nothing but hypocrisy. They go on saying one thing and they go on doing just the opposite.
The original shankaracharya has said: “The world is illusory, it is maya.” If the world is illusory, if it is maya, if it does not exist at all, then why do these priests go on preaching to people to renounce it? That is their whole life’s work: to tell people to renounce the world – the world which does not exist in the first place! It is like telling people to renounce their shadows. If you are right, there is no world to renounce; if there is a world to renounce, then you are not right.
Because of such stupid ideas, people become hypocrites. They go on condemning the world on the one hand, and on the other hand they go on grabbing the same world. You will not find more greedy people anywhere in the world than you will find in India, and the Indian goes on condemning the whole world as materialist.
One of our sannyasins, Kamal Bharti, had gone to America and traveled all over the world. He wrote a letter to me saying, “It is strange, Osho, that I traveled all over the world without any money, just sannyasins and friends were supporting me, and I never ran out of money. I was never in any difficulty anywhere in the whole world. But the moment I landed at Mumbai airport my money and my things were all stolen!” This is a religious land, people are spiritual!
Kamal Bharti, that shows that somebody who thinks the world is maya has taken your things. What does it matter? Why allow you to carry such illusory things? He has helped you to unburden!
These people have created such a hypocrisy by telling people to do something anti-life. The shankaracharyas, the priests of the Hindus, go on condemning life and also go on praising God for creating the world. And they don’t see the illogicality of it, the ridiculousness of it. They are blind people. They cannot understand me because what they think is spirituality is nothing but hypocrisy.

The pope lay dying. His doctor called the cardinals together and announced: “We can only save his life with a heart transplant.”
“We must tell the people,” said one of the cardinals. “Perhaps a donor will volunteer to give his heart for the Pontiff.”
The announcement was made and thousands gathered beneath the pope’s balcony, shouting, “Take-a my heart! Take-a my heart!”
The cardinals now had to decide on the person who would donate his heart to the Holy Father. “We will drop a feather from His Holiness’ hat,” said the head cardinal. “Whoever it lands upon will be the lucky person.”
The feather floated down from the balcony. From the multitude below came: “Take-a my heart! Pfhoo, pfhoo! Take-a my heart! Pfhoo, pfhoo!”

They were doing both things: “Take-a my heart!” and blowing the feather as far away as possible! That’s what these people call spirituality.
“The world is illusory.” And these temples of the shankaracharya accumulate as much money as possible. “Money is dirt” – and they collect gold! “Gold is nothing, it is dust…” These people are against everything, and yet from the back door they go on doing the same as anybody else.
My spirituality is not hypocrisy, it is authentic living. I don’t tell you to be life-negative. I tell you to be life-loving, life-affirmative, because God is nothing but life. The aliveness of existence is what God is all about.
These people are afraid that I may destroy the spiritual atmosphere – as if the spiritual atmosphere exists! I have traveled all over India – there exists no spiritual atmosphere. A spiritual atmosphere exists only around a buddha. It is like light: if there is a flame, there is light around it. Once the flame is gone the light disappears.
When Gautama the Buddha was alive there was a spiritual atmosphere that surrounded him. Wherever he went that spiritual atmosphere went with him; it was his light. There was light when Krishna was alive, when Christ was alive, but now Christianity is only talking about light.
Maybe they have paintings about light, of light, but those paintings will not give light in darkness.

The Mother Superior of the convent awoke in a happy mood, dressed and set off to visit her flock. “Good morning, Sister Augusta, God bless you! Are you happy at your work?”
“Yes, Reverend Mother, but I am sorry to see you got out of bed on the wrong side this morning.”
The Mother Superior ignored the remark and passed on to another nun. “Good morning, Sister Georgina, you look pleased with yourself!”
“I am, Reverend Mother, but it is a pity you got out of bed on the wrong side today.”
The Mother Superior, greatly puzzled, moved on to a young novice. “Tell me, little Sister, do you also feel I got out of bed on the wrong side?”
“I am afraid so,” said the nun.
“But why? Am I not as happy as a song-bird and pleasant to you all?”
“Yes, Mother, but you are wearing Father Vincenzo’s house slippers!”

These are the people who go on talking about spirituality, celibacy, renunciation! And if you look deep down into the world that surrounds you and these spiritual, so-called spiritual people, you will be very much puzzled: they live a double kind of life.
Yes, I will destroy this double kind of life wherever I go! He is right in that way. Whatsoever he calls “spiritual environment” exists nowhere. Whatsoever exists is hypocrisy, and I am going to destroy it, certainly, because that is the only way to create a spiritual atmosphere. Something that is destroying people’s very lives has to be ruthlessly uprooted. All the weeds have to be uprooted so we can grow roses.
He says that sanatan dharma, by which he means Hindu dharma, Hindu religion, gives great importance to self-control. I don’t give any importance to self-control because all control is ugly, because all control is repressive. Life should be spontaneous, not controlled. Yes, your inner world should be so clear and transparent that you can see what is right and what is wrong; and you should live according to it, not by any dictates in any scriptures.
He says: “Hindu dharma lives according to prescribed rules.” All prescribed rules create slavery. I don’t prescribe any rules for my sannyasins. I don’t give you a character from the outside, but I give you something far more valuable: I give you meditativeness, out of which a character arises which is your own, out of which you start living a life full of insight. Then you know what is right and what is wrong and you live accordingly, but not according to Krishna or Manu or Rama. They may have been right – that was their intuition – but to live according to any prescribed rule is to live the life of a slave. And I am against slavery.
I teach people rebellion. In that way the shankaracharya of Shardapeeth is right: that wherever I go I will destroy their so-called spiritual atmosphere. He has not really criticized me, he has praised me – unknowingly of course, unconsciously of course, because these people have no consciousness.
A man of consciousness cannot be a priest. He cannot be part of any tradition or convention. He is bound to be free from all conventions and all traditions. He lives a life of freedom, spontaneity, love, joy.

The third question:
Osho,
It seems, when the hits come through our work, it is not a hammering on the rock but a simple knocking on the door. Would you comment?
It is true. The master only knocks on your door, but if you are too much identified with your sleep the knock on the door hurts you. It feels as if you are knocked on the head by a hammer. When you want to sleep and somebody tries to wake you up, he looks like an enemy. Otherwise, the function of the master is to wake you up. It depends on your sleep how many and how loud the knocks you will need. Sometimes he even has to knock exactly on your head because you don’t listen to the knocks on the door. He has to throw a bucket of cold water on you!

Mulla Nasruddin was saying to his wife, “What makes you think, dear, that I am a loafer?”
The wife said, “Because when opportunity knocks you complain about the noise!”

The master knocks because there is an opportunity. He knocks only when there is an opportunity. When he sees that the opportunity is waiting at the door and you are fast asleep, he knocks.
Unless you love the master deeply you will not be able to understand his knocks; they will look inimical. They are out of his compassion, out of his love.
You have understood well: it is a knock on the door. Wake up and open the door because the sun has risen, the birds are singing. There is not time to sleep anymore. Come out of your slumber of many, many lives! And then you will be grateful to the master who knocked on the door, because the sun will not knock on the door, the flowers will not knock on the door. They will go on flowering, the sun will go on shining, the moon will come, the stars will come, but nobody will knock on your door. God goes on without knocking on your door.
Kabir has a beautiful poem in which he says:
Guru govind doi khare, kake lagun pae
Balihari guru apaki, govind diyo batae.
Kabir says: “The master and God both are standing in front of me, and I am in a confusion, whose feet to touch first?” The master’s feet or God’s feet? – because it is the master who has shown me God; he should be respected first. But when God is standing there, how can you respect the master first? You have to bow down to God.
And Kabir says: “But my master was so great that he immediately looked at me and showed me the feet of God. ‘Touch the feet of God, forget all about me.’”
Buddha says: “If you meet me on the way, kill me immediately. Don’t let me stand between you and the ultimate.”
The master knocks on the door and goes on knocking. The moment you open the door, the master will disappear; he will not stand in the way. That is the difference between the true master and the pseudo master. The pseudo master will stand between you and existence. The true master will disappear. The moment you are awake you will find existence. And the master is not standing there anywhere, but because the master disappears he creates more respect and more love in you.
I have always wondered about this small statement of Kabir, “Whose feet to touch first? And great is my master who has shown immediately the feet of God to me.”
I have wondered whose feet Kabir really did touch first. As far as I can see, he must have touched the feet of the master because he says, “Great is the master who has shown me the feet of God.” Now how can you not help touching the feet of the master first?
Buddha says, “Kill me if I come in the way.” And the disciples who became enlightened continued to touch Buddha’s feet. Buddha said, “Now there is no need. You are as much enlightened as I am, because in enlightenment there are no degrees. You have come home, you are a buddha yourself – no need to touch my feet.” But they continued, out of deep gratitude.

The last question:
Osho,
I am going to Italy and the situation there is very bad. People are killing each other in the streets and a bomb destroyed ninety people in a station a week ago.
Now, Osho, you love Italians. Will you please say a few words so that they become a little aware of their insanity?
The whole of humanity is in the same situation. We have worked for thousands of years to make the Earth a big madhouse, and we have succeeded, unfortunately. It is not only in Italy, it is the same everywhere; people are killing each other. There is violence everywhere for the simple reason that we have, in subtle ways, not allowed people’s energies to be creative, and whenever creative energies are prevented they become destructive.
Violence is not the real problem. The real problem is how to help people to be creative. A creative person cannot be violent because his energies are moving in the direction of godliness. We call God the creator. Whenever you are creating something you participate in God’s being. You cannot be violent, you cannot be destructive; it is impossible.
But for thousands of years we have destroyed every possible door to creativity. Instead of helping people to be creative we train them to be destructive. We have respected the warrior, the soldier, too much. In fact, the warrior is something which should be condemned not respected – he is destructive. The soldier should not be respected.
We need sannyasins, not soldiers. We need lovers, not fighters. But love is condemned and violence is praised. What is great in Alexander the Great? – nothing but violence. He is great because he was the most violent person of those days. He killed throughout almost all the known world of his day – he killed millions – and still we go on calling him Alexander the Great. What is great in your kings and emperors and their history? Why do you go on praising them? They should be completely forgotten. Nadir Shah, Genghis Khan, Tamurlaine, why should they be remembered? Why should small children be told all the stupidities that man has done to man? – because we still want people to fight.
The politician lives on violence, the nations live on violence. If the violence disappears, there will be no Italy, no India, no Japan. There will be only one humanity. Why these boundaries? But without these boundaries the politician disappears, and he does not want to disappear, obviously. He has a great vested interest in the boundaries and the boundaries have to be defended. And the only way to defend is to kill, and whosoever is the bigger killer is the winner.
The same is true on a smaller scale in people’s lives. People are taught to be violent because unless you are violent you are not going to succeed in life. You have to be very violent, only then can you fulfill your ambitions. A gentle person cannot succeed, he is bound to fail because he cannot be competitive. He cannot push and pull people, he cannot step over people’s heads.
All the politicians are criminals for the simple reason that crime pays. You only have to be cunning enough not to be caught. The most fundamental rule of this violent life is: all means are good if they fulfill the end. And of course, rather than arguing – because argumentation is a long thing and it may never come to any conclusion – it is better to pull out the sword, it decides things immediately. It is easier to fight with a person and decide who is right. “Might is right.” That rule still remains; the rule of the jungle.
We call man civilized? He has yet to be civilized. Civilization is only an idea which has not yet been realized. Man is just superficially civilized, not even skin-deep. Just scratch a little and you will find the animal coming out – a ferocious animal, far more ferocious than any wild animals because wild animals, howsoever wild they are, don’t carry bombs – atom bombs, hydrogen bombs. Compared to man and his violence all animals are left far behind.
In the past this has been the rule. The buddhas are exceptions. Of course, they are the only civilized human beings. The remaining crowd of people, the mob, is very uncivilized.
It is not only in Italy; it is the same here in this country: a great spiritual country, a long, long heritage of religion, and still people are killing – it makes no difference to people.
Just now all over the country there are riots. And strange: in Moradabad where the riots started, the Mohammedans had gathered to pray. It was their religious festival, Id, and they had gathered to pray. And after the prayer meeting the violence erupted. It means the people who had come to pray had brought weapons with them. Immediately one hundred and thirty people were killed. What kind of hypocrisy is this? What kind of insanity? People who have come to pray are hiding knives, swords, bottles full of acid. They have come ready, prepared. Everything seems to be pre-planned. And they have been there to pray. What kind of prayer can be possible in such a situation?
The word Islam means peace and Islam has created more violence in the world than any other religion, and the word means peace.
Christianity says, “God is love” and Christianity has killed millions of people, burned people alive. And God is love!
It is a very unconscious state of affairs. People are living unconsciously, not knowing what they are doing, why they are doing, not even pondering over it.

Manetti, the mechanic, woke up one morning with a black eye.
“What happened?” he asked his wife.
“While you were sleeping,” she explained, “you reached over and felt my arms and said, ‘What a smooth finish!’ Then you reached over further and said, ‘What perfect headlights!’ Then you reached down further and said, ‘Who left the garage door open?’ And that is when I let you have it!”

People are almost asleep. Even when you think they are awake they are not awake.

Rigamonte was visiting a small town in the Italian Alps. After a few lonely nights he began feeling the need for a woman. He asked the local barkeeper how to find the ladies of the town.
“We ain’t gotta no prostitutes. The church would never allow it. But the thing-a you want-a is kept-a out of sight-a.”
“What I gotta do?” asked Rigamonte.
The bartender explained that up in the mountains were caves. “Go up there at dusk-a and shout-a, ‘Yoo-hoo!’ and if the lady yoo-hoos back-a you work out-a the price. If she’s-a busy you no get-a an answer.”
That evening Rigamonte yoo-hooed his way from cave to cave, but without luck. He finally decided to go back and get drunk, but at the foot of the mountain he found a fresh cave. “Yoo-hoo! Yoo-hoo!” he shouted.
“Yoo-hoo! Yoo-hoo!” came back so clearly. He rushed into the cave and was killed by a train.

People have to be helped to be a little more aware, a little more alert. They need a little more clarity to see what they are doing. But there is no clarity, and the vested interests don’t want any clarity. They want more confusion. The more confusion there is, the more power politicians have. The more confusion there is, the more power priests have. They don’t want man to become aware; they want him to live as unconsciously as possible.

Rinaldo returned to Italy to see his relatives. One day he tried to ride his uncle’s horse. “Giddy up! Giddy up!” he said to the animal, but it did not move. “Hey,” he said to his relatives, “why this thing-a no move-a?”
“You no say, giddy-up,” said his uncle. “You gotta say, mamma mia to make-a him-a go and mangiare to make-a him-a stop.”
“Mamma mia!” he yelled and the horse galloped off into a clearing. Ahead was a steep cliff and Rinaldo noticed it almost too late. He pulled back on the reins and screamed, “Mangiare!” The horse came to a screeching halt at the edge of the cliff. Looking down and then up at the sky, Rinaldo whispered, “Mamma mia…”

And this is not so only with the people, this is so with everybody else – the so-called intellectuals, the intelligentsia, the politicians, the religious. It is applicable to all except a very few people, and those few people cannot be of much help.
That is why my effort is to create a great buddhafield, to release as much energy as is released in an atomic explosion. Sannyas is an effort to collect all those people who are ready to be aware, to be intelligent. And we have to spread the color all over the world. This is the color of spring.
Man needs a new life, a new birth. All that has been told and taught up to now has failed. It was bound to fail because it was not meant to create a better humanity; it was meant to keep man as much enslaved as he is.

A Polack was badly injured in an automobile crash and had to have a brain transplant. A team of surgeons put him under anesthesia, removed his brain, and went into the next room to get the new one. When they returned to the operating room the Polack was gone. The police searched everywhere for him but to no avail – he had vanished. The doctors contacted Interpol and they checked throughout the world trying to find this poor Pole who had left the hospital without his brain.
Finally, five years later, he was found. The Polack was now the pope!

Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
My problem is that I think there is something wrong with me. If I think that I have a problem then I really do have one. In fact, thinking seems to be just the making up of problems. What do you think?
I don’t think at all! That is why I have no problems, only answers and answers – no questions at all. It is exactly so. Mind is the root cause of all problems. Problems grow on mind like leaves on trees. You can go on pruning the leaves; that is not going to destroy the tree. On the contrary, it will help the foliage to become thicker – more and more leaves will come. Every gardener knows it: cut one leaf and the tree will accept the challenge. To protect itself, it will give birth to three leaves.
Mind can go on trying to solve problems, but it cannot solve them. Each solution will bring many more problems in its wake. That is why philosophy has utterly failed. Philosophy is the greatest failure in the world. And it has been such a great wastage of human intelligence that it is almost incalculable, because the people with the greatest intelligence have remained involved with philosophical problems. From Aristotle to Wittgenstein, thousands of brilliant people have wasted their whole brilliance for the simple reason that they were trying to solve single problems rather than going to the very root of all.
The mind is the only problem. Hence philosophy comes up with many solutions, many conclusions, but no conclusion is conclusive. Immediately many more problems pop up. Not one single question has been solved by philosophical endeavor, but still philosophy goes on and on moving farther and farther into the desert. It cannot reach the ocean; it is going basically astray. That’s where religion differs.
Religion means not trying to solve particular problems, but looking at the root of all the problems and cutting the root. That is what we call meditation: meditation is cutting the root. Meditation is not a solution of any problem in particular; it solves nothing. It simply helps you to get rid of the mind, the problem-creator. It simply helps you to slip out of the mind like a snake slips out of the old skin.
Once you know that you are not the mind, the great transcendence has happened. Suddenly all problems become insignificant; slowly, slowly they evaporate. You are left with a profound peace; a great silence prevails. This silence is the solution. This peace is the answer, the answer of all answers.
This is the miracle of religion, or the miracle of meditation to be more particular: that without solving a single problem it solves all the problems in a single blow. It is a sudden leap, a quantum leap.
And, you have the feeling already arising in you. You say, “If I think that I have a problem then I really do have one.” The moment you think, you create it; and once you have it you start looking for solutions. And who will look for solutions, and where? The mind will look for the solutions – and in the mind! Do you see the absurdness of it all? It is like pulling yourself up by your shoestrings; it is not possible. Yes, mind will fabricate many solutions but they will only be superficial. The basic question will remain untouched and many more will arise, and it is a process – ad infinitum.
But it is good that you have the feeling – a vague feeling, of course. Mind you, I am saying feel; I am not saying that you have come to the right thought. No thought is ever right. I am telling you that you have come to the right feel. It is still vague, clouded, just like early morning: the sun has not yet risen, but it is no longer night either.
You will have a little difficulty because this is the moment of transition. You will feel very vulnerable. You will feel almost split because you will not be in the night, you will not be in the day. You will be somewhere in between, on the way. Naturally a part of you will go on talking in the language of the night, and that is the older part and the major part. Just a small fragment of you will start speaking the language of the future, the language of the day, and you will find it is as if you have become two persons.
This period of transition is the most difficult period for every meditator – he starts falling apart. If you go to a psychologist he will say, “This is a breakdown.” And if your mind gets the idea that this is a breakdown, then of course it is. It is not a breakdown; it is a breakthrough but psychology still has no idea of the breakthrough. It will try to push you back into the old skin which you have left behind or are in the process of leaving behind. But that cannot be done, that is impossible.
Hence psychology – with all its different schools of psychoanalysis, psychosynthesis, gestalt, and so on and so forth – is groping in the dark because it is still unaware of the fact that a man can go beyond mind. There are psychologists like B. F. Skinner or Delgado who think man is just a behavior. It is another way of saying that man is nothing but physics, chemistry, physiology. Science is capable of explaining everything, nothing else is needed; man is a body and nothing more. That is the major part of modern psychology, and that is the only psychology in the Communist countries.
There are a few people who are striving to get a little beyond that, but they get caught into the subtle traps of the mind. Then they start thinking psychology is nothing but mind. Freud, Adler, Jung are all of the opinion that psychology is nothing but a concern with the mind, an inquiry into the mind.
The word psychology is beautiful: it comes from psyche, and psyche means the soul. But no psychologist agrees with the idea of the soul. In fact, they have no right to call their thinking psychology; they are using a wrong word, a far bigger word. They are all either believers in the body or believers in the mind, which are not really separate things. “Mindbody” is one phenomenon. In fact, we should not use the word and between the two. Mindbody should be a single word because there is not that much difference that you can use the word and. Not even a hyphen is needed, not even that much space is available. Body is mind looked at from the outside; mind is body looked at from the inside. Or, in other words, the body is the outer expression of the mind and the mind is the inner expression of the same phenomenon – just in two different dimensions.
Unless one goes beyond both, one never knows anything about the breakthrough. And man is really falling apart all over the world because of this stupid idea that man is nothing but body or nothing but mind, or at the most both. A breakthrough is possible if there is more space available inside you so that you can put the mind aside and still be.
When the skin of all the past, of all the memories, is dropped, there are moments, very delicate moments, when you are nowhere. You are neither the old nor the new; you are just passing through the birth canal. It is painful too because the old identity is disappearing and the new has not yet arrived. You can become very frightened; hence the master is needed.
The function of the master is to help you in such critical moments. Socrates used to say that the function of the master is that of a midwife, and I absolutely agree with him. It is just to help the child leave the womb in which the child has lived for nine months. And the child has lived in immense comfort. In fact, he will search and seek for the same comforts his whole life. There was no responsibility, no worry, no problem. Everything was supplied; existence took every care. Some unknown energies went on flowing from the mother to the child. Everything was done by the mother, and the child was simply floating inside the womb. Those nine months are nine months for the people who are outside the womb; for the child it is almost infinity because he is not aware of time, he cannot be aware of time. You become aware of time only when there are events happening.
Have you watched this? If one day many things happen you have a different sense of time, if some day nothing happens you have a totally different sense of the time. The sense of time depends on what happens. Time is measured through events. But nothing is happening in the womb, all is quiet. The child cannot feel that this is only nine months; it is infinity, it is a timeless state. And floating in the mother’s womb in a warm liquid is immensely pleasant.
That is how the desire for bliss arises in us – because we have experienced it. Otherwise, you cannot seek for anything that you have never experienced. Something must be there lingering deep down in your unconscious – some experience, some nostalgia that keeps you searching for bliss.
The whole search for godliness is basically the search for the mother’s womb. And the meditator really enters into the womb of existence.
In the Hindu temples the innermost shrine is called garbha – the womb. When you go into a Hindu temple the innermost shrine, where the statue of the god is, is called garbha – the womb. It is very significant, very meaningful. To enter again into the universe in a deep let-go is to find peace, bliss, a non-problematic existence. That is breakthrough.
If you go to a psychoanalyst, he will try to bring you back to your old identity. That is the whole function of psychology in the West: helping people to be adjusted again because they have become a little maladjusted with their past. Of course, the moment you are not adjusted with your own mind you are not adjusted with society, because your mind is part of the collective mind of that society. You are no longer adjusted with your religion; you are no longer adjusted with your political ideology. You simply find that everywhere you are in a way uprooted. And great fear grips you: you are no longer part of the collective mind, you are alone and you hanker to be part of some crowd so that you can feel a little warmth, a little coziness, and you can be on familiar ground again.
That is what psychology is doing in the West. Its whole work is against religion. Religion tries to give you a new identity, a new birth, and psychology gives you your old identity back again. It forces you somehow into the skin that the snake has left behind. The work can never really be done because the skin can never be your skin again. You can live with it, but it will be just hanging around you; it will be a burden, it is no longer part of you.

A father was telling his child, his small son, “There is nothing impossible in the world. Napoleon has said so: there is nothing impossible in the world.”
The child said, “Wait, and I will show you. One thing is impossible – I have tried.” He ran into the bathroom, brought a tube of toothpaste, forced the tube. The toothpaste came out, and he told his father, “Now put it back! If you can do this I will believe that Napoleon is right.”

Now it is almost impossible to put the toothpaste back into the tube, but that may be possible. Just a little scientific device will be needed to suck it back. But man cannot be put back into the old skin again. At the most he can go on carrying the skin like clothes, but clothes are not skin.
The function of the master is to help you to become acquainted with the new territory that you have already jumped into, and to help you to forget all about the old.
That’s where your problem is. You can create many problems – they are all excuses – but the real problem is that you are passing through a beautiful process of immense value. This is the process of rebirth. So you vaguely sense that, “It is me, my own mind which goes on creating problems.” You have started feeling, in fact you say, “…thinking seems to be just the making of problems.” Then why go on thinking? That’s the whole purpose of being here!

Young Mazzilli was not getting along too well with his wife. One night he threw a big party and invited all his friends. At the beginning everyone sat around just making small talk. But as the evening progressed, people started to couple off and find cozy corners. Soon the lights were dimmed and moans of love and passion could be heard. Mazzilli began looking for his wife, but could not find her.
After searching everywhere in the apartment he stepped into the kitchen and there she was, sitting on the sink, her legs in passionate embrace around Vince, one of his friends.
“Your wife and I love each other,” stammered Vince, “and we want to get married. Can you forgive me for taking her away?”
“Hey,” smiled the husband, “that’s what this party was for!”

The second question:
Osho,
Can you really learn from everything and every situation in life, as the Desiderata says?
Certainly. Sometimes it may seem, “What is there to be learned in this situation?” That only shows that your awareness is not deep enough, otherwise no situation is without a lesson, no situation at all. All situations are pregnant, but you have to discover, it may not be available on the surface. You have to be more watchful, you have to look at all the aspects of the situation.
Desiderata is absolutely right – this is my own experience. I have learned from every situation possible.

One of the great Sufi Masters, Junaid, was asked when he was dying… His chief disciple came close to him and asked, “Master, beloved Master, you are leaving us. One question has always been in our minds, but we could never gather enough courage to ask you. And now that you are leaving there will be no more opportunity to ask, so all the disciples have forced me to come to you and ask. Who was your master? This has been always a great curiosity among your disciples because we have never heard you talk about your master.”
Junaid opened his eyes and said, “It will be very difficult for me to answer because I have learned from almost everybody. The whole existence has been my master. I have learned from every event that has happened in my life and I am grateful to all that has happened, because out of all that learning I have arrived. But I did not have any single master. I was not so fortunate as you are,” Junaid said to them. “You have a master.”
I can understand Junaid because this has been the case with me too. I never had any master; you are far more fortunate. I had to learn the hard way: from every experience, from every event, from every person I came across. But it has been an immensely rich journey.
Junaid said, “Just to satisfy your curiosity I will give you three instances. One: I was very thirsty and I was going toward the river carrying my begging bowl – that was the only possession I had. When I reached the river a dog rushed, jumped into the river and started drinking.
“I watched for a moment and threw away my begging bowl because it was useless – a dog can do without it. I also jumped into the river and drank as much water as I wanted. My whole body was cool because I had jumped into the river, sat in the river for a few moments. I thanked the dog and touched his feet with deep reverence, because he had taught me a lesson. I had dropped everything, all possessions, but there was a certain clinging to my begging bowl. It was a beautiful bowl, very beautifully carved, inlaid with gold. It was presented to me by a king and I was always aware that somebody might steal it. Even in the night I used to put it under my head as a pillow so nobody could snatch it away. That was my last clinging – the dog helped. It was so clear: if a dog can manage without a begging bowl, I am a man, why can’t I manage? That dog was one of my masters.
“Secondly,” he said, “I lost my way in a forest and by the time I reached the village, the nearest village that I could find, it was midnight. Everybody was fast asleep. I wandered all over the town to see if I could find somebody who was awake to give me shelter for the night. I could only find a thief who was searching to find some house to enter.
“I asked the thief, ‘It seems only two persons are awake in the town, you and I. Can you give me shelter for the night?’
“The thief said, ‘I can see from your gown that you are a Sufi monk…’”
The word Sufi comes from suf – suf means wool, a woolen garment. The Sufis have used a woolen garment for centuries; hence they are called Sufis because of their garment. Just as in the world you are called the orange people, they are called the Sufis.
The thief said, “I can see you are a Sufi and I feel a little embarrassed to take you to my home. I am perfectly willing, but I must tell you who I am. I am a thief. Would you like to be the guest of a thief?”
For a moment Junaid hesitated. The thief said, “Look, it is better I told you. You seem hesitant. The thief is willing, but the mystic seems to be hesitant to enter into the house of a thief, as if the mystic is weaker than the thief. I am not afraid of you. In fact, I should be afraid of you – you may change me, you may transform my whole life! Inviting you means danger, but I am not afraid. You are welcome. Come to my home. Eat, drink, go to sleep, and live here as long as you want, because I live alone and my earnings are enough. I can manage for two persons, and it will be really beautiful to chit-chat with you of great things – but you seem to be hesitant.”
And Junaid became aware that that was true. He asked to be excused. He touched the feet of the thief and he said, “Yes, my rootedness in my own being is as yet very weak. You are a really strong man and I would like to come to your home. And I would like to stay a little longer, not only for this night. I want to be stronger myself!”
The thief said, “Come on!” He fed the Sufi, gave him something to drink, helped him to go to sleep, and he said, “Now I will go. I have to do my own thing. I will come early in the morning.” Early in the morning the thief came back.
Junaid asked, “Have you been successful?”
The thief said, “No, not today, but I will see tomorrow.”
And this happened continuously for thirty days; every night the thief went and every morning he came back, but he was never sad, never frustrated, no sign of failure on his face, always happy, and he would say, “It doesn’t matter, I tried my best. I could not find anything today again, but tomorrow I will try. And, God willing, it can happen tomorrow if it has not happened today.”
After one month Junaid left, and for years he tried to realize the ultimate, but it was always failure. But each time he decided to drop the whole project he was reminded of the thief, his smiling face and his saying, “God willing, what has not happened today may happen tomorrow.”
Finally when he achieved the ultimate, Junaid said, “I remembered the thief as one of my greatest masters. Without him I would not be what I am.
“And third,” he said, “I entered into a small village. A little boy was carrying a candle, a lit candle, obviously going to the small temple of the town to put the candle there for the night.”
And Junaid asked, “Can you tell me where the light comes from? You have lit the candle yourself so you must have seen from where the light comes? What is the source of light?”
The boy laughed and he said, “Wait!” and he blew out the candle in front of Junaid. And he said, “You have seen light go out. Can you tell me where it has gone? If you can tell me where it has gone I will tell you from where it has come, because it has gone to the same place. It has returned to the source.”
And Junaid said, “I had met great philosophers, but nobody had made such a beautiful statement: it has gone to its very source. Everything returns to its source finally. And secondly, the child made me aware of my own ignorance. I was trying to joke with the child, but the joke was on me. He showed me that asking foolish questions, ‘From where has the light come?’ is not intelligent. It comes from nowhere, from nothingness, and goes back to nowhere, to nothingness.”
Junaid said, “I touched the feet of the child. The child was puzzled. He said, ‘Why you are touching my feet?’ and I told him, ‘You are my master, you have shown me something. You have given me a great lesson, a great insight.’
“Since that time,” Junaid said, “I have been meditating on nothingness, and slowly, slowly I have entered into nothingness. And now the final moment has come when the candle will go out, the light will go out. And I know where I am going – to the same source.
“I remember that child with gratefulness. I can still see him standing before me blowing out the candle.”

Buddha has used the word nirvana for the ultimate experience. Nirvana simply means blowing out the candle. Suddenly the flame that was manifest goes into unmanifestation; it disappears.
You ask me, “Can man really learn from everything and every situation in life, as Desiderata says?” Yes.

Poor Pete was known as “Broomstick” among his friends. He was awfully skinny and looked so emaciated it did not help his social life. One night, to drown his sorrows, Pete wandered into a bar in New York’s Little Italy and by some miracle became friendly with Rosalie, a buxom divorcee. He nearly fainted when she invited him home.
At her apartment she led Mr. Skin-and-Bones directly to her bedroom and said, “Why don’t you get undressed and wait for me in bed?”
Pete ripped off his clothes and, panting with excitement, waited for her return.
Five minutes later the Italian girl walked in with a six-year-old boy. She threw back the bedsheets, pointed to Pete and exclaimed, “Now, you see, Roberto, that is what you are gonna look like if you don’t start eating your spaghetti!”

Sheela has written a letter to me. It will help you understand what Desiderata means. She says:

The third question:
Osho,
The other day two really weird-looking Hare Krishna people came to check out this place and the way we run it. One of the men, Haridas, is the head of the Hare Krishna movement in Mumbai. And the first question the guy asked me was why I am here, so I casually replied, “Because I am in love with Osho and I enjoy what I do here.” And then he asked me, “You have no interest in scriptures?” So I again casually replied, “No, they don't make any sense to me.” So the guy looked at me weirdly and asked me, “What do you do for spirituality?” So I said, “Who needs it?” So he turned toward me and said with a very serious voice, “I feel sorry for you.” Then I just smiled at him and the guy said to me, “If you don't have any interest in scripture, how do you learn?” So I said to him, “By living.” And he jumped, and said, “Do you know what happens after death?” I said, “No, I am still alive!” He said, “But scriptures can tell you what happens after death.” So I said to him, “Did the scriptures tell you what happens after death?” He said, “No.” So I said, “Ah!”
Then the guy jumped up, and picking on the word bhagwan, started reciting a ten-page sutra in Sanskrit and explaining, “Do you know what the word bhagwan contains?” And I said, “No,” and he said, “The word bhagwan is made of sex.” And I am looking at the guy in amazement, and the rest of the questions were more absurd than the previous ones. And then I just had fun with them, and the guys left disgusted.
Osho, what is up with them?
The Hare Krishna movement attracts the most stupid people. It is a miracle! Only the stupid ones are attracted toward it. It is in a way strange, because almost every movement attracts all kinds of people, but the Hare Krishna movement is special: it is only for the stupid. The more stupid you are the better.
Now all his questions are foolish. I have come across many Hare Krishna people. While I was wandering around the country I would meet them, and I can understand Sheela’s amazement because I know all their questions are foolish. Now what kind of a question is this? – “Why I am here?”

Once Mulla Nasruddin was caught making love with a woman by the woman’s husband who suddenly entered the room. Naked, Nasruddin rushed, tried to find some place to hide. Finding nowhere else, he stood inside the cupboard.
The man looked all around. He opened the cupboard.
Nasruddin was standing there completely naked, and the man asked, “What are you doing here?”
Nasruddin said, “Everybody has to be somewhere! I am in such a difficulty, and you are asking metaphysical questions? Obviously, everybody has to be somewhere!”

Now this foolish guy, even if he meets God, will ask, “What are you doing here? Why you are here?” And do you think God can answer that? Impossible! But there is one thing, fortunately: these Hare Krishna people will never meet God. They are so stupid that even if they meet him they will miss.
He asked, “What do you do for spirituality?” As if spirituality is something that can be done. That’s what their idea of spirituality is, that you have to do something.
Spirituality is disappearance of the doer, and when there is no doer how can there be doing? It is a state of being, not of doing. Doing keeps you in the world; being takes you into the beyond.
I have heard…

A Western businessman and his sannyasin son were discussing his coming trip to Pune. “You know, son,” said the father “you can get very sick in India.”
“Yeah!” replied the son. “I can get killed walking across Fifth Avenue!”
“Well, at least think of your mother – she is worried sick,” the father urged.
“She certainly does not need me around to be worried sick,” replied the sannyasin.
“Well,” said the father, “this guy you are going to see, is he a Christian?”
“Hell, no!” replied the son. “He even works on Sundays!”
Disgusted, the father snapped back, “You know, son, you are going to amount to nothing.”
“Gee, Dad,” said the sannyasin with a grin, “you really do understand!”

“What do you do for spirituality?” Spirituality is not something that can be attained by doing. It is your innermost core, you feel it when all doing ceases. Once you have felt it, then it always remains like an undercurrent even when you are doing a thousand and one things. Then wherever you are, whatsoever you are doing, it is there: a presence surrounding you, a light arising from your deepest core, radiating all around you, a peace, a love, a joy, a fragrance.
But these Hare Krishna people think that you have to go on chanting, counting beads, repeating the name of God. As if God has a name! As if by counting beads you can become spiritual or by repeating the name of God. Your repetition will make you even more dull than you are. Repetitiveness always makes a person duller than he was before because repetition creates boredom.
And every mother knows it. When the child is not going to sleep, she starts singing a lullaby. And what is a lullaby? – a mantra, a transcendental meditation, forced on the child. Now the child cannot escape; he is tucked under the blanket. He fidgets and he has to listen to some nonsense words. Continuous repetition in a monotonous voice bores him to death. Finally he escapes into sleep – seeing no other way out he goes in and falls asleep and starts snoring. That is the only way to get rid of the mother and her lullaby.

Once Mulla Nasruddin was very ill. He was treated by all kinds of doctors – allopathic, ayurvedic, homeopathic, etcetera, etcetera, but nothing was helping; he was deteriorating every day. Finally his son went to a hypnotist and asked him to come and help him. That was the last resort.
The hypnotist said, “Don’t be worried.” He came, he started repeating again and again, “You are falling asleep, falling asleep, falling asleep… Deep, deep sleep… Falling, falling…” for half an hour continuously, “Falling into deep sleep…”
Suddenly Mulla started snoring. That was one of the problems, that he had not slept for months and the doctors were saying that their medicines were not working because he could not fall asleep. In sleep the body recovers, recuperates. If somehow it can be managed that he falls asleep, then the medicines will start working. So this was a miracle!
The hypnotist tiptoed out of the room very silently, and the son was very much impressed. He gave him double his fee and thanked him very much. The hypnotist left, the son went in.
Mulla opened one eye and asked, “Has that nut gone? He was killing me! I have never been so bored in my life, I have never thought of committing suicide. For the first time when he continued, continued, I thought, “There is no way to get rid of this guy,” so I acted snoring. Either he would have killed me or if I were a little better, a little healthier, I would have killed him. But never bring such people here again, otherwise there is going to be bloodshed. Either I will kill myself or I will kill the person! What nonsense is this?”

But these people believe that by repeating a certain mantra you can attain to spirituality. All that you can attain to is a bored state of mind. You will lose your intelligence, that’s all. You will lose your sharpness.
And he says, “Bhagwan contains sex.” Now he has understood only language and nothing else. In Sanskrit each word means many things. Sanskrit is one of the most poetic languages of the world. In fact, all ancient languages are poetic; modern languages are scientific. A poetic language has many meanings for one word so you can play upon those many meanings. It gives you freedom, poetic freedom. The scientific language has a precise meaning for every word.
Bhagwan has many meanings. Yes, one of the meanings contains “sex” because in ancient India sex was considered and respected as the very origin of life, and God is the origin of life. Bhag really means vagina. But those were the beautiful people who thought of sex as divine, as if God is the womb, the vagina. Out of that vagina, out from that womb, the whole of existence has come. Hence the word bhagwan certainly contains “sex” in it, and the whole of creation is a proof that sex is the origin of life.
But he must have got caught by this one meaning. And why did he get caught with this one meaning, because bhagwan also means “the blessed one” – another meaning. That’s why we call Buddha, “Bhagwan” and we call Krishna, “Bhagwan.” And these Hare Krishna people go on repeating the name of Krishna as Bhagwan. Are they repeating some sexual symbol? They are repeating the other meaning, “the blessed one.”
Bhagwan can also come from another root, bhagya. Bhagya means fortune. One who achieves the ultimate is the most fortunate one, hence he is called Bhagwan. Bhagwan means “the blessed one,” the most fortunate one. There is nothing more to realize for him. He has arrived home.
But to his stupid mind the sexual meaning has become the predominant meaning. And the reason is not in the word, the reason is in his own mentality – because Hare Krishna people are sex-repressive people.
He had also asked, “There are so many men and women here. Do they all live together?” He was shocked. An ashram, and men and women are living together? Hare Krishna people make a demarcation: the women have to live separately, the men have to live separately. No love relationship is allowed; hence naturally their minds become full of sexuality, perversion.
The meaning of bhagwan comes from his perverted mind. And whatsoever Sanskrit he knows has nothing to do with it. Just that meaning, one meaning of the word, has become his obsession.

Mario missed a day at work and O’Riley, the foreman, wanted an explanation. “Where have you been?” he asked.
“It was-a my wife – she gave birth-a to a wheelbarrow!”
“If you can’t do any better than that,” said the foreman, “I am gonna have to let you go.”
“I think-a I gotta it wrong,” said Mario. “My wife she is-a in bed-a having a pushchair.”
“That’s it, wise guy!” shouted O’Riley, “You are fired.”
Mario went home and said, “Hey, missus, what-a was wrong-a with you yesterday?”
“I told-a you, I had a miscarriage!”
“Ah, I knew it was-a something with-a wheels on!”

Now, you can learn many things from this leader of the Hare Krishna movement. You can learn much about stupidity, and you can learn much about yourself – when and where you are also behaving stupidly. You can learn a thousand and one things. And that’s what Sheela had told him, “I learn from living.” But they think one can learn only from scriptures.
Nothing can be learned from scriptures. One becomes knowledgeable but never wise. And the knowledgeable person is in a far worse state than the ignorant one, because the ignorant one is at least innocent, ready to learn; at least receptive. These people cannot listen, they cannot see. They are so full of bullshit! But to them bullshit is holy cow dung.
Just watch. Whenever you are fortunately with a stupid person, just watch him; it will help you immensely to become intelligent.

In London, Lady Ashcroft decided to give a snooty party and hired a maid, Miss Scapeccia, who had recently immigrated to England.
“Now don’t forget the sugar tongs,” ordered the English matron. “It is not very nice when the men go in the loo, and they take themselves out and they put themselves back, and then they have to pick up the sugar lumps with their fingers.”
“Yes-a, ma’am,” answered the Italian girl.
Later that night after the guests had gone, Lady Ashcroft said, “Miss Scapeccia, I thought I told you about the sugar tongs.”
“I put-a them out, my Lady, I swear!”
“Well, I did not see them on the table.”
“On-a the table? I put-a them in the toilet!”

The last question:
Osho,
How do I open my sense of humor?
Everybody is born with it. It is not a talent, it is intrinsic to human nature. But the society tries to destroy it; it is afraid, even of the sense of humor. We teach children to be serious. Seriousness is praised, highly praised. In fact, seriousness is a kind of disease; it should be condemned.
Every child brings a sense of humor in the world but we destroy it, at least we repress it. We don’t allow him to enjoy it, we don’t allow him to share it with us. We don’t encourage him to help it grow because we are afraid; if he becomes too non-serious then he will become dangerous to the serious society. Then he will start rebelling against many things because a sense of humor is an essential part of intelligence.
You don’t see donkeys laughing, you don’t see buffaloes enjoying a joke. It is only man who can enjoy a joke, who can laugh. Your saints are like buffaloes and donkeys! They have fallen below humanity, they have lost something of immense value. Without laughter a man is like a tree without flowers.
But society needs serious people: presidents, prime ministers, vice-chancellors, professors, popes, shankaracharyas, ayatollahs, imams, all kinds of priests, teachers, commissioners, collectors, governors… Everybody has to be serious. If they have a sense of humor the society is afraid efficiency will be lost. If they have a sense of humor they will become human. They are expected to be just like machines.
The way Adolf Hitler walks is mechanical. Just see his pictures, the way he stands, the way he walks, the way he takes the salute, the way he salutes. It seems almost mechanical, as if he is not a man but a robot. His face, his gestures, all are robotlike, and he made the whole of Germany robotlike. He destroyed Germany more than he destroyed anybody else, but he created a very efficient army. The efficient army is possible only if people lose all intelligence and all that intelligence contains.
A sense of humor is one of the very essentials of intelligence. The moment you lose it you also lose intelligence; the more you have it, the more intelligent you are. There is no question of how to open the sense of humor; you simply remove the barriers. It is already there, it is already the case. You simply remove a few rocks which your parents, your society have put there to prevent it. The society teaches you self-control, and sense of humor means relaxation.

Just the other day somebody from London, a sannyasin, sent me a cutting from a newspaper. He had heard my jokes about Zimbabwe’s president, Reverend Canon Banana, so he sent me a small cutting: that one of Banana’s cabinet ministers was traveling with Banana in an airplane and that he pissed all over the passageway. He was asked, “What is the matter?”
He said, “I was trying to use self-control, and it became impossible!”

Of course, in the presence of President Banana you have to be a banana! He was trying to use self-control so he tried his best. If he had undergone the EST training, he would have succeeded!
You cannot laugh before your elders, you cannot laugh before your teachers, you cannot laugh before your priests, you cannot laugh in the churches.
The Christians say Jesus never laughed. I cannot believe that – he was not a buffalo! He was one of the greatest, most intelligent men who ever walked on the Earth. He must have laughed, he must have enjoyed it. He was a man far more of the Earth than Buddha. He lived more passionately and more intensely than anybody else who has ever become enlightened. He loved the company of women; he had beautiful women disciples, even one of the most famous prostitutes of those days, Mary Magdalene. He loved eating, he loved drinking. He is the only enlightened person who loved wine – a real man! And he loved feasting very much. Every night there was a feast, and the feast continued for hours.
Just a few days ago some sannyasins, samurais, had a small party, and my medium, Radha, did a belly dance. Good! I enjoyed the news, and I told Radha, “Then one day you have to do it before me. Just seeing your belly dance, I will really enjoy it!”
Jesus would have enjoyed Radha’s belly dancing too. Buddha may have closed his eyes, but not Jesus, not Lao Tzu!

The rumor is that one day Lao Tzu, Buddha and Confucius, all three were sitting in a restaurant in heaven, and a beautiful woman came with a big beautiful jar and told them, “This is the juice of life! Would you like it?”
Confucius said, “I will only taste a little bit of it because without tasting it I cannot say anything.” That was his way, always to be scientific, pragmatic. So he just tasted it and he said, “No, it is bitter!”
Buddha closed his eyes. He said, “There is no need for me to taste it. Many people have tasted it – just now Confucius has tasted it. I declare it is bitter!”
She went to Lao Tzu. Lao Tzu drank the whole jar. He said, “Unless you drink it totally you have no right to make any comment, any judgment on it.” And when he had drunk the whole jar he started dancing, he started laughing.
Buddha and Confucius left: “This man Lao Tzu is giving a bad name to all of us enlightened people!” And of course he was not dancing alone, he started dancing with the woman. When you are full of life…

Jesus was a man of the Earth. He repeats many times – many more times than he says “I am the son of God” – he says many more times, “I am the son of man.” He is closer to Earth than to heaven. He is a very earthly person. He must have laughed, enjoyed. But the priests and the popes and the churches are very serious. To enter into a church is like entering into a graveyard. You have to be serious, uptight.
All that has to be dropped. And if you cannot drop it here, where else can you drop it? Either here or in Italy! Go for a little visit to Italy.

Ten years after his arrival in America, Roselli had saved enough money from his fruit and vegetable business to build a huge house. “I wanna three bedroom-a upstairs,” he explained to the builder. “I wanna large-a living room with a nice-a big-a staircase leading up to the room. And right over here next to the staircase I wanna hollow statue.”
Months later he returned and found everything built to his specifications. Then he noticed a statue next to the staircase. “Hey, what’s-a matter with you?” shouted Roselli. “You no capisci what I tell-a you?”
“Is not that what you ordered?” asked the builder. “A hollow statue?”
“Are you-a stupid or something?” cried the Italian. “I wanna one-a those things that goes ring-a ring, you pick them up and say ‘Hallo, s’tat-a you?’”

Go to Italy and you will come across many situations!

For a wedding present Brambilla gave his son Aldo two hundred dollars. Two weeks later he asked him, “What-a you do-a with-a the money?”
“I bought-a a wristwatch, papa,” answered the boy.
“Stupido!” cried his father. “You should-a have bought-a a rifle!”
“A rifle?! What for?”
“Suppose-a some-a day you come-a home and find a man sleeping with your wife-a,” explained the father. “What-a you gonna do? Wake him up-a and tell-a him what-a time it is?”

Gannon, staying in a small Rome hotel, called the desk and said, “Send me up a whore!”
Mrs. Agostini, the owner’s wife, was shocked and demanded that her husband throw the man out. But he was afraid, so Mrs. Agostini decided to go up and throw him out herself.
In a few moments, the husband could hear the sound of furniture breaking and screams and curses.
Finally Gannon came downstairs panting, his face scratched and his shirt torn. As he walked out he confided to Agostini, “That was a tough old bitch you sent up, but I screwed her anyway!”

Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
Sitting near you I increasingly feel deep silence and what seems to be emptiness, but there is no bliss in it. I tend to regard this as an indication that something is wrong, especially at darshan where so many people are so blissful. I don't seem to have any idea whether I am on the right track or not. Sometimes I think I am becoming more meditative and other times I think I am totally off beam and lost. Please comment.
Deva Ashoka, the temple of God has many doors. Each door has its uniqueness and one should not compare one door with another door. Silence is one of the doors to the divine, just as bliss is, truth is, love is, freedom is, awareness is, meditation is, prayerfulness is. Man can enter into the divine through as many ways as there are types in the world. And each type will have its own joys, experiences on the way.
Finally, when one has entered the temple, all those experiences melt and merge into one experience which is not possible to express. The ways can be expressed, but the goal remains unexpressed. Nothing can be said about it, it is a nameless experience, but the ways have names.
Silence is totally different from bliss. If you start comparing with others you will be getting into unnecessary difficulty. Comparison creates anxiety – no need to compare with what is happening to others, just see what is happening to you. Is it healthy? Is it nourishing? Without any comparison just watch what is happening to you. Are you becoming more centered, more rooted, more grounded? Are you feeling at home?
And this has to be without any comparison, otherwise everybody here will be in difficulty, because somebody is moving through the door of bliss and he will start comparing, “Why I am not as silent as Ashoka? Something is wrong. I dance and I sing and I feel great joy, but where is that profound silence which Buddha speaks of? Something is wrong, I am not on the right track.”
The same is happening to you, and each path has its own language. I have given you the name Deva Ashoka. It will be helpful to be reminded that Ashoka was the man who transformed the whole face of Asia. It was he, and only he, who made Buddha the light of Asia. Ashoka was one of the greatest emperors in the world. In many ways he was a far greater man than Alexander the Great, because even being a great emperor, the only emperor who ruled over the biggest map of India possible… Since then India has never been so big, many chunks of it have fallen away. Still it is a vast country, but Ashoka was the emperor of the greatest India possible, almost half of Asia.
When he became a meditator, when he became surrendered to the master, Gautama the Buddha, such a transformation happened to him that he remained an emperor and yet he possessed nothing. He lived like a man who has nothing. He had everything, but he lived like a man who has nothing. Apparently, on the surface, he never renounced the kingdom, but inwardly he was no longer part of this world. It has rarely happened in any other emperor’s life, in the whole history of man.
I have given you the name Deva Ashoka – divine Ashoka – feeling the possibility that silence will be your path. Silence means the path of via negativa. Bliss is very affirmative; it is via positiva. It affirms that the whole existence is divine, hence rejoice. It says yes to all that is. It does not renounce, it does not eliminate, it does not negate. It learns to enjoy, to experience, to sing, to dance, to celebrate. It is the way of a beautiful garden path. Many flowers bloom, birds sing.
The path of silence is just the opposite of it: it is like a beautiful desert. Remember, the desert has its own beauty. Not only gardens are beautiful – they have their beauty, but the desert also has its own beauty. The immensity of it, the unboundedness of it, the silence of it, the undisturbed, virgin peace that prevails in a desert – that has its own beauty. Beauty is not found only in one color and one size; it comes in all shapes, all sizes, all colors. There have been people who have loved deserts more than gardens.
I live in Lao Tzu House and my garden is a forest. Mukta, my gardener, was very reluctant to make it that way – obviously; she is a Greek and thinks logically, and this is very illogical. No symmetry, no pruning is allowed. She prunes, although when I am not looking! She tries to make something out of the mess.
Vivek hates the whole forest around the house. She says it has destroyed all perspective; you cannot see. You cannot see the vastness of the sky, you cannot see anything from the room – it is so covered! In fact, I don’t need to see anything; I have seen everything. But for poor Vivek it is difficult, she still needs to see a few things. I can understand her difficulty.
You can go on and on seeing a desert; it ends nowhere. All the horizons are available. Its vastness and its profound silence has its own song, unheard, unspoken. The same is true about the path of silence.
Buddha cannot dance, cannot sing. Of course he has his own song, but that song is not of sound. It is not the sound of running water; it is the song of a desert. You can feel it, you can live it, you can be it, but it is not tangible. You cannot touch it, you cannot hold it in your hands. How can you hold nothingness in your hands?
Buddha attained to the ultimate by negating: “I am not the body, I am not the mind, I am not the heart even.” He went on negating: “I am not a self, I am just nothing.” He went on negating till nothing was left to negate. His method is like peeling an onion: you go on peeling layer by layer, layer by layer. The onion starts becoming smaller and smaller and smaller, and finally the last layer has been taken off and the onion has disappeared. Now there is nothingness. This is Buddha’s path. When you have become absolutely nothing, you have entered. But don’t compare.
Buddha cannot compare himself with Meera, with Chaitanya, with Kabir. He cannot compare. If he looks at Meera dancing with her veena, singing ecstatically, of course he will feel something is being missed. If Meera looks at Buddha, the silence…
The first statues in the whole world were made of Buddha, and for the simple reason… It is not accidental that the first marble statues were made of Buddha. Buddha had some quality, the same coolness as the marble and the same stillness as a statue.
You cannot make a statue of Meera – impossible, because how is the statue going to represent a dance? Meera is fluid, flowing. If you want to make a statue of Meera, you will have to make a statue out of a fountain. You will have to give a shape to the fountain of Meera because she is volatile, dynamic. The dance has to be there. If the dance is not there… Yes, you can catch a posture of Meera dancing, but the moment the dance stops it disappears. Dance is a process, not a thing. Buddha can be caught beautifully in a statue; hence it is no wonder that he has the most beautiful statues in the whole world. His silence can be caught in a marble statue very easily.
Never compare. Comparison simply creates unnecessary problems. Go on moving into this silence and don’t call it empty – because when a Westerner calls anything empty it means one thing, and when the Easterner calls something empty it means something almost diametrically opposite. In no Western language has emptiness the connotation of something that really exists. Emptiness simply says that nothing exists, that nothing is simply nothing. But in Eastern languages, shunyata, the word that Buddha used for emptiness, does not mean nothing exists; it means nothing really exists. Nothing is not simply nothing: it is all, it is overflowing.
In English you have the word room; room simply means space. I lived in Raipur for six, eight months once, and I had a totally empty room, not even a chair, just a bamboo mat; that was the all that the room contained. Anybody entering the room would say, “Nothing in the room?” And I would say to the person, “Room simply means space; nothing else is needed. This is a room! It is spacious. You are looking for things and because there are no things you say ‘nothing.’ That is where the word nothing comes from – no thing. But you are not seeing the roominess, the spaciousness which is very positive. The room is full of space, it is not empty – empty of things but full of space.”
The desert is empty of trees and people and animals, but is full of space.
The Eastern languages also have a positive sense about nothingness, emptiness. So remember when you feel nothing, when you feel empty, drop the Western idea. It is a change of gestalt.
You must have seen pictures in children’s books – a very famous picture, almost everybody must have seen it, it exists in almost every psychology book: just a line drawing of an old woman, but if you go on looking at it, a moment comes when the gestalt changes. Suddenly the old woman disappears and there is a beautiful young woman. Those lines contain both the figures. If you go on looking at the young woman, soon again the gestalt will change and the old woman will appear, because the eyes cannot remain static; they become tired of one thing so they change the gestalt.
If you try to find the young woman while your eyes are focused on the old woman you will not be able to find the young woman, or vice versa: when you see the young woman in the picture and you try to find the old woman you cannot find her. And you have seen her, you know she is there, but you cannot find her. You cannot see both together, remember. You can try, but your failure is absolutely certain.
You cannot see both together because the same lines have to be used. Those lines can either show you the old woman or, if you have exhausted the lines in the old woman, then the old woman is nowhere, she has no more lines left for her. If you have exhausted the lines in the young woman then the young woman disappears. But if you go on looking you will have shifts: sometimes the young woman appears and then the old woman disappears as if she has never existed. You search for her and you will not find her.
The same is true when you look at an empty room: it is a question of gestalt. If you are focused too much on things – looking for the furniture and for the paintings and for things that are almost part of a room – then you will say, “There is nothing in it,” and your “nothing” will be Western. If you are focused on the space of the room, on the roominess of the room, you will see it is full, overflowingly full; full of itself. Then your nothingness will have an Eastern meaning.
The Eastern and the Western mind really differ in many ways; they have become focused on different gestalts. The West thinks of things; the East thinks not of things, it thinks of nothings. Its whole gestalt is different.
Your gestalt is changing from the Western to the Eastern, and it will be a little difficult for you to drop the old habit. Hence it looks as if it is empty and there is no bliss in it. This is your old habit; otherwise it will not look empty.
Nothing is as full as the empty hand: it has the whole sky in it. And nothing is as empty as a fist: it has nothing in it. The fist has “nothing” in the Western sense, and the open hand has “nothing” in the Eastern sense.

Once Ananda asked Buddha, “Bhagwan, what is your teaching, in short?”
And Buddha opened his hands and he said, “My teaching is like open hands, not like fists.”

A very significant statement: when your hands are open, in one sense you are empty; in another sense you are holding the whole world, all the stars, the whole sky. How much can you hold in a fist? – almost nothing. But to change from the Western gestalt to the Eastern is a little bit difficult.
In the West, via negativa has never been the predominant gestalt. Nothing like Buddhism has ever happened in the West, nothing like Zen. It could not have happened, it was not possible. The whole Judaic tradition out of which Christianity and Islam are born is basically affirmative: “God is” and Buddha says, “God is not.”
Remember the Eastern meaning. When Buddha says, “God is not,” he is not an atheist. He is simply saying that the nature of God is nothingness. He is not denying God at all; he is not agreeing with Epicurus or with the Charvakas. When he says “God is not,” you have to remember, you have to be constantly aware, that his “not” is not your “not.” His “not” does not say that God does not exist. His “not” simply says that God exists as nothingness. Hence we cannot say God is, because that will make your gestalt change to the positive. Either you can say God is nothingness or you can say God is not. And of course saying God is nothingness will not come closer to the truth. “God is not” comes very close, so close that one step more and you will disappear into nothingness. But that nothingness is overfull, it is pregnant. It is the nothingness that is found inside the seed.
If you cut a seed, what you will find? – nothing. But you know perfectly well that nothing contains millions of flowers – invisible, but they are there, all the colors, all the fragrances. Nothing can be felt right now, but the potential is there.
Enjoy this silence and don’t compare, and don’t call it empty. You are absolutely on the right track; this is the way for you.
I cannot conceive of Ashoka dancing; that will look very ridiculous. When you see Ashoka next time, just think – Ashoka dancing! It will look absurd, it is not possible. Ashoka singing – impossible! He tries because he sees so many people dancing and singing.
He writes jokes many times to me but I have never chosen a single joke because he has no sense of humor at all! But he tries, poor man, tries his best!
Once he wrote to me, “Osho, what do you think about it? I have an idea that I would like to start an ashram magazine just full of humor.”
I said, “My God – and Ashoka will be the editor of the magazine!” If he wanted to start a magazine on boredom or something like that it would have been perfectly logical, but he wants to start a magazine full of humor and he has no sense of humor at all, no possibility even! But there is no need.
Go on falling deeper and deeper into your silence. And never, never compare yourself, your experiences with others, because everybody has to go in his own way. Of course in the end, the one who has come dancing to existence and the one who has come in silence meet and merge into one experience.
Bliss is not right now the thing for you. It may happen as a by-product at the final stage.
A joke for you Ashoka. Think over it. Perhaps you may get it!

Garrity’s member was twenty-five inches long. The poor man could not find a woman who could hold him. The doctors could not help, so he went to a little sidestreet sex shop.
The clerk showed Garrity a stick of peppermint candy and said, “This has a secret medication inside. As you suck, your stump shortens. In your case about five minutes ought to do the trick. But let me warn you, the drug makes you very sleepy and drowsy, so you must have someone there to pull it out of your mouth when the time is up.”
Garrity could not wait to try the miraculous treatment. He dashed into the nearest men’s room, handed the Italian attendant twenty bucks and said, “I am popping a medicated rod into my mouth and it might make me doze off. It is extremely important that you pull out the dopestick after five minutes.”
Garrity woke up several hours later, saw the attendant watching him and asked, “Did you remove the stick after five minutes?”
The man replied, “No speak-a the English.”

Bliss is not your language – forget all about it. Silence is your language. And don’t try to be blissful because that will be simply false. Don’t try at all to be something that you are not; just be that which you are and whatsoever it is, it is right, because you have to find yourself and nobody else. And remember another thing, don’t condemn others either: “What are you doing, dancing, singing and wasting your time? Sit silently.” Because that is also a possibility.
Either people compare and then feel that they are missing or they become aggressive and they start destroying other people’s lives; they start condemning: “This is wrong.” That is a kind of defense, and it is said that the best way to defend is to attack. They start attacking others, “You are wrong,” just in order to feel “I am right.” That aggressiveness is also wrong because that may distract somebody from his or her path.
The religious person has to understand that people differ, they are unique. In fact, each individual comes to godliness in his own way, in his own unique way. Nobody else before him has ever come to it in the same way, exactly the same way, and nobody else in the future is ever going to come to it in the same way.
This is one of the calamities that has befallen humanity. The Christian goes on condemning the Hindu, the Hindu goes on condemning the Christian, the Mohammedan goes on condemning others. Everybody is condemning everybody else: “You are wrong.” The basic thing is, they are all defensive, they feel deep down, “Perhaps we are wrong.”
Naturally, Jainas are only such a small minority that a deep defensiveness is natural. There are millions of Christians in the world; almost one half of the world is Christian. There are only three hundred thousand Jains. The natural, the obvious logic is, “How can so many people be wrong? We must be wrong.” Hence they become very aggressive.
If you meet a Jaina monk, he is more aggressive than anybody. Of course he believes in nonviolence, so he is nonviolently aggressive! But I have looked in Jaina scriptures: they have been criticizing everybody and vehemently, for the simple reason that they are so few, they have to defend themselves. They are trembling inside: “How can we be right? It is impossible for us to be right, we are so few. If we were right we would have been victorious all over the world. And Christians are so many and Mohammedans are so many and Buddhists are so many – they must be right.” But they cannot concede that, hence: “Destroy them as much as possible.” If you cannot do anything else, logically, in your own scriptures, you can condemn them.
Either a person starts feeling, “I am wrong,” or he starts hankering to make the other feel wrong. Both things are absolutely unnecessary. No need for you to feel wrong; no need for others to be made to feel wrong. Allow everyone his own individuality to flower in its own way. Roses are roses, marigolds are marigolds, lotuses are lotuses. There is no need to compare and there is no need to say, “You are wrong.”
Just watch inside. If you are feeling good, if you feel well-being arising in you, then you are on the right path. If you feel your misery disappearing, if you feel your anxiety falling away, if you feel your anguish evaporating, you are on the right track. Don’t be bothered about anybody else; that is none of your business.

The second question:
Osho,
If another man who has already realized his own self comes to you, can you recognize him simply by looking at him? I would like to meet you if you permit me.
Abhedanadan, no need to bother. I can recognize you even without seeing you – you have not realized. There is no need to see you. This is not the question of a man who knows. The very desire to be recognized as self-realized is enough proof that it has not happened yet. Once it happens, who cares, who bothers? There is no point, not at all.

A few days ago I was reading about Baba Franklin John. He writes that he went to Satya Sai Baba and he waited there in the crowd to see whether Satya Sai Baba could recognize him as a God-realized person or not.
If he recognizes Franklin John: “This man is a God-realized person,” and comes to him and says this to him, then Franklin John will know that he too is God-realized. But he never looked at him, so Franklin John says he knows nothing. He was waiting to be recognized – a childish desire for certificates, somebody authoritative giving you a certificate.

When I left the university there was a post vacant for a professor of philosophy. I applied for it. The education minister called me for the interview, and you can understand what kind of interview it must have been. We immediately clashed. Instead of him interviewing me, I interviewed him! And finally he said, “What is the matter? Have you come here to be appointed to this post or are you interviewing me?”
I said, “That doesn’t matter, that is secondary. That we can decide later on. The essential things first!”
But he said, “I have other things to do. You just do one thing,” he told me. “Give me one character certificate, that’s all. I have seen that you are well-qualified and you can be appointed, and I am ready to appoint you because I cannot argue with you. Just give me one character certificate, which is absolutely necessary, and here is the appointment order.”
I said, “That is very difficult because I have not yet found a man whose character certificate I would like to have!”
He said, “What do you mean? Can you ask your vice-chancellor?”
I said, “No, I cannot, because even if the vice-chancellor asks me to give him a character certificate, I cannot – he has no character at all. How can I ask him for a character certificate?”
He said, “This is very difficult. You can’t find anybody?”
I said, “I cannot find anybody. You suggest someone to me. For example, you are the education minister, but I cannot take your character certificate!”
He said, “Why?”
I said, “Just now I have seen you. You have no intelligence at all! Appointing a man like me, who is absolutely anti-philosophical, who is against philosophy, to the post which is vacant for a professor of philosophy – what further proof can there be that you are absolutely unintelligent? I would not appoint myself to that post!”
He said, “You are very difficult!” But he started feeling for me, loving me, feeling a softness for me. He said, “Somehow manage. Bring any certificate. I would like you to be in the university.”
So I said, “I can do only one thing: I can write one myself, because that is the only certificate I will accept.”
He said, “That will do – because who looks in the files?”
It must still be in the files, my own character certificate! – “Hereby I recommend: this man has a great character.”

Abhedanada, you say, “If another man who has already realized his own self…” What self? The moment you realize, there is no self. The self exists only for the unrealized; for the realized, the self disappears. There is pure emptiness, just nothingness, no “I,” no shadow of “I,” no “I-amness.” Hence, what self? Self is only a religious term for the same game called the ego. It is the same number; it does not differ in any way.
Self means: “I am separate from the whole,” and the realized one knows he is not separate from the whole. He cannot have a self; he can only have a no-self, anatta. That’s what Buddha calls it – no-self.
It is a very paradoxical phenomenon. To realize who you are is to realize that you are not. If you want to be, never try to realize because in the very process of realization the ego disappears. And the self is only another name for the ego. There is nothing like “self-realization.” Yes, there is realization, but the realization always makes you absolutely clear that the self had never existed in the first place and it is not there; it has never been there.
And for whom are you looking for recognition? As I see it, to me, everybody is a no-self whether he knows it or not. Yes, if he knows that there is no self, I will immediately see that he knows. His humbleness, his simplicity, his spontaneity, his no-nonsense will be enough. His eyes will be absolutely empty because only in emptiness is there clarity. He will be a nobody, a nothingness. Of course, as far as I am concerned everybody is a no-self, but you may not be aware of it. If you are not aware of it, nothing is changed in reality – you still remain a no-self but you go on living in a dream-world of the self. And the greatest dream of that dream-world is the dream of self-realization.
You ask, “If another man who has already realized his own self comes to you…” For what should he come to me? Is there something still left to realize? “…can you recognize him simply by looking at him?” Certainly, but there is no question of recognition. I will see that he knows, but I will not say.

Kabir and Farid met once – two enlightened masters. For two days, forty-eight hours, they sat in silence together. Nobody uttered a single word. Nothing was said, nothing was heard. They hugged each other, they kissed each other, they laughed, and then they departed.
The disciples of both were very frustrated because they had come in thousands to see the great meeting of two self-realized persons, and nothing happened! What can you expect? When two zeros meet, what can happen? It becomes one zero. Two zeros are not two zeros. As they come closer it becomes one zero.
So when they departed, the disciples of Kabir asked him, “What happened to you? You go on talking to us and torturing us every day, but for forty-eight hours suddenly you went crazy or something? And we were waiting and waiting for something to be said.”
Kabir said to them, “I can talk to you because language is the only way you can understand, but this man Farid can understand silence. I need not say a single word. If I speak I will only prove that I am ignorant.”
The disciples of Farid asked him, “What happened to you?” – Farid sang such beautiful songs – “What happened to you? You could have at least sung one of your beautiful songs, but you didn’t utter a single word! And what were you laughing about? – because not even one joke was told.”
Farid said, “We were laughing at you – that so many fools are waiting as if something is going to happen, but nothing is going to happen. The moment I saw him, the moment he saw me, everything was clear. He knows, I know, and we know the same thing. So what is the point of speaking?”

It is like Lao Tzu… A man asked Lao Tzu, “Can I follow you when you go on your morning walk?”
Lao Tzu said, “Yes, but with one condition: no talking.”
The man agreed. For one hour continuously they walked in the mountains, and the man was really in difficulty. He was controlling and controlling and controlling. And then finally the sun started rising. The valley was so beautiful with the sunrise that he forgot that he was not to talk and he didn’t think that this was much talk either: he simply said, “What a beautiful dawn!”
And Lao Tzu said, “That’s the end! Never again come with me – you chatter too much!”
The man said, “What? I have simply said, ‘What a beautiful dawn!’ after one hour, and you are telling me, ‘You chatter too much!’”
Lao Tzu said, “Yes, you chatter too much, and unnecessarily because I have got eyes, I am also seeing the beautiful dawn. What is the point of repeating it? Do you think I am blind, do you think I am insensitive? Do you have to say it to me? I know it is beautiful, so what is the point of saying it?”
He never allowed the man to follow him again. He said, “No, that is not possible. You have proved yourself too stupid.”

If somebody who has come to know that he is not comes to me, I will immediately see. But there is no need to come – by chance the meeting is possible. Farid and Kabir met by chance. Farid was traveling and on the way came to Kabir’s hut, so Farid’s disciples said, “Kabir lives here, and it would be beautiful for you to be together for a few days, and we can also enjoy your being together.”
He said, “Okay.”
And Kabir’s disciples said, “Do you know Farid is passing by on the road? If we can invite him for just a few days it will be good to have two enlightened persons in the same hut.”
Kabir said, “Okay.”
It was a coincidence.
It happened during Buddha’s and Mahavira’s lives that many times they were in the same town, and once at least they were in the same caravanserai; Mahavira occupying one part of the serai and Buddha occupying another part of the serai. Yet they never met – there was no need.

Once I was in Mumbai and J. Krishnamurti was in Mumbai. Somebody told him that I was there. He said, “Good.”
People persuaded him, his disciples, that the meeting would be good. And my people also came running to me and they said, “J. Krishnamurti is here, and this is the opportunity of a lifetime for us. It will be good if you meet.”
I said, “Perfectly okay, but who is going to whom? I am not going anywhere. If Krishnamurti comes, he is welcome!”
And Krishnamurti said the same thing, “I am not going anywhere. If Osho comes, he is welcome.”
And there the matter finished, finished forever. There was no need. I told the people, “What will we do? We will sit, unnecessarily wasting each other’s time!”

One thing is certain: you have not attained yet. That I can say without seeing you.
He has also asked another question which becomes proof of what I am saying: “Osho, can you enter into samadhi whenever and howsoever long you like to remain in it?” One only enters samadhi once and then one never comes out of it. There is no way out. There is no exit, there is only entrance. I have entered samadhi. Now wherever I am, whatsoever I am doing, it is all happening in samadhi. Now there is no way to come out of it. Samadhi is not a state, is not a mood into which you go and then you can come out. Samadhi is your very being. Now where can I leave my being? It is my very nature. Now where can I leave my nature? I am it.
You don’t understand at all. You may have studied scriptures – Abhedananda seems to be an old type of Hindu sannyasin – you may have studied, you may have read, you may have listened to great scholars, pundits, but you have not tasted the wine, not yet.

The third question:
Osho,
I feel so sad about leaving. Can you kiss me goodbye with a joke?
A mouse was looking for a new place to live. He traveled for days, always finding something wrong with each house he came to. At last he came to a beautiful mansion and as he approached it he could hear singing in the distance.
He went in, and to his surprise all the rooms on the ground floor were deserted, but the singing got gradually louder. He went up to the next floor – the singing got louder and louder, but there was still no sign of anyone.
He went to the next floor, and as he went from room to room, the noise was becoming really deafening. At last he tracked the sound down to a small bedroom, but to his amazement there was no one inside. Then he noticed an old chamber-pot. Inside there was a little mouse singing his heart out as he paddled a tiny boat across the piss.
The first mouse asked the mouse in the pot if this was a good place to live. He was assured that it was safe, plenty of food, and that he would be very welcome. So he went back down to the kitchen to find some food, but to his horror was faced with an enormous cat, ready to pounce. He fled back upstairs and shouted at the other mouse, “I thought you said this was a safe place to live!”
“Ah!” replied the second mouse. “You know, you really should not believe anything I say – I have been on the piss all night!”

Enough for today.

============================================================

Avoid loud and aggressive persons; they are vexations to the spirit.
If you compare yourself with others, you may become vain or bitter,
for always there will be greater and lesser persons than yourself.
Enjoy your achievements as well as your plans.
Keep interested in your own career, however humble; it is a real possession in the changing fortunes of time.
Exercise caution in your business affairs, for the world is full of trickery. But let this not blind you to what virtue there is; many persons strive for high ideals, and everywhere life is full of heroism.
It was on a coast-bound train, Mieczyslaw was slumped in his seat and every few moments he sighed and cried, “Ah my! Ah my!” Forbes, sitting nearby, heard him cry but did not butt in, thinking the fellow was troubled by some great personal tragedy.
The next day it was the same cry of, “Ah my! Ah my!” And again the same the day after.
Finally, Forbes leaned over and whispered, “Anything seriously wrong?”
“Ah my, yes!” said the Polack. “For three days now I have been on the wrong train!”

This is exactly the situation of humanity: everybody, almost everybody, is on the wrong train; hence there is so much misery. Misery simply indicates that you are not where you are supposed to be; that you are not moving toward your own destiny; that you are not flowering into your own potential; that you have been diverted by others, distracted by others. Maybe those others were not intending any wrong to you, but they were unconscious people just like you.
Every parent distracts the child from his essential being, leads him astray. Every teacher, every priest goes on doing the same. Nobody respects the individual. They have already decided what is right and what is wrong, and for all.
Each individual is a unique phenomenon. Hence no law, no morality can be applicable to all. Of course, we have to agree on a few minimums just to exist together, but those minimums have to be the nonessentials.
That is the fundamental message of Desiderata. Desiderata means “the fundamentals,” “the essentials.” About the essentials there should be no compromise at all, with nobody, not even with God, because you don’t know anything about God. The priest goes on speaking on behalf of some God which nobody knows. It is the priest, the cunning priest, who pretends that his voice is God’s voice.
One of the most ancient scriptures in the world is the Hindu scripture, Rig Veda. Ninety-nine percent of it is sheer nonsense, not only nonsense but irreligious too – not even religious nonsense! All the prayers in the Rig Veda are prayers for the nonessential. People are asking for money from God, asking for power, prestige, more cows, more horses, more land; not only that but for the death of their enemies and the prosperity of their friends. And this scripture is worshipped by the Hindus as religious.
Religion means one is trying to transcend the mundane; otherwise, religion loses all its meaning. But the Rig Veda is full of the mundane. It is really a miracle that once in a while you come across a statement which can be called significant, concerned with the essential and not with the peripheral.
And this is not only the case with the Hindus: this is the case with the Buddhists, with the Jainas, with the Christians, with the Jews, with the Mohammedans, with almost all the organized religions. They have all gone astray. And when I say they have all gone astray I mean they have become entangled with the nonessential.
In Buddhist scriptures there are thirty-three thousand rules; unless you follow those thirty-three thousand rules of conduct you can never become a buddha. One cannot even remember those rules! Just think of thirty-three thousand rules to be followed and you will drop the idea, the very desire, to be a buddha. All those rules will drive you crazy if followed, and only an insane person can follow those rules.
There cannot be thirty-three thousand rules about the essential, it is about the very nonessential: while you are walking, how much you should see of the road? – only four feet, not more than that, not even four feet six inches. If you go beyond the limit of four feet, you fall from grace. Now what nonsense is this, and what does it have to do with religion? You have to have only three pieces of clothing, you cannot have four – only three, and you have to be very strict about it. You have to beg in a certain way, from certain people, not otherwise. You have to eat only at a certain time; if you are feeling hungry again you cannot eat, you have to remain hungry.
The Buddhist monk has to eat only once a day. The Jaina monk cannot even drink water in the night. The Jaina monk cannot even urinate where the earth is wet; the Jaina monk cannot urinate in water. That’s why no Jaina monk can use modern toilets. Such stupidities – but they have been propagated in the name of religion, and once something takes the color of religion it starts looking important to people.
Character has been very much emphasized; in fact, character is a peripheral phenomenon. The real thing is not character but consciousness, but consciousness happens inside and is not available for others to observe; others can only observe your character. And it is always the others who are deciding for you, hence they decide something that they can observe: they decide about your behavior. And of course man is capable of conducting himself in a certain way; he can force himself to do all kinds of contortions, but that does not change his consciousness at all.
I have seen Jaina monks who have followed all kinds of rules prescribed in the scriptures, and their most important value is nonviolence. But they are not nonviolent people; they are aggressive. Of course, their aggression takes a different form – it has to. It cannot be expressed in an ordinary way because they have prevented the ordinary way. They are very argumentative, their whole aggression becomes argumentation. Now argumentation is a way of fighting – not with the body but with the mind. A really nonviolent person will not be so interested in argumentation.
Jaina scriptures are full of arguments, hairsplitting. In fact, nobody else has done as much hairsplitting as Jainas have done. It was bound to happen because their whole violence has turned into a mental phenomenon; it is a perversion. They cannot kill even an ant, but they can kill a great argument – and they enjoy killing.
In India, Jainas, all the Jainas, have become business people. Why did it happen? It happened through the idea of nonviolence. One cannot conceive the relationship. But if you look deep into it, the Jaina rules say you should not cut a tree, you should not uproot a tree, because trees have life. True, but then you cannot cultivate, you cannot be a farmer. So that dimension was closed for the Jainas: they cannot be farmers, cultivators, gardeners. Even cutting a leaf is violent.
Of course they cannot be warriors, they cannot go to the battlefield. All their tirthankaras, the twenty-four masters, were born into the race of the warriors; they were all kshatriyas, samurai. But all their followers have become business people for the simple reason they cannot be soldiers, they cannot be farmers. And to be a brahmin one has to be born a brahmin. You cannot become one and even if you want to become one, the brahmins won’t allow it to happen, so that door is closed. And of course, who wants to be a sudra – the untouchable? Who wants to fall so low?
So the only possible outlet was to be a businessman. So all the Jainas became business people, and their whole violence became concentrated on exploitation; hence they are the richest people in India. Their violence turned in a subtle way, it took a very subtle form: suck the blood of the people, exploit, oppress. Money became their goal, through money they became powerful. They cannot be powerful directly because they cannot fight for power, but in a vicarious way, by having more money, they can purchase all. They can purchase brahmins, they can purchase sudras, they can purchase the warriors – they can purchase everybody! Their consciousness is not changed, they are as violent as everybody else. Of course, their violence has taken a very strange turn.
Have you observed the fact that hunters, who are violent people, are very good people, very friendly people? – for the simple reason that their violence is thrown out in hunting.
Psychologists have observed that woodcutters are very nonviolent people, very peaceful, because their whole violence is thrown out of their systems by cutting wood. Their profession is such – chopping wood, cutting wood – that their whole desire to cut and chop disappears. They have done enough chopping, enough cutting; they are no longer interested in it at all. They are very loving, good people.
This world is a strange world, and the strangest thing is that we go on trying to change the inner by changing the outer – and it is not possible in the very nature of things. You can change the outer by changing the inner, but not vice versa. But the society cannot see the inner; the society can only see the outer. Hence the society emphasizes the outer and makes everybody a split personality, makes everybody in a certain way schizophrenic. You are one on the outside, you are totally another on the inside – not even different, but diametrically opposite.
You can observe people on the surface and you can decide about their inner beings. You can conclude, more or less, and you will be on the right track: whatsoever they are on the surface, they must be the opposite of it in their innermost being. The so-called brahmacharins, the so-called celibate people, think continuously of sex and nothing else. That is bound to happen, it is natural because celibacy has not arisen out of meditation. It is imposed, it is cultivated, it is not even skin-deep; hence they are always afraid of women. The Jaina monk, the Buddhist monk, the Hindu sannyasin are all afraid of the woman. A great trembling arises in them just by seeing a woman; hence the Buddhist rule: don’t look beyond four feet.

Mahatma Gandhi has written about one of the incidents that happened in his ashram. He was reading the Ramayana, the story of Rama, and in the story of Rama there was a passage where he became a little puzzled. The passage is that Rama, with his wife Sita and brother Laxmana, are going into the forest. They have been expelled by their father for fourteen years. Rama is the first, behind him is his wife, Sita, and behind Sita is Laxmana.
This way they roamed in the forest for years. Then Sita was stolen by Ravana. When Ravana was taking her away she wanted to leave a few clues for Rama to find out where she has been taken, so on the path, unnoticed by Ravana, she dropped her ornaments one by one. She was a queen and she had many ornaments, so she dropped ornaments all the way, and of course that was the clue.
Rama found those ornaments, but he was in such shock and his eyes were full of tears; he was almost going crazy. He was asking the trees, “Trees, tell me, please, where is my Sita?” He looked at the ornaments but could not recognize them.
He asked Laxmana, his younger brother, “Can you recognize these ornaments? Do they belong to Sita? If they belong to Sita, then this is the route which she has been taken on and we have to follow this route.”
Laxmana said, “I can recognize only the ornaments that she used to wear on her feet because those are the only ornaments I have ever seen.”
Mahatma Gandhi became very puzzled: “For years they have lived together, wandered in the forest, and Laxmana has not seen another ornament – from her hands or a necklace or something else. He sees only the ornaments of her feet. Why?”
Vinoba Bhave, one of his great disciples, suggested, “Because Laxmana was following an ancient rule: don’t look at any woman because looking at a woman may create desire in you. So he was simply focusing on her feet, he was not looking up. And of course, he could recognize the ornaments on her feet because for years he had looked only at her feet. He must have touched her feet, bowed down to her feet; he must have seen those ornaments.”
Mahatma Gandhi was very much impressed by Vinoba Bhave’s interpretation – this was a great revelation! Laxmana was following the rule of celibacy, he was following brahmacharya.

When I read about this whole incident, I said that if Laxmana was so much afraid even to look at Sita’s face, then one thing is certain: he was not a celibate. The elder brother’s wife is almost like a mother – and he could not look at her face, could not look at her whole figure? What kind of fear is there, what kind of paranoia? Is this something healthy? Does this show a man of understanding, of awareness, or only a man fast asleep? And if he was forcing himself to look only at her feet, can he avoid the desire to look up at her face? You may not look, but can you avoid the desire? In fact, the curiosity will become more and more, bigger and bigger. You may become obsessed with it: “How does she look? The feet are so beautiful, so impressive – how must her whole figure be?”
Then she will start entering into your dreams. Then more fear will arise. The fear can be so much that there are stories in India of saints like Surdas, who destroyed his eyes because he saw a beautiful woman and became allured, fascinated. Obviously he concluded, according to the Hindu tradition, that these eyes are leading him astray, so he destroyed his eyes, became blind. But can you see the stupidity of it? Do you think the blind person has no sexual desire? Do you think just by becoming blind you can avoid sexual desire? But Surdas is respected for this act, tremendously respected: “What sacrifice and what a great character! What great morality, what purity!”
I don’t see any purity in it and any greatness in it. I see simply something idiotic, something utterly silly. You can destroy your eyes or you can close your eyes, but your mind will still continue. In fact, the woman is never as beautiful when you look at her as she is when you avoid her. When you forcibly distract yourself from her she becomes more beautiful. And the same is true about the man, because nobody is, in fact, as beautiful as your fancy can make him appear.
That is why psychoanalysts try to penetrate into your dreams, for the simple reason… It is a condemnation of humanity. Nobody has thought that way: why the psychologist, the psychoanalyst, is trying to know about your dreams, not about you while you are awake. Strange – he should ask you questions while you are awake. He never bothers with what you do while you are awake; he wants to know what you do when you are asleep. Why? – because he has come to know one thing absolutely and certainly, categorically: that man is false when he is awake. Centuries of outer imposition have made his so-called awakened state absolutely false and pseudo. If you want to know the real, authentic, man you have to know about his dreams; only in his dreams will you find him.
And then you will be surprised: the man who has renounced all money, in his dream goes on counting money and he does nothing else. The man who has renounced the woman – the woman he loved, the woman he wanted to love – goes on dreaming about the same woman or maybe about thousands of other women. His dreams will be full of women.

I have heard about a Catholic monk who went to a psychoanalyst and said to the psychoanalyst, “I have come in great trouble to seek help from you. Every night in my dream I am surrounded by at least a dozen naked, beautiful women!”
The psychoanalyst said, “But why be worried about it? There is nothing wrong. You should on the contrary be happy. What is the problem? If the women are beautiful and you are surrounded by beautiful women the whole night – enjoy it!”
The monk said, “You don’t understand. In the dream I am also a woman – that is the trouble! I am not objecting to the presence of the women; that is the only solace. The problem is I am always a woman myself in the dream. Help me somehow so that I can remain a man in my dreams.”

Now on the surface he is a Catholic monk and deep down just a human being. And I am not condemning his humanity and his human desire, but I am certainly condemning his bogus Catholic monkhood.
All the religions have done the same in different degrees: they have divided man into two. And what he is on the surface is one thing and what he is underneath is totally different.
Because of this the whole of humanity lives in a very strange state: divided, tense, anxious, fighting with itself. And the way it has been done is by leading people astray through the nonessential. The character is nonessential. What you do is not the essential thing, but what you are, because doing comes out of being. Being does not come out of your doing, so doing is secondary, just like a shadow. Being is essential. And you should know first who you are. Rather than trying to become somebody – Mahavira, Buddha, Christ – try first to know who you are.

A great Hasid mystic, Zusya, was dying. His old aunt was always worried about Zusya because he was not following the traditional Jewish religion; she was very much worried about him. She was an old woman with all the orthodox thoughts. At his deathbed she came and asked Zusya, “Have you made peace with God?”
Zusya opened his eyes and said, “But I have never been in any conflict with him. Why should I make any peace with God? I have never struggled against him. I have lived a life of let-go.”
The old woman could not understand the life of let-go, the life of total surrender to the ultimate, to the whole – flowing with the whole. She asked again, thinking that he had not understood it. She said, “Have you made peace with Moses?”
Zusya said, “When I am in front of God, he is not going to ask me, ‘Zusya, why are you not a Moses?’ He will ask me, ‘Zusya, why are you not a Zusya?’ I am not supposed to be Moses, otherwise he would have made me a Moses. Who was preventing him? He never made another Moses.”

God never repeats. He never sends carbon copies to the world. Mahavira is not repeated, Buddha is not repeated, Christ is not repeated, Mohammed is not repeated, Kabir, Nanak; nobody is ever repeated.
And this is what we are all doing: we are trying to be like Moses or like Mahavira or like Mohammed. Zusya is right, his insight is great. He says, “God will ask me, ‘Why are you not Zusya?’ He has made me Zusya and I have to be myself. That is my responsibility. To be Moses is not my responsibility; that was Moses’ responsibility and that is something between Moses and God. I have nothing to say about it, nothing to do with it; it is not my concern at all.”
The most essential thing is: you have to be yourself. Don’t be distracted by anybody, by any scripture, by any priest, by any politician. Don’t be distracted. Stick to one thing: I have to be myself.
Don’t be stubborn, don’t bother about nonessentials. If the rule is to keep to the left, follow it; it is a nonessential thing. Whether you keep to the left or whether you keep to the right does not matter; it is just a traffic convenience. In India we keep to the left because of the British, because they had the idea of keeping to the left; the Americans keep to the right. Both are okay – there is nothing essential about it. But one thing is certain, that the traffic has to be managed and one has to decide either left or right – the traffic cannot be left in a chaos.
These are nonessentials. Don’t start fighting for them; that is a sheer wastage of energy. But about the essential no compromise should ever be made.
Desiderata says: “Without surrender, without making any compromise, remain yourself.” That does not mean that you have to be continuously fighting. It simply means if you are alert, aware, watchful, you can save your being from being contaminated by others.
Everybody is like a vulture trying to dominate you. Even the love of those who say they love you is also nothing but an ego trip. They love you so that they can dominate you. The husband loves the wife to reduce her almost into a thing, into a commodity. The wife loves the husband just to dominate him, just to exploit him. All this love, all these relationships… Parents love their children if the children are following the ideas of the parents. If they are obedient, then they love their children, if they are not obedient then all love disappears – instead of love they start hating.
A sannyasin asked me just the other day: “Listening to the Desiderata I am in a confusion about what to do. I have not gone to see my mother for two years because she insists that I have to come to her not as a sannyasin. I cannot come in orange with a new name.” So she is puzzled: what to do? “Is it an essential or nonessential? Should I compromise?”
If you think only of clothes it will look nonessential: why hurt the mother unnecessarily? You can go in white, you can go in any other color – clothes are just clothes. But that is not the point: the mother is trying to dominate you. It is not a question of clothes, because why should she be against orange? If you go in blue, she is not against it; if you go in green, she is not against it; if you go in white, she is not against it. Why should she be worried about orange, what is wrong with orange? Is your mother a kind of bull or something? Why should she be worried about orange? Orange is one of the colors. If all other colors are acceptable and orange is not acceptable, it is not a question of colors or clothes; the question is deeper. She insists that you have to be obedient to her. And the sannyasin is thirty-two years old, not a small child. But the desire to dominate… “Otherwise,” the mother says, “I don’t want to see you.” What kind of love is this? It insists that “You have to be according to me.”
Forget the clothes. It is a very essential question; it is not nonessential. It is essential to defend yourself against all those who try to dominate you, because they will not stop only at that. Once you give in, then the whole trip begins, and then there is no end to it.
Every person has the freedom to be himself or herself. And if the mother really loves you she would like you to be yourself, she would like you to come the way you are. Love always accepts the other without any conditions; if there are conditions, it is not love.
So you will have to be very, very clear about it, otherwise Desiderata can create much confusion in you. Desiderata is a simple statement because it is for the beginner, for those who are just beginning the journey into the world of truth, those who are beginning the inquiry. Listen to it very intelligently. Try to understand it without bringing your mind in. Just put your mind aside and listen in silence, because whatsoever is listened to in silence is understood immediately. Otherwise you will hear today, and some day in the future you may be able – and that too is a “perhaps” – to understand it. But meanwhile your life will be a wastage, and it will become entangled into many nonessentials.

Zowicki, in a body-cast, lay in a hospital bed explaining to a doctor how he fell off the roof and broke most of his bones. “Twenty years ago, I am on the road selling brushes when my car break down and I walk to nearby house to use the phone,” he began. “A good-looking blonde built like a brick shipyard answered the door. She did not have phone, but ask me to stay over till morning.
“I stay in upstairs room. That night she ask if I need anything. I tell her no. One hour later she come back again, ask if I want anything. I tell her everything all right. Around midnight she stop by again and ask if I want anything. I tell her I be fine.”
“What’s that got to do with your accident?” asked the doctor.
“Well,” said the Polack, “I be up on the roof fixing TV antenna when I remember that night back then, and all of a sudden I realize what she driving at. I jumped up, fell off the roof, and here I am!”

After twenty years! Don’t be a Polack: try to understand right now, here.
These are simple words and simple words are in a way dangerous: because they are simple you think you have understood them. Simple words contain more truth than complex words; complex words are creations of the stupid scholars. Simple words are direct, immediate; they are not roundabout. If you silently listen to them there is nothing which can prevent you from understanding them, but the silence is a prerequisite. If your mind is full of thoughts and you are listening through all the garbage, then those simple words will become complex by the time they reach you and they will not have the same meaning.

Czarobski walked into a drugstore. “Give me a can of talcum,” he said.
“Mennen’s?” asked the clerk.
“No, wimmen’s – it’s for my wife,” he answered.
The clerk shrugged. “You want it scented?”
“Nope,” replied the Polack. “I can take it along.”

And did you hear about the Italian girl who almost ruined her health by going to the doctor?
She thought he prescribed three hearty males a day.

Mrs. Marzanini complained to a lawyer that every time she had relations with her husband it hurt her unbearably.
“He is big! He is like a horse!” she added.
“In that case,” said the attorney, “the best thing you can do is to file your petition.”
“Oh no! Let him sandpaper his!”

Beware of simple words.

Little Pierino walked into a cocktail lounge and said to the barmaid, “Give me a double scotch!”
“Hey, kid,” she sighed, “you want to get me in trouble?”
“Maybe later, lady! Right now I just wanna drink!”

Desiderata is very simple, but don’t postpone. Let it be an immediate understanding.
Desiderata says:
Avoid loud and aggressive persons; they are vexations to the spirit.
A very simple statement, but of tremendous importance. It is very pregnant. Avoid loud and aggressive persons… Who is a loud person, and why is a certain person loud in the first place? The person who feels inferior deep down is always loud. He is afraid that if he is not loud, you will see his weakness; if he is not loud, you may be able to see his inferiority; if he is not loud, he may be exposed. By being loud he creates smoke around himself: he hides behind his loudness.
Adler’s insight is right when he says that all politicians basically suffer from inferiority complexes. Unless somebody suffers from an inferiority complex he will not go into politics. Politics is loud, very loud, very noisy and very aggressive. The inferior person tries to prove that he is not inferior. He wants to hide his inferiority by becoming a prime minister, by becoming a president, by having much money, by conquering the world.

Alexander the Great must have suffered from the greatest inferiority complex, more than anybody else; otherwise who bothers to conquer the world? When he was coming to India – that was the last part of the world which was still not conquered by him – he met a tremendously beautiful man, Diogenes. And Diogenes asked him, “Why are you bothering to conquer the world? Why not conquer yourself?”
Alexander laughed – a shallow laugh. He said, “What you are saying is true, but right now I cannot stop. I have to finish what I have decided to do. First I have to conquer the world and then I will do what you are saying to me.”
Diogenes said, “There will be no time left then – the world is vast. By the time you have conquered it, your life will have slipped out of your hands.”
But he did not listen.

And actually that’s what happened: he could not reach back to his home. He died on the way back from India; no time to reach back to his home, what to say about reaching back to one’s own center, the real home? His whole life was lost in proving: “I am a great conqueror.” But why should one try to prove it? People always try to prove something which they feel they are missing. Hence: Avoid loud and aggressive persons… they are empty, they have nothing. You cannot learn anything from them. On the contrary …they are vexations to the spirit.
They will distract your mind. They will give their stupid ideas to you. They will advise you and guide you. They have reached nowhere, they know nothing, but they will pretend that they are wise, they will pretend that they have arrived. They will pretend all kinds of things.
Avoid loud and aggressive persons… Seek the company of the humble, of the simple, of the silent ones, of the nonpolitical, of the nonaggressive, and you may learn much. But it is always learned in the company of the innocent. Yes, you can learn much more by playing with children than by being with a politician. You can learn much more even by being with animals or trees than by being with the so-called rich.
And they can easily distract you because you are not yet centered. Ambitions are infectious. Avoid ambitious people, otherwise something of their fever is bound to infect you, is bound to affect you. You may start moving in a direction which is not yours, you may start doing things which you had never thought to do in the first place, just because you fell into company with somebody.
Just look at your life – it is almost all accidental. It is not essential, it is accidental. Your father wanted you to be a doctor so you are a doctor. Now, it was his ambition that his son should be a famous doctor; he fulfilled his ambition. He used you as a means to fulfill his ambition. This is not love – this is exploitation.
My father wanted me to be an engineer or a scientist or a doctor. I told him, “If you insist, if it makes you happy, I will do any stupid thing you tell me. But remember, this is not love. If you love me, then let me be what I want to be. I don’t want to be a doctor and I don’t want to be an engineer. I have no desire at all to be a scientist – that is not my way. I don’t feel any joy in the scientific way of thinking. My love is totally different: I am in deep love with poetry, aesthetics, beauty, truth.”
He said, “Then you will remain a beggar!”
I said, “That’s perfectly okay, that I can accept. I will be a beggar, that is okay, but let me be what I want to be. Even in my poverty I will be rich, and following you and becoming a doctor I may become very rich but I will remain poor, and I will always hanker for that which was my real longing.”
He was a man of tremendous understanding. He meditated over it and he said, “Then it is okay. Do whatsoever you feel like doing, and you have my blessings.”
He could have forced me easily because he had the money. He could have forced me to go in any direction because I was helpless. He showed love, he showed understanding. He allowed me to be whatsoever I wanted to be.
If you are with loud people they are bound to distract you. He was not a loud person at all, very humble, he was not aggressive at all. I have never seen him fight with anybody. He has not even shouted at me for any wrong that I had done that he did not like. I have never seen him in an angry mood. It was beautiful to be with such a man; but rare is the opportunity.
At least do one thing: avoid loud people, aggressive people. If you cannot find loving, silent persons – if you try you will find them – if you cannot find them, be with trees. At least they are not loud, at least they are not aggressive. Learn to be with animals, be with children. Or you can be alone; no need to bother with being with others. Make the minimum contact and remain alone, or remain with those who are silent.
One of the greatest sayings of Lao Tzu is: The most beautiful company is when you can be with someone as if you are alone. See the insight of Lao Tzu: when you can be with someone as if you are alone, when he allows you so much silence and so much freedom that you are absolutely alone, as if almost alone. His presence is not a hindrance; his presence in fact, enhances your aloneness, enriches your aloneness.
Avoid loud and aggressive persons; they are vexations to the spirit.
If you compare yourself with others, you may become vain or bitter…
And never compare. Comparison is a disease, one of the greatest diseases and we are taught from the very beginning to compare. Your mother starts comparing you with other children, your father starts comparing you with other children. The teacher compares you: “Look at Johnny, how well he is doing, and you are no good at all! Look at others!” From the very beginning you are being told to compare yourself with others. This is the greatest disease; it is like a cancer that goes on destroying your very soul – because each individual is unique, and comparison is not possible. I am just myself and you are just yourself. There is nobody else in the world you can be compared with.
Do you compare a marigold with a roseflower? You don’t compare. Do you compare a mango with an apple? You don’t compare. You know they are different – comparison is not possible.
Man is not a species because each man is unique. There has never been any individual like you before and there will never be again. You are utterly unique. This is your privilege, your prerogative, existence’s blessing – that it has made you unique. Don’t compare. Comparison will bring trouble.
Desiderata says:
If you compare yourself with others, you may become vain or bitter,
for always there will be greater and lesser persons than yourself.
If you fall a victim of this disease comparison, naturally either you will become very egoistic or you will become very bitter; it depends with whom you compare yourself. If you compare yourself with those who seem to be bigger than you, higher than you, greater than you, you will become bitter. You will become a complaint against existence, angry: “Why am I not greater than I am? Why am I not like that person? Why am I not physically so beautiful, so strong? Why am I not intelligent? Why am I not this, not that?” And there are millions of things in the world.
If you compare yourself with the people who are greater in some way than you, you will become bitter, very bitter. Your life will become poisoned by the comparison. You will always remain in a state of depression; as if life has deceived you betrayed you, you have been let down.
Or if you compare yourself with people who are smaller than you, in some way lesser than you, then you will become very egoistic. It is one of the reasons why politicians are always surrounded by smaller people than themselves; they collect them, that is their joy. They collect smaller people around themselves so that they can look bigger than they are in comparison. It is stupid, but one cannot expect anything more from a politician.
Rich people are always surrounded by those who are smaller. They feel good, very good, great in comparison to those people. But ordinarily people always look at others’ houses, their successes, their achievements, and feel very bitter against God. In the world, religion cannot prosper because people cannot pray to a God who has betrayed them from the very beginning, who has made them so small, so ugly. How can they be thankful toward him? Impossible. And without thankfulness there is no prayer, and without prayer there is no religion.
A man who understands the uniqueness of everybody can be religious, can only be religious because he feels immense gratitude for whatsoever life has given to him. If you don’t compare, then you are neither bigger nor smaller, neither ugly nor beautiful, neither intelligent nor stupid. If you don’t compare, you are simply yourself. And in that state of simply being yourself spring comes, flowers come, because a deep acceptance of life and a deep gratitude to existence helps to bring the spring.
Enjoy your achievements as well as your plans.
Don’t be bothered with others. Enjoy whatsoever is your achievement, enjoy whatsoever is your vision to achieve.
Keep interested in your own career, however humble; it is a real possession in the changing fortunes of time.
Don’t be bothered that others are earning more money, that others are becoming more successful, more famous. Remain interested in the thing that you are really interested in; whether it keeps you poor and humble does not matter. If you enjoy doing it, if you love doing it, if it is your creativity, then you are rich, very rich, immensely rich, and existence will be very pleased with you. If you are pleased yourself, existence is pleased with you.
Exercise caution in your business affairs, for the world is full of trickery. But let this not blind you to what virtue there is; many persons strive for high ideals, and everywhere life is full of heroism.
Desiderata is very pragmatic. It says: Exercise caution in your business affairs… As far as worldly things are concerned, be cautious. Don’t blame others that they are cunning. If you allow them to exploit, they will exploit. They are not cunning – you are not cautious, that’s the only thing to be remembered. Don’t blame them; that is their business, to be cunning or not to be cunning. Don’t think that they are sinners and will suffer in hell; that is not your concern at all. Your concern should be: “I am not cautious enough.” Be more cautious, more alert, more aware.

Lorenzo staggered home filled with vino, and his wife would not let him in the house.
“Hey, Rosa,” he shouted from below their window, “if you don’na let me in, I am-a gonna tell-a everybody I slept-a with you before we gotta married!”
“Go ahead!” yelled back his spouse. “And I am-a gonna tell-a them you were not-a the first-a one!”

Don’t blame others. Whatsoever they are, they are. In fact, all the cunningness of the world and the trickery of the world helps you to be aware. If this world cannot help you to be aware, then what world will ever be able to make you aware, to be cautious? It is a good world – it gives you a tremendous challenge to be cautious. But – reminds Desiderata – let this not blind you to what virtue there is…
It is not only trickery, it is not only cunningness. There are many beautiful things in the world. There is always a silver lining to the cloud – don’t miss that. So don’t be blinded by the trickery, otherwise you will never find anything beautiful and the world is full of beauty: …many persons strive for high ideals and everywhere life is full of heroism.
If you watch you will be surprised: this may be the most perfect world. With all the darkness, with all the thorns, there are roses, there is great light too. And you have to learn from both.
Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
Is my name an essential or something nonessential?
Premananda, existence is nameless. We are all nameless but the name has a certain utility; without it life will be impossible. When the child is born he comes as a nobody, as pure nothingness – that is the beauty of a child – but it is a necessity that he should be given a name. Once the name is given, slowly, slowly the child becomes autohypnotized by his own name; it becomes almost a reality to him. In fact, he can sacrifice himself for the name. That is what millions of people are doing all over the world: sacrificing themselves for the name, for the fame – sacrificing the essential for the nonessential.
A name is not an essential, but it has certain purposes; without it life will be very difficult. Hence we even have to invent names for existence. It cannot have any name, but it has to be addressed. There are moments when you would like to shout to it out of sheer joy – some name is needed.
That is why I give you new names. Why new names? The new is as nonessential as the old, but the new will give you some insight. First it will make you aware that you are not the name, because the name can be easily changed and you remain the same. When the first name was given you were a small child, absolutely unconscious, unaware of what was happening to you. Now you are no longer a child. A new name is given to you, it has significance and that significance is essential. The name is nonessential, but the change of the name is of the essential.
Once you change the name you know that a name is just utilitarian; to know it is very essential. Now it will be more difficult for you to get identified with it.
Secondly: the name that your parents give to you is almost meaningless. Any name that comes to their minds is given to you, any name they feel they like. But the name I give to you is given for certain reasons – those reasons belong to the world of the essential.
For example, I have called you Premananda. It consists of two words: prem and ananda. Prem means love, ananda means bliss. For thousands of years man has tried to live either in the world of love or in the world of bliss; it has been an either–or, a choice. But to be total it has not to be either–or, it has not to be a choice, it has to be both together.
My sannyas is a synthesis, and that synthesis belongs to the essential. So keep on remembering; something nonessential may become an indicator of the essential, something nonessential can be used in a very essential way. The fool can use the essential in a nonessential way; the wise man can use the nonessential in an essential way. It all depends on you.
So don’t be so concerned with what is essential and what is nonessential. It is not a quality of things that we can put into two different categories – this is essential and this is nonessential. Rather, it is the use that you make out of a certain thing which decides to what category it should belong.
When I give you a name it indicates toward the essential.
Man has lived only a partial life up to now. The worldly man lived a partial life; the worldly man lived the life of love. He was trying to figure out with the wife, with the children, with the parents, with the friends, with the society: “What is this phenomenon ‘love’ all about?” In every possible way he was trying to know what love is.
Consciously or unconsciously his whole effort was devoted to one thing: to know the joy that can happen between two persons in deep harmony.
Love is a harmony between two persons – two universes beating in the same rhythm, dancing hand in hand, melting, merging, becoming almost an organic unity. It is the way of the drunkard. You become drunk with the wine of the other, the other also becomes drunk with the wine of you. But it is only half the truth of your life. You start knowing more about the other and you completely forget yourself; love requires you to forget yourself and remember the other. The other becomes the focus – you fade away into deep darkness, you become secondary.
The people who live in this partial way are bound to be frustrated sooner or later because no partial life can ever be a fulfillment. When they become frustrated – and the more intelligent someone is, the sooner he becomes frustrated because he can see that something is missing, something very essential is missing. You are missing. You are groping for the other not knowing at all who you are. And how can you find the other when you have not even found yourself? Hence you go on only stumbling with the other. You may call it love, but it is just groping. There is no insight, no clarity, no light; it is all dark.
You are afraid of being alone so you seek the company of the other. It is out of fear that your so-called love arises – and love can never arise out of fear. It is pseudo. The partial is always pseudo, only the whole is true. Only the whole has meaning, never the part. The part has meaning only in context with the whole, but never separately.
So many intelligent people became frustrated; then they decided to move to the opposite extreme. That is the way of the mind – if you fail in one thing, the mind immediately suggests the polar opposite to you. And it appeals, it looks logical. If love has failed, if you have not been able to rejoice and dance and celebrate with the other, then the logical conclusion is that it is better to be alone, to move into solitude, to become a monk. The word monk literally means to be alone. It comes from a root; from the same root come words like: monotony, monogamy, monopoly, monastery. It comes from the same root.
A monastery is a place where many people are trying to live a life of aloneness. This is the way of the monk, the other-worldly. And he has also failed in the same way; he is bound to fail. He has chosen the other half, but now he will miss something. He will learn how to be alone – he will learn the way of bliss, he will be blissful, but his bliss will miss something: it will miss sharing. And a bliss that cannot be shared starts dying, becomes sour, goes bitter. Even nectar can turn into poison if it stops its flow.
The monk is really far more blissful than the worldly people, but his bliss is not a river. It is not going to reach the other. He becomes just a pool, not a river; a pond – in a certain bondage, afraid of the other.
Just see the point: the worldly person is afraid of his aloneness; hence he tries to reach the other, in the darkness he shouts for the other. And the monk is afraid of the other because the other may disturb his solitude – he may start interfering with his space, he may start encroaching upon his space, his territory, which he has found with such difficulty. He lives in fear; he lives in a dark, walled, self-imposed imprisonment. He makes walls between himself and others; he avoids all possibilities where love can grow. Then his bliss slowly, slowly becomes a dead pool with no flow, and he also starts missing. He starts getting fed up with himself. Rather than being alone he starts feeling lonely.
If a monk is intelligent, now a higher kind of intelligence is needed. The ordinary intelligence will again take him to the other pole. Now Catholic monks are revolting against the church and getting married. For what?
For hundreds of years they have tried to live alone – nuns have lived separately, monks have lived separately. There are Christian monasteries like Athos where for one thousand years no woman has ever entered. For one thousand years continuously the doors of the monastery have remained closed to women. Not even nuns, not even a small, six-year-old girl or six-month-old child is allowed in. Such fear! One wonders whether monks are living inside or monsters! If you are afraid even of a six-month-old baby girl; what kind of people are living there? There is fear, great fear, trembling. The monks don’t come out of the monastery. Once you enter Athos you enter forever; the world is finished.
There have been thousands of Hindu monks living in the Himalayan caves, never coming back to the world. But these people lose something, something very essential: sharing. Life is sharing, and only in sharing do you become fulfilled.
Just think of a sun which keeps itself enclosed, with no rays going out. Or think of a lotus which keeps its petals closed so no fragrance can reach to anybody. Think of a bird which is afraid of singing – somebody may hear it. Then this whole existence will be dead.
That is what these monks have become: dead people, living in their graves – whatsoever they call those graves – caves, monasteries. Whatsoever they call them does not matter, but they are graves and they are living an almost dead life.
Premananda, I have given you this name, prem and ananda – both love and bliss. That is the message for all my sannyasins: that you have to learn both. You have to be fluid, you have to be flowing. You have to know how to be alone and you have to know how to be together. You have to be simultaneously both meditative and loving; only then will you be whole. And to me, to be whole is to be holy.
Man has not been holy up to now because he has not been whole – how can he be holy? Yes, once in a while a person may have attained – a Lao Tzu, a Zarathustra. Once in a while a person may have attained to his wholeness, but as I look I feel even Buddha’s wholeness can be enriched a little more, even Lao Tzu’s wholeness can become a little more than it is; something can be added to it. Even Jesus’ wholeness can have a few more dimensions to it.
My effort here is to give you a multi-dimensional existence; all the dimensions that are possible for human beings should be available to you. You should be capable of love and you should be capable of bliss. And my own experience is, and my observation is, that the man who is blissful is the only man who is capable of love, and the man who is capable of love is the only man who is capable of bliss. They enhance each other.
You have heard about the vicious circle: that one thing leads to another, then the other thing leads to the first, and there is a vicious circle. But you have not heard about the virtuous circle. I call this a virtuous circle – it is not vicious, it is virtuous – because one thing leads to the other and you go higher, moving in higher altitudes. More and more plenitudes are added to you. The highest that I can conceive of is love added to your bliss in deep harmony; not interfering with each other but enriching each other.
But Desiderata is going to create such questions. I was aware that you would become very much puzzled about what is essential and what is nonessential. And your mind is very cunning; it can find ways, it can start thinking, “Then why not drop the new name, why not drop sannyas – why not do this, because these are nonessential things? The essential thing is inner and these are outer things.” And this will be sheer cunningness and nothing else. You have not understood the message: the nonessential can also be used as essential.
But Premananda is an American and for an American to be sane is difficult! And he is not only an American, he comes from California-land!

Benson returned to Naples where, as a youngster during the war, he had befriended a native named Capitini. When the Italian saw Benson, he simply could not do enough for him and insisted that he meet his sister.
“Is she pretty?” asked Benson.
“Ah, bella, bella!” cried the friend.
“Is she young?” continued Benson.
“Si! Si!”
“And is she pure?” asked Benson.
The Italian shrugged and exclaimed, “You Americans are all crazy!”

In Chicago a couple came before a justice of the peace to be married. The young man handed him the marriage license.
“Join hands,” said the magistrate.
Then he looked at the document, which authorized him to unite in the bonds of matrimony Wlodzimierz Lineandowski and Nehrebecka Zozislawsieka.
“Ahem,” he said, clearing his throat. “Wlod-hm-h-m-ski, do you take this woman…?” and so forth.
“Yes sir,” responded the young man.
“Nehre-hm-hm-hm-sieka, do you take this man to be…?” and so forth.
“Yessir!”
“Then I pronounce you husband and wife,” said the Justice, “and I congratulate you both on having reduced two names into one!”

A few days after the new pope had been elected, Cardinal Sicola had dinner with an old friend, Rabbi Finkalari. They chatted about many things and the Rabbi noticed that Cardinal Sicola seemed rather dejected.
“Dear friend,” said the Rabbi, “you seem disturbed. Is it anything you would care to discuss with me?”
“You know, I did not labor under any illusion that I might be elected. I just never dreamt I was so unpopular as not to have received even one vote!”
“My dear Cardinal!” consoled the Rabbi, “dismiss such thoughts from your mind. You are held in very high esteem by your colleagues. I know what must have been on their minds. Each one undoubtedly figured that if you were elected, it would sound demeaning to call you Pope Sicola!”

The second question:
Osho,
If a master's teachings are perfect, why are they corrupted over time?
It is something very essential to understand because it has always happened and it is always going to happen in the future too. There is not going to be any change. Every teaching is bound to be corrupted; it is in the very nature of things. Just as every child will become old one day and everyone who is born is going to die one day, each teaching is out of necessity bound to be corrupted. It cannot be avoided. It is not that the great masters have not tried; they have tried their best, but you cannot go against the laws of nature. Nobody can go against the laws of nature.
There are seven things to be taken note of. The first is the experience of the master himself. When he experiences the truth there is no mind at all. It is a state of no-mind, or as Dionysius will call it, a state of agnosia – absolute innocence. Not even a single thought moves in the mind. Hence the memory system is not functioning, the mind is in a complete state of non-functioning. It is frozen, it is absolutely still.
This is the moment when the teaching is perfect, but nothing has been taught. The teaching has not yet become teaching. Nothing has been said, nothing has been heard. In fact even the master is not yet aware of what has happened. Something has happened, but he is so deeply lost in it that there is no possibility of he himself becoming aware of it. To be aware of something means division, the observer and the observed; the experience has become split. When the experience happens it is indivisible. There is no knower and no known, no subject, no object. All is silent. This is the most perfect teaching.
The second stage is when the master becomes aware of what has happened – corruption has begun, even inside the master. He has not said a single word, but a vague awareness has started arising in him. The experience is no longer undivided, it is divided. It has become not one but two. It is no longer the same, it is not the whole. Part of it has become subjectivity; the knower, the observer, the awareness. And the other part has become the object; the known, the experienced. This is the first corruption, and it happens inside the master.
The third is: the master formulates his experience; he starts making it more clear, more expressible. Now there are not only two but three things. The one is divided into three: the subject, the object and the mind, because without the mind nothing can be made articulate. The mind is the expert. Language has to be used, logic has to be used. The mind has to be awakened from its deep sleep; the mind has to be called forth. Just as one day the master struggled hard to put the mind into a deep-frozen state, now he struggles hard to unfreeze it, because without it there is no possibility of being absolutely clear about what has happened. It has to be conceptualized.
Now, the moment the ultimate experience becomes conceptualized a great corruption happens, because the wordless is being forced into the word. And words are small things, and the experience is as vast as the sky – even the sky is not its limit. The unlimited has to be brought within limits. Naturally much will be lost. First it was the whole sky with all the stars, with all its infinity and eternity. Now it is only a small window with a frame, a man-made frame. Now you are looking through the window: it is no longer the whole sky but just a small piece of it.
The fourth thing to be understood is the expression. Out of great compassion, out of love, the master would like to share with others what has happened, because he can see millions of people groping in the dark in the same way as he was groping one day. He can see everybody groping in the same darkness, with the same confusion, with the same misery and now he is in a state where he can help. At least he can indicate the way; at least he can show something of the beyond. He can transpire; he can trigger some process.
He has to use the art of synchronicity. He has to sing the song so that your song which is in the seed starts moving, becomes alert, comes out of its dormant state, starts reaching toward the sky – so that your seed is broken, so that your song also starts having a longing. Your heart has to be touched.
The master speaks. But the moment he speaks even much more is lost – because to conceptualize within yourself is one thing, to communicate it to somebody else is totally different. Now you have to look at the other person, what can he understand? – only that can be said. You have to come to the lowest possibility because that’s where people exist. You have to use language which they can understand.
A buddha cannot use the language which only other buddhas can understand. He has reached the sunlit peak, but he has to come back, he has to descend back into the darkness of the valley. He has to use your language, your expressions, your ways of saying things. And naturally, almost ninety-nine percent is lost, only one percent is expressed and that too needs a very skillful master. Not all the masters have been able to express even that one percent; many have remained silent seeing that they have no skill.
When I decided to become a teacher in the university, a few of my friends who were aware of what had happened to me asked me, “What are you going to do?”
I said, “It will be good if I can be a teacher for a few years, it will help me tremendously: it will give me the skill. Now I have something to express, I have something to share, but the skill is needed. The best teacher is one who can help the last person hearing him, the lowest in intelligence, to understand. Of course the best ones will understand easily, but you have to keep aware of those who are not that intelligent.”
And humanity, the greater part of humanity, is not intelligent at all. It lives in a very stupid way, it lives in mediocrity. Its consciousness is so much covered with dust and rust that its mirroring quality is completely lost. It cannot reflect anything, it cannot echo anything. Great skill is needed; only then can one percent of the experience be expressed.
The fifth thing is the hearing of the experience. Now the master has spoken, he is no longer the master of what he has spoken. Now the person who has heard becomes the master of it; now it is his possession. Up to now the corruption was happening inside the master, because he was bringing it to the level of the mind. Once he has spoken, it enters into a mind which has never experienced anything of the unknown, anything of the beyond. In the very entry, out of that one percent almost ninety percent is lost. It is bound to be so because everybody understands things in his own way, according to his own conditioning, his past experiences, his philosophy, his religion, his ideology.
Nobody listens in silence. If you listen in silence, then there is a possibility you may be able to get hold of the one percent, and that is enough for you to be transformed. Once a small flame enters into you, the whole forest will be afire soon. That one percent is enough – it is pure fire, it will make you afire.
But even that one percent never enters. It enters only into those who are devotees, who are totally devoted to the master, who have no conditions, no barriers, who are almost like shadows, who have effaced themselves completely. Otherwise, ordinarily the sixth thing is bound to happen: the interpretation. The person who hears is going to interpret it. The moment your mind comes across any word it immediately interprets it, it cannot allow it to remain as it is.
Looking at a roseflower your mind immediately says, “A beautiful flower!” You cannot resist the temptation of saying it. You may not say it to anybody, but deep inside you have said it to yourself: “What a beautiful flower!” You could not remain silent with this beauty; interpretation is bound to happen.
Now you are here – Christians, Jews, Mohammedans, Jainas, Buddhists, Parsis, Sikhs – all kinds of ideologies, all kinds of philosophies are there in your minds. Whenever you hear something you will give it your color. Then even point one percent is not left, what to say about one percent? Not even point one percent is left. It has become so diluted, so contaminated that it is almost something else.
There is the seventh possibility, the moment the hearer starts telling what he has heard to others. All the Buddhist sutras begin with: “I have heard the Blessed One say this…” Buddha never wrote a book, neither did Christ nor Lao Tzu; they all depended on the spoken word. There is reason in it: while I am speaking the word is one thing, but the pauses are far more pregnant, the silences are far more meaningful. My gestures may touch your heart more easily than my words. My words are bound to go into your memory system, they will revolve there. But my presence, my eyes, can penetrate you far more deeply.
Hence all the great masters have used the spoken word. Nobody has ever written a book and I don’t think they are ever going to write a book. The moment you write something it becomes dead. The moment you say something it is not only a word: behind it is standing an alive being, full of joy, full of the experience, so full that he is overflowing. His words can take many, many things toward you, crossing all the barriers. There is a possibility of reaching.
But when the person who has heard it from somebody else goes on telling it to others, he is just repeating like a parrot. That’s why all the great teachings, all the teachings which were perfect become corrupted over time. They become corrupted even in the presence of the master.
These are the seven steps of corruption. And if you keep alert then something can be saved, only something, but that something is enough. If you can even save a seed, that will do because out of that seed the whole Earth can be made green.

The last question:
Osho,
I am a Polack. I don't understand why people think that Polacks don't have any intelligence.
I also wonder why people think that Polacks don’t have intelligence. They have a different kind of intelligence, that is true – so different, a unique kind of intelligence. Nobody else in the world has that.
I have heard about the Polack Pope…

He was aboard a plane and the pilot said, “It is unfortunate that out of the four engines one has stopped working, but there is no need to worry. Three engines are more than enough to take us to our destination. The only thing is we will be three hours late.”
After fifteen minutes he said, “Sorry to interrupt you again: the second engine has stopped, but no need to worry. Two engines are still more than enough and we will complete our journey, but now we will be six hours late.”
And after half an hour he announced again, “Ladies and gentlemen, sorry to announce that the third engine has also failed, but still there is no need to panic. One engine is enough to take us to the destination, but now we will be nine hours late.”
And after just five minutes he said, “If you want to say your prayers you can, because the last engine has stopped.”
And there was great panic and chaos, but the Polack Pope was sitting silently. The lady sitting by his side started crying and weeping and screaming. He said, “What is the matter? Why are you so worried? At the most we will be twelve hours late!”

This is pure intelligence! It is mathematics, nothing else. Who says Polacks don’t have intelligence?
I have read Bertrand Russell’s Principia Mathematica – that’s nothing as far as the pope’s mathematics is concerned.

Watkins walked into a Hollywood talent agent’s office. He placed his suitcase on the agent’s desk, opened it, and thirty mice scampered out, carrying little musical instruments.
In seconds, they were positioned as an orchestra and with a snap of Watkins’ fingers, the mice began playing exactly like Benny Goodman. Watkins snapped his fingers and this time they sounded like Guy Lombardo. Watkins snapped his fingers again and the rodents played a medley of Paul Anka tunes.
“Well,” asked Watkins, “what do you think?”
“Can’t use them,” replied the agent.
“What do you mean, you can’t use them? What’s the matter with this act?”
“To tell you the truth,” said the agent, “they don’t play half bad, but the drummer looks too Polish!”

There are people who don’t understand the Polacks and they go on spreading rumors that they have no intelligence. I am not anti-Polack. I love them, I enjoy them – I can see their intelligence is totally different!

Kyacki’s son had been acting a little strangely lately, so Kyacki took him to a psychiatrist.
“Tell me, son,” questioned the shrink, “how many wheels does an auto have?”
“Four.”
“Very good,” said the doctor. “Now what is it a cow has four of that a woman has two?”
“Legs.”
“And what does your father have that your mother likes most?”
“Money.”
The psychiatrist turned to Kyacki and said, “You don’t have to worry about him – he’s smart!”
“He sure is!” said the Polack. “I missed the last two questions myself!”

Just a matter of different intelligence! Who says they don’t have any intelligence? Don’t be worried. Enjoy the intelligence that existence has given to you.

Banducci, Sullivan and Piwalski, traveling together in Mexico, got drunk and killed a Mexican. All three were sentenced to the electric chair.
First they sat Banducci down and asked him if he had any last words. “I am a dentist,” said the Italian, “and I will care for everyone in the village for twenty-five years if you will let me go.”
The authorities refused and the executioner proceeded to carry out the sentence. He pulled the switch and nothing happened. “By law,” said the executioner, “the Italian is a free man, because the electric chair did not work.”
Then the Irishman sat down. The same question was asked. “I am a doctor,” said Sullivan, “and I would care for the villagers for twenty-five years in exchange for my freedom.”
Again the answer was no. The switch was pulled and nothing happened. He went free.
Then Piwalski sat down. He was asked if he had any last words. “I am a graduate in electrical engineering from Texas A&M,” said the Polack, “and if you put that white wire in that hole, and the red wire in that hole…”

And who says that Polacks don’t have intelligence? Just sheer nonsense! They have intelligence – in fact only they have intelligence.

In Poland, disorder – or what is known as “the Polish mess” – is referred to by Poles as Polski balagan.
It is said that Jimmy Carter, Leonid Brezhnev, and Polish party chief Edward Gierek met God. He allowed them one question each.
“Is it true,” asked Jimmy Carter, “that America will go Communist?”
“Yes,” answered the Lord, “but not in your lifetime.”
“Will the Chinese take over Moscow?” asked Brezhnev.
“Yes,” replied the Almighty, “but not in your lifetime.”
“Will disciplined labor ever replace Polski balagan?” asked Gierek.
“Yes,” answered God, “but not in my lifetime!”

Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
I welcome your stern steps to guide a country like India from slavery and poverty, etcetera. However I feel very sorry to hear you quoted as saying: “For fifteen years this country needs no democracy. It has not that much intelligence.” Please explain what you mean.
I love democracy, I love freedom, but to transform a country which has lived for two thousand years in slavery is not possible through democratic means, otherwise it will take two thousand years or even more.
The mind of India has become accustomed to slavery, and when you give freedom suddenly to slaves they go berserk. It is like suddenly throwing open the doors of a prison and releasing all the prisoners, making them free. What do you suppose they are going to do?
Democracy needs a certain context which is missing in India. That is why these thirty years have just been a failure. All the work that has been done since India attained its so-called freedom has not been of any value. In fact, we have more problems than we had before. We have not been able to solve a single problem; we have created thousands of other problems.
I love democracy so much that I am even ready for a fifteen years temporary benevolent dictatorship to train the country, to teach the country how to be free. It will appear paradoxical, it will appear contradictory, but don’t be deceived by the appearance.
It is easy to condemn and criticize my views because the paradox is so apparent. Any fool can say that it is contradictory. But life works in a dialectical way; it is not linear logic, it is dialectics. It is far more complex than you think it is.
Two thousand years of slavery is a long time, very long. The slavery has gone into the very blood and bones, into the very marrow of the nation. To uproot it, something surgical is needed. Just telling people to be free is not enough. And how can the surgery be done if democratic means are adopted? “Democratic means” simply means telling people things, not doing anything, just telling people to be more understanding, to be more democratic, to be more independent. But that is not going to help – it is like telling an ill person to be healthy.
Something drastic is needed, something radical is needed; not only medical treatment but something surgical. That is possible only if for fifteen years at least – that is the minimum limit – the country lives under a benevolent dictatorship. Then compulsory birth control can be imposed on the people. Otherwise their freedom to reproduce is going to create so many problems that no government can ever solve them. By the time you solve a few problems, thousands more people have arrived with all their problems. They don’t bring land with them, they don’t bring factories with them; they simply come empty-handed. And already millions of people are unemployed, half the country is starved.
This country can be happy only with a population of two hundred million. It is now reaching the limit of seven hundred million, and by the end of this century it will reach the highest peak, one billion. It will even defeat China because China is under a dictatorial regime; they have been able to impose strict birth control. Right now they have more people, but by the end of this century India will be the most populated country in the world – and of course the most poor, the most hungry.
When there is so much poverty, so much starvation, talking about democracy is all nonsense. It is like playing a beautiful song on the flute before a hungry man. The song is beautiful – I love the flute, I love the song – but to play the song before a hungry person is absurd, it is ridiculous.
The so-called Indian democracy only helps to increase its problems, to increase violence, because when people are hungry they become violent. When they are not even able to live as human beings, what can you expect from them? These communal riots and all the rape, murder, arson, show that the animal is surfacing. You cannot expect the great quality of being human from hungry people – it is impossible.
This “democracy” helps only the politicians; hence I will be condemned by the politicians. Morarji Desai has already said yesterday in Rajkot that, “Osho should not be allowed in Gujarat, he should not be allowed in Kutch, because he is against democracy.”
Now just look at the statement: if it is a democracy then I can live anywhere, wherever I choose. You see the stupidity of the remark? – I should not be allowed to enter Gujarat.
That is what I am saying, that it is better to drop this empty word democracy. It is just a beautiful word borrowed from others. In fact, because India was under British rule, all the great Indian leaders were educated in England. They saw democracy working beautifully there, but in England it has a context of one thousand years. When they came back to India, they had seen democracy functioning perfectly well. It can function in England, so they started imitating England, but where is the context here? India cannot be England so easily.
These thirty years have been sheer nonsense. India should think first about its own tradition, history, past, and in that context we should create a government. We cannot borrow a certain ideology from another context. Those trees cannot be transplanted into another climate so easily; first you have to change the climate.
India has no sense of a nation, has never had. In fact, it has never been a nation. In Buddha’s time it was divided into two thousand kingdoms. It has never felt an organic unity; there exists no organic unity. There are divisions and subdivisions, and they are all in conflict; they are each ready to destroy the other. There are so many religious and political ideologies that it is chaos.
England has only two parties, a two-party system – a very logical way of running a government smoothly. India has hundreds of political parties. It is impossible for any party to be powerful enough or stable enough to implement any program. Hence they promise but they cannot fulfill. But the game can be continued; one party fails in fulfilling its promises, then another party starts promising the people. One party has deceived the people, then another party will deceive the people, and so on and so forth.
But the politicians enjoy it because that is their great opportunity to rule the country. Nobody is concerned with the real problems of the country.
Democracy is not really a problem for the poor. They are ready to sell their votes for just two rupees, five rupees. Now in a country where people are ready to sell their votes for just five rupees, how do you think a democracy can function? Whosoever has the money will purchase the votes. So it is good for the people who have money, it is good for the people who are in politics, ambitious. It is good for smugglers because a certain freedom allows them to do whatsoever they want to do. It is good for the hooligans, the gundas, because nobody can prevent them from having freedom of expression. It is good for all kinds of criminal elements, but it is not good for the people.
Ninety-nine percent of the people have nothing to do with democracy. They need bread, butter, shelter – they don’t have the very essentials to exist, to survive. And talking to these people about democracy is ridiculous.
I love democracy. I would like this country to be democratic. I would like all the countries to be democratic, the whole world to be democratic, because I respect freedom as I respect nothing else. But a context has to be created, and two thousand years of slavery has to be destroyed.
The Indian mind thinks very selfishly, everybody thinks only of himself. That is the heritage of the Indian culture; it has made everybody very selfish. And they have rationalized it beautifully. They say that everybody suffers or rejoices according to his karmas, the acts that he has done in his past life. It has nothing to do with the social structure, it has nothing to do with the government, it has nothing to do with anything else; it is a question of your own past life. So if you are poor, you are poor because of your past life, you have committed certain sins and you are suffering. If somebody is rich, he is rich because of his past life; he had attained great virtue.
You have heard it said, “You cannot purchase virtue with money, but you can purchase money by virtue.” In India that is an accepted rule: you can have more money by being virtuous – not in this life, remember. If in this life you are virtuous you won’t have any money! In the past life you were virtuous, in this life you have to be as cunning as possible, then you will have money and you will have power.
Nobody is concerned with the whole nation as such. My concern is with the whole nation. When I say that it needs a fifteen years benevolent dictatorship I mean that a certain discipline has to be created. People have to be forced to do certain things because they won’t do those things if they are left on their own.
For example, every Indian thinks it is his birthright to give birth to as many children as possible, because to prevent him from giving birth to children is to prevent his freedom, and children are God-given. And he has a certain karma that he has carried from his past life: he has to be a father of one dozen children or two dozen children, and anybody interfering with it is interfering in his freedom. So in a democratic setup it is impossible to impose compulsory birth control.
It is impossible to force people to be a little more industrious. The country has lived in laziness for thousands of years. It must be the laziest country in the world; nobody wants to work. Now in a democratic setup it is impossible to make them work. They will go on strike for the sheer joy of not doing anything!
Almost half the time all the factories are closed, and even when the factories are open nobody is interested in really producing, creating. They don’t have these values. They think that the world is illusory, so what is the point of producing and creating? Their whole creativity has become focused on reproduction They don’t feel any need to create anything else.
It is impossible in a democratic setup to bring people to their senses. But I say, “a benevolent dictatorship” – what do I mean by a benevolent dictatorship? I mean a dictatorship which is used only as a means – the end is democracy.
And my own feeling, my own observation is that Indira Gandhi is the right person, the one who can do it. First she is a woman, has a far more loving heart than any man can ever have. She is a mother and has tremendous love for the country. She has the grace to become a benevolent dictator.
The only problem is that once somebody is a dictator it is difficult to take power from his hands, it is difficult for him to give way to democracy again. But Indira is over sixty. In fifteen years’ time she will be seventy-five; she will have enjoyed the power more than enough. She will be really tired – she is already tired. She is already bored with the whole thing. She is carrying it on because she loves the country; otherwise I don’t see any desire in her to dominate the country. She has tasted the power for a long time. In these fifteen years she will get older, wiser; she will be getting closer to her death.
And she is a woman, and up to now she has proved very intelligent, broad-minded. There is every possibility that a benevolent dictatorship can function through her.
It cannot function through a man like Morarji Desai. He is a fanatic and utterly narrow-minded, utterly stubborn, and very ambitious. If Morarji Desai was in power I would not suggest that there were no elections for fifteen years; I would suggest elections after every six months!
I see that Indira can be of tremendous help to transform the climate of the country. All that she needs is encouragement because she has been brought up in a very democratic family. For four generations she has been brought up in the climate of freedom, independence, respect for others. She has been educated in the West. Her father was almost Western, not Indian at all. Her father was the person who introduced democracy into India. She loves democracy.
The only problem is she is afraid to be associated with the idea of dictatorship. If she can drop that fear… The West will condemn her; particularly America will condemn her, England will condemn her. The West will condemn her – but they don’t help in any way, so what does their condemnation mean? Let them condemn. This much sacrifice she has to make for the country. I call it a sacrifice because her name will become associated with dictatorship. That much sacrifice she has to make. If she can make that much sacrifice for the country, if she is ready to become notorious, then there is no other problem.
All these stupid politicians who are creating chaos in the country can be stopped, all smuggling can be stopped, all the crimes which go on growing every day to new heights can be stopped. The country can be trained in fifteen years to be more industrious, to be less selfish. And a country, which is creative, productive, rich… It can become rich because the land is rich, its potential is great – just a little less population.
So two things have to be done. One is birth control: nobody should be allowed to have children unless the medical board of the city or the town or the village approves. Secondly, euthanasia: old people who want to die should be given the freedom to die. These are two sides of the same coin: stop new people coming in and help the older people to go. Create a little more space in the country.
And in those fifteen years the whole context that is needed for democracy can be created. After fifteen years people will not be ready to sell their votes for anything because they will have understood. They will not be just going on strike for any excuse.
I have not even moved to Kutch, we have not even purchased the land there yet, and just three days ago the people who are opposing the move closed the capital city of Kutch, Bhuj. All the shops were closed, all the factories were closed, all the schools and colleges were closed – as a protest.
I have not entered yet, I have not even got any land there, not even a single house, I have not even visited Kutch – just the rumor that we are going to Kutch is enough! And they are creating so much nuisance in Kutch, in Gujarat, that in two places the police had to force people by lathi charge, people had to be beaten to disperse.
In one place, Mandvi – the whole city of Mandvi is for me – they want me to be there because the would-be commune will be close to Mandvi and Mandvi will have all the benefits of the commune. So Mandvi is totally for me. Bhuj is against me; not against me really, but against Mandvi. They are jealous.
Once Mandvi was the most important city in Kutch; two centuries ago it was the richest city in Kutch. Then the River Sind changed its course and Mandvi became a desert, and of course when it became a desert it lost its glory. Then Bhuj became more important. Now Bhuj is afraid: if ten thousand sannyasins move to Mandvi, the glory will again come to Mandvi. Bhuj will become secondary again; Mandvi will become an international center. They are not really against me; the conflict is very political – it is between Mandvi and Bhuj.
Bhuj people, politicians belonging to Morarji Desai’s party, went to Mandvi to tell people to close that city too. Mandvi people gave them a good beating. One thousand people gathered and threw them out and they had to escape, run away.
Now, I have not gone there yet and all this is happening. And the Gujarat government is puzzled because no land has been purchased; no land has been given to us. Nothing concrete has happened – it is just a rumor, but just for a rumor Indians can go crazy, as if they are just sitting on a volcano. Anything is enough for them to strike, to protest, to make a noise and to create chaos.
This is why I call the country unintelligent. It has lost intelligence, through the priests and through the politicians – not that it does not have the potential of being intelligent. It can be intelligent, but it has to be helped. It needs tremendous help: first a surgical operation, then nourishment. But the country has to be transformed into a new context; just the old country having democracy is impossible.
India has never been democratic, remember. It has always been ruled by kings. It was always monarchic, it has never been democratic. Democracy is a foreign idea, a Greek idea; there are no roots in Indian soil for it. We will have to change the soil, we will have to change the climate if it is going to happen. And the problem is, if you want to change the climate, the context, people will be against you.
Why are people against me? I am not doing any harm to anybody, but they are against me because I am trying to change their culture. But their culture is the problem! I am trying to change their religion, and their religion is the problem. I am trying to cut the very roots, the very causes of their problem. All this can be done very easily by a benevolent dictatorship, by somebody who is intelligent enough and loves and respects democracy, and is ready after fifteen years to give the country back its freedom.
My feeling is that if Indira was gone, then I don’t see on the Indian horizon any other politician who can be so benevolent. Once Indira is gone, India will be in the hands of Hindu chauvinists. Then it will be a Hindu country, and then it will become impossible to change the context because they will go on emphasizing Hindu culture in every school, college and university. And that is the cancer – what you call Hindu culture. That culture has to be removed. A better, far better human culture has to be introduced.
My feeling is that Indira may be the last person who can do it. If she cannot do it, then this country cannot hope for much. That is why… I love democracy, I love freedom – still I insist that for fifteen years it is better to put aside the idea. The time for it has not come yet.

The second question:
Osho,
The priest inside me seems to have a strong hold. Are sannyas and meditation really going to cure me of being a miserable, stupid bastard or should I join the Hare Krishna movement? I could do it for the price of a haircut – I need not even change the color of my clothes!
Dhyanakirti, the priest has always a strong hold because the priest is the most ancient institution in the world. They say the most ancient profession in the world is that of the prostitute. I don’t agree. The most ancient profession is that of the priest, because without the priest who will create the prostitute? How will the prostitute come into existence? It is through the priest.
The priest is the source of all kinds of ugly institutions. And if you have been a priest yourself, then of course it goes very deep in you. Joining the Hare Krishna movement is not going to help – it will be jumping from the frying pan into the fire; it will lead you toward more stupidity.
The priest creates something in you which he calls “the conscience,” and by creating a conscience he destroys your consciousness. Conscience is nothing but a state of hypnosis. By repeating certain things again and again, the priest creates a deep hypnotic state in you, and then you are under the spell.
You are right to ask, “Are sannyas and meditation really going to cure me of being a miserable, stupid bastard?” If you have understood that it is stupidity, then a cure is not difficult, then sannyas will do it. And if my sannyas cannot do it, then drop all hope – then it cannot be done at all.

A man standing beneath the Eiffel Tower looked up, and saw another man jump from the top of the tower and fall at a great velocity. On the way down, however, he seemed to hit a pocket of air which broke his fall and brought him gently to the ground. The spectator was impressed.
A man standing close by noticed the look of wonder spread over the spectator’s face and told him to stay around and watch his friend do it again.
The spectator looked up and saw the same figure jump and fall at great speed, then come once again to a smooth landing on the ground nearby. He got up, walked over to the spectator casually and said, “Go on, have a go. There’s nothing to it – you only have to jump.”
“Okay,” said the man. “I’ll give it a try.” So he climbed to the top of the Tower and jumped. He fell downward at a tremendous speed and hit the pavement. He was a real mess!
The man who had been standing close by turned to the skydiver and said, “D’you know, Gabriel, for an archangel you are a real bastard!”

The priests and the angels and the archangels and the gods and even your so-called God: they have all done tremendous harm to you. In the name of religion so much crime, so much calamity, so much misery has happened to man as has not happened from any other source – even politicians are secondary.
Certainly every religion tries its best to force its ideology into the heart of the child. So the hold is certainly strong. But once you understand it, once you get unidentified with it, there is no trouble – because it is something imposed on you. It is like a dress, you can drop it any moment. But if you think your dress is not a dress but your skin, then it becomes difficult. That’s where you get identified with it.
Don’t get identified with your conscience. That’s the whole purpose of meditation: to make you aware that you are not your mind. The priest can only reach to your mind, he cannot reach to your being – fortunately he cannot pollute your being, he can only pollute your mind. Meditation means creating a distance between your mind and yourself.
The moment you are aware that the mind is a separate thing, created by others – the priests and the politicians and the parents and the teachers; it has nothing to do with you – you can slip out of it very easily.

A man lost his hat. He decided to go and steal one from the entrance of a nearby church. When he arrived at the church, a sermon on the Ten Commandments was in progress.
At the end of the service, he approached the minister and said, “Thank you, Reverend. You have saved me from committing a crime. I came here with sin in my heart. I wanted to steal a hat.”
“That’s very good, my son,” said the minister. “But tell me, what did I say to make you change your mind?”
“Well,” explained the man, “when you got to the part about ‘Thou shalt not commit adultery,’ I remembered where I had left my hat!”

The conscience that the priest has created has not become your soul; it has just become your mask. It has given you a pseudo personality, it has made you a hypocrite.

An attractive, sexy young woman goes for a checkup to the Catholic doctor-cum-monk, who has devoted his whole life to serving the people as a physician. He looks her over, impressed, and as his breathing becomes heavier, he tells her to undress so that he can check her temperature rectally.
She bends over and says, “Hey, doc, this is not my rectum!”
“That’s okay, my dear,” says the Catholic doctor-cum-monk, “nor is this my thermometer!”

The priest has not really changed anything, he cannot; he has only imposed a certain layer of hypocrisy on you. So it is not difficult to get rid of it. It is just a layer of dirt; you can clean it any moment you decide to.
Sannyas is a bath. It is a shower, it will cleanse you, Dhyanakirti. And I have given you the name Dhyanakirti – the glory of meditation. This is the glory of meditation: that it can help you to get rid of all imposed ideas, and it can give you back that which is really yours, your real center.
The Hare Krishna movement will be another imprisonment. Yes, when you move from one prison to another, for a little while the change feels good. The new prison has different architecture, different decoration, different jailers, different guards – everything is different so it feels good. But soon you will realize that it is again the same thing because the slavery is the same.
You say, “…or should I join the Hare Krishna movement? I could do it for the price of a haircut.” Don’t think that just by cutting your hair anything changes.

Ya, ya means yes in German. But in the Polish language, a yaya is what hangs below a Pole’s belly button if the Pole is a male.
Brudzewa from Warsaw stopped in a Berlin barbershop and asked for a shave.
“Ya, ya,” said the barber.
“Nie yaya,” screamed the Pole. “My beard!”

So be aware. You can get into some difficulty. If you want to cut your hair, don’t go to Germany. Otherwise the barber will say, “Ya, ya”…and you seem to be a Polack!
Sannyas and meditation are enough, nothing more is needed. Sannyas changes your whole vision about reality. It helps you to drop all ritualistic religion, all serious religion. It helps you to become nonritualistic, nonserious. It helps you to become playful, it helps you to take life as fun. It helps you to rejoice in existence, and through that rejoicing comes real renunciation.
In the past it has been said again and again by the priests that if you renounce you will attain to bliss. I tell you just the opposite: if you become blissful there is renunciation. And that renunciation has a beauty of its own because you have never renounced anything. In your blissfulness, in your rejoicing, all that is nonessential starts dropping away because you can see it is nonessential. The very seeing is the transformation. If after seeing you have to do something for transformation, then your seeing was incomplete, was not entire, was not total, was not real.
Sannyas means seeing how you are caught in prisons, why you are caught in prisons. And the very seeing is enough, because nobody is really holding you in the prison except your own fears; the fear of the unknown, the fear of the unfamiliar keeps you huddled together like sheep in the crowd. And there are many crowds: Hindu, Mohammedan, Christian, Jewish – different crowds. And people are clinging to each other; they are afraid to be lost in aloneness. Meditation teaches you aloneness.
Sannyas helps you to get rid of the nonessential – in the words of Desiderata – sannyas helps you to negate the nonessential, to drop the nonessential. And meditation helps you to find the essential, to discover the essential. And these are the only two things that are needed, nothing else is needed. Withdraw your energy from the nonessential and let it move into the direction of the essential. Discover your being, your individuality. In that authentic experience is the miracle.

The last question:
Osho,
I love the way you appreciated the intelligence of the Polish people.
Are you too a Polack? – because there are Polacks everywhere. Particularly India has many Polacks, they are masquerading as Indians. Polacks are found in every shape and size everywhere. Remember, Polacks don’t belong only to Poland; in fact, we should rename the whole Earth Poland. Polacks are everywhere!
India has many Polacks, very famous Polacks – Morarji Desai is a Polack, Muktananda is a Polack.

Do you know, if Jimmy Carter, Leonid Brezhnev and Morarji Desai together went skydiving and none of their chutes opened, who would be the last one to hit the ground? Of course, Morarji Desai because he would have to stop to get directions – or maybe a few times to sip his own water of life.

Just the other day when I was talking about the mouse who said to the other mouse, “Don’t believe a thing that I say because I have been on the piss the whole night,” I remembered Morarji Desai, because what will Morarji Desai say? He has been on the piss his whole life! Now where can you find such a Polack?

How can it be proved that Adam was an Indian?
Who else would stand beside a naked woman and just eat an apple?

Several young boys were called by the New Delhi authorities for a medical checkup to determine the paternity of a certain teenage girl’s baby.
Chandulal went in and after a few minutes came out. “Don’t worry, fellows,” he smiled. “They’ll never find out. They’re taking samples from the finger!”

Pundit Ramprasad Shastri comes home and finds his wife in bed with another man. The pundit takes out a gun from the drawer and puts it to his head. The wife’s lover jumps up and shouts, “Hey, what are you doing?”
“Shut up!” says the Indian pundit. “You are next!”

Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
What is your message?
My message is very simple: Live life as dangerously as possible. Live life totally, intensely, passionately, because except for life there is no other god.
Friedrich Nietzsche says, “God is dead.” That is wrong because God has never been there in the first place. How can he be dead? Life is, always has been, will always be. Allow yourself – and I repeat again, allow yourself to be possessed by life.
The so-called religions of the past have been telling you just the opposite. They say, “Renounce,” I say, “Rejoice.” They negate life, I affirm it. They say life is something wrong, illusory, and they create an abstract idea of God which is nothing but a projection of their own minds. And they worship that projection. It is so unintelligent, so utterly stupid that one wonders how millions of people have believed in such sheer nonsense. That which is, is denied for that which is only an abstraction of the mind. God is only a word, but they say God is real. And life is a reality You feel it in your heartbeat, it pulsates in your blood, it is all over the place: in the flowers, in the rivers, in the stars. And they say this is all maya, all illusion. They say that it is made of the same stuff as dreams are made of. And they create a God, and of course everybody creates a god in his own image, so there have been thousands of gods.
It is your imagination. You can make a god with four heads, you can make a god with a thousand hands. It is up to you, it is your game. And these people have been telling and poisoning the minds of others. They say, “Brahma satya – God is true,” and “Jagat mitya – the world, life is untrue.”
I say to you, life is the only truth there is. There is no other god than life. So allow yourself to be possessed by life in all its forms, colors, dimensions – the whole rainbow, all the notes of music. If you can manage this simple thing… It is simple because it is only a question of let-go. Don’t push the river, let the river take you to the ocean. It is already on the way. Relax, don’t be tense and don’t try to be spiritual. Don’t create any division between the matter and the spirit. Existence is one, matter and spirit are simply two sides of the same coin. Relax, rest, and go with the river.
Be a gambler, don’t be a businessman, and you will know more of God because the gambler can risk. The gambler is non-calculative, he can put all that he has at stake. But the thrill of the gambler when he stakes everything and waits – what is going to happen now? In that very moment a window can open. That very moment can become a transformation of the inner gestalt.
Be a drunkard, drunk with life, with the wine of existence. Don’t remain sober. The sober person remains dead. Drink the wine of life. It has so much poetry and so much love and so much juice. You can bring the spring in any moment. Just give a call to the spring and let the sun and the wind and the rain enter into you.
It is because of this message that the spiritualists are against me: they think I am denying God. I am not denying God. For the first time I am bringing God into a real perspective: I am making him alive, I am bringing him closer to you, closer than your very heart, because he is your very being – nothing separate, nothing far away, nothing there in the sky, but herenow. I am trying to destroy the very idea of there and then. My whole vision is of here and now because there is no other space than the here, and no other time than the now.
The spiritualists are against me because they think I am making people materialists. And the materialists are against me because they think I am taking people into meditative drunkenness.
The shankaracharya would not agree with me because he says, “God is true and everything else is false.” I cannot agree with him. And Karl Marx will not agree with me because he says, “Religion is the opium of the people,” – that religion is something utterly false, that there is no God, no spirit, no life except matter; that what you think is your consciousness is an epiphenomenon, just a by-product. The moment you die everything dies.
I tell you, you are born and you will certainly die but something in you was there before your birth, and something in you is there which will remain after your death. And that something is life. Life is eternal.

Twenty sannyasins walk into the World Trade Center in New York singing, “Drinking from your wine, Osho, drinking from your wine!”
The front desk receptionist calls for the manager to come quickly. He tells the sannyasins that they must wear formal dress to enter, so one of the sannyasins goes over to the desk and gets the “Rules of the House.” He finds out that priests and people of religious orders do not have the same dress code. He presents this rule to the manager who is thereby forced to allow them entry.
The twenty sannyasins walk into the bar on the one hundred and thirtieth floor still singing, “Drinking from your wine, Osho…” A couple of drinks later, the same sannyasin notices a fat old Texan sitting on the stool next to him. He raps him on the back and they get talking. Fatso happens to import fine scotch whiskey into the States. He listens in amazement as this sannyasin tells him that he is a connoisseur and that he knows of a wine that just keeps getting you higher and higher – it is made in India and brewed by a master called Osho.
“Faarrr out!” drawls the Texan, and he calls the bartender and pays for everybody’s drinks.
A short time later, twenty sannyasins walk out of the bar, singing, “Drinking from your wine, Osho, drinking from your wine…”

That is my message.

The second question:
Osho,
We have come to know that you believe that all religions are humbug. How can you say this? All people have every right to believe in some specific religion. Everything can be good as well as bad. So how can you say that other religions are humbug?
I don’t believe in anything. I am not a believer at all. I need not believe, I know. All the religions are humbug. This is not my belief, it is simply my experience. I can see it – they are humbug. The whole of human history proves it.
The moment you say, “all the religions,” you have already gone astray because there is only one kind of religiousness. There cannot be many. Just as science is one, the scientific approach is one, so is religion, so is the religious approach.
Jesus, Krishna, Buddha, Zarathustra, Lao Tzu – they all belong to one kind of religiousness. Of course, they speak different languages – that is another matter. They are bound to speak different languages. Lao Tzu will speak in Chinese, Jesus will speak in Aramaic, Buddha will speak in Pali, and of course they will use the idiom of their day. But that is the difference of expression, and one should not be deceived by expressions, one should not be deceived by words because religion has nothing to do with the words. In fact, it is because of the curtain of the words that we cannot see. It covers our eyes, it hinders our insight. Religion is a wordless experience. Hence Christianity, Hinduism, Jainism, Buddhism, Mohammedanism are all false.
Jesus is right, Buddha is right, Krishna is right. But Christianity is not right, cannot be right. In fact, to be a Christian is to settle for something pseudo. You can be a Christ – then why be a Christian? To be a Christian is just to be a shadow. You can drink from the very source of existence – then why go on only talking about it, thinking about it?
A Christian is one who talks about truth and knows nothing about it. A Christ is one who knows about it. It is his experience. The Christian has no experience of his own, he is simply repeating the words of Christ. And repeating others’ words is a stupid activity. This repetition is called believing. Remember, religion has nothing to do with believing. The whole foundation of religion is seeing, not believing. Remember, only blind people believe in light. Those who have eyes don’t believe in light, they know! The moment you know something, the necessity for belief disappears.
But the world is full of believers. That means the world is full of blind people. And how have you come to a certain belief? Just a coincidence, that you were born into a certain family and they started imposing their beliefs upon you. You are a Hindu. You have not chosen to be a Hindu, you have been forced to be a Hindu by your parents, by your society. Or you are a Jew, or you are a Mohammedan, but you have not chosen it, and religion is not so cheap that anybody else can impose it upon you. It has to be one’s individual choice.
Religion has to be chosen out of freedom. It is not a conditioning. Belief is a conditioning. Belief means you have been made afraid that if you don’t believe you will be punished; hence, the hell. Hell is for those who don’t believe. And those who believe? – for them are all the joys of paradise.
It is the same psychology that pervades the schools, the colleges, the universities, the law courts. They all think that if you want people to be a certain way, the only possibility is to create fear and to create greed. And how can you be religious if you are full of fear and greed, fear of hell and greed for paradise? That is the trick that has been played upon you. You have been cheated, you have been exploited, and you have been only given words – words which mean nothing to you.
When Buddha says something it has meaning. When Buddhists repeat it they are repeating like parrots. The parrot can repeat a mantra, there is no difficulty in it, you can teach the parrot. And the same methods have to be applied as are applied to you: if he learns the mantra he gets beautiful food, if he does not learn the mantra then he is punished, he has to starve, he is denied food. He is forced to learn. This is what psychologists call conditioning.
There are people like B. F. Skinner who say that man can be conditioned for any behavior. Just give him enough punishment and enough reward and you can manage, you can change anybody’s behavior.
Why are you being good? Not that you really feel like being good – there is a great fear that if you are not good then you will have to suffer for it later on. The whole of humanity is living in fear and greed – and you call these religions?
Religions are not possible, only a religiousness is possible.
You are too much burdened with words. You say, “We have come to know that you believe that all other religions are humbug.” You have not even listened to me, you have not even been in communion with me. You have “come to know…” You have heard it from others who may have heard it from somebody else. That you believe. If you had been here for a few days you would have come to know that I don’t believe in anything.
I know. I have eyes, I can see! What is the need to believe? Belief is for those who are not courageous enough to open their eyes. Belief is for those whose religion is formal, who have not experienced anything of life, anything of beauty, anything of joy, anything of love – for whom God is a word, life is a word. They live in words.

“Hey, Paolo, how come-a I no see you around no more?”
“I gotta new business now, but I am-a no doing so good-a!”
“What’s your business?”
“I am a pump!”
“What the hell-a is a pump?”
“I gotta these eight-a girls who work-a for me, and every time they go out-a and make fun-a with a guy, I make-a money!”
“You be a dope! You ain’t a pump – you are a pimp!”
“No wonder business is-a no good-a. In the Yellow-a Pages, I am-a listed under ‘Pumps’!”

Beware of words. You are listed as a Hindu, as a Mohammedan, as a Christian – you are none of these.
Friedrich Nietzsche is right when he says that the first and the last Christian died on the cross twenty centuries ago – neither before him was there another Christian nor after him. Only Christ is a Christian in the true sense of the word. He lived and experienced, and whatsoever he said was coming from his innermost core, it was not something borrowed. Everything borrowed is ugly. Beliefs are borrowed, hence they are ugly. And when you live according to borrowed beliefs you create chaos in the world. You remain unconscious and you go on talking about the Bible and the Veda and the Gita. And you are repeating all these things in your dreams. You have not understood a single word.

One Sunday morning a drunkard stumbled into a big building, not knowing it was a church. When he entered, the ten o’clock mass was in process – the organ was playing, a choir was singing and the church was very crowded. The priest was standing in front of the people, swaying a pot filled with smoking incense.
Suddenly a shout was heard from the back of the chapel, “Madam! Hey, Madam! Your bag is on fire!”

You are not in your senses, you don’t have any awareness, you are sleepwalkers. Almost the whole of humanity suffers from somnambulism, sleepwalking, and in your sleep the priests have caught hold of you. It is only accidental who was close by and who got hold of you.
If a child who is born into a Hindu family is given to a Christian family from the very beginning, he will never come to know that he is a Hindu. Or do you think he will ever come to know that he is a Hindu? – he will be a Christian.
So what is your religion? Just whatsoever is forced upon you by others is your religion. Religion basically is freedom, but your so-called religions are slaveries, they are humbug, and humanity has suffered much because of this nonsense.
I would like more buddhas but no more Buddhists – enough is enough.

An Australian country town had an old nunnery at its center. The town was growing up fast all around it and the nuns would stand at the windows and watch the new multi-story building being erected on the other side of the street.
Around midday, the lunch siren would go, and the bronzed sweaty bodies of the laborers would come down the scaffolding to the ground floor to have their lunch.
The nuns would watch the blokes sit around in a big circle, get out their lunch-boxes and thermos flasks and dive into their lunches.
“Sister, sister, did you notice that the gentlemen did not thank the Lord for their food?” said one nun to the other.
The other replied enthusiastically, “Yes, yes, I did! Perhaps we could mention it to Mother Superior.”
So off they went upstairs to relate their tale to the Reverend Mother. After a moment of silence, she said, “Bring me a lunch-box tomorrow – just the kind the gentlemen use!”
The next day, when the siren sounded, Mother Superior picked up the lunch-box and slipped downstairs and across the street. She sat quietly down next to the men who were noisily chomping into their lunches, then she raised her hands suddenly and said, “Gentlemen! Gentlemen! Have you heard of Jesus Christ?”
One of the fellas stopped, pushed back his hat, scratched his head and said, “Hmmm, ah, Christ – Jesus Christ… Hey Danny, you heard of a Jesus Christ working here? Well, tell him his mum is here with his lunch!”

Jesus Christ? Twenty centuries have passed! Who cares? Who bothers? You have to live your life. You have to be authentic to yourself. You have to discover your individuality. And all these religions are humbug because they hinder discovering, they hinder exploration. They hinder you from knowing the truth. They hinder in every possible way.
They go on stuffing knowledge in your head, and that knowledge only creates stupidity. Pundits are the most stupid people in the world because they are parrots. There are so many simple people who even start trying to live according to the teachings that they have been given by others. They start trying to live… They create a mess of their lives. Then life becomes unnecessarily repressive because you are not a Mahavira, and you are not a Buddha, and you are not a Krishna.
Just try to be a Krishna. Stand in the street playing on a flute, and immediately the police will catch hold of you. You cannot repeat Krishna. You have to be only yourself. Nobody is capable of repeating anybody else; there is no need either. It creates repression. You repress your individuality and you start acting like somebody else, and you are not that somebody else so your life becomes an hypocrisy. Hence I call all these religions humbug.

Chandulal got an out-of-town construction job, and asked his guru, Swami Dharamdas Brahmachari to check up on his wife to see that she did not fool around with anybody.
Of course he argued within himself that his guru, Swami Dharamdas Brahmachari is a celibate, so his wife is in the right hands, there is no fear. If he had asked me I would have said, give the control of your wife to anybody else. Anybody else will be far better than this so-called celibate!
Six months later he returned and found his spouse and his guru in bed doing the very same thing he had tried to prevent. He called his wife every name in the book, and then threatened divorce.
“And as for you, you dirty dog!” Chandulal shouted at his guru, “Couldn’t you at least stop while I am talking to you?”

Repression sooner or later explodes. You are sitting on a volcano.
You say, “We have come to know that you believe that all other religions are humbug.” They are. “How can you say this?” Because I know it.
You ask, “All people have every right to believe in some specific religion.” There is no specific religion. There is only a religiousness. And nobody has the right to believe! Everybody has the right to know.
You say, “Everything can be good as well as bad.” No. If you know, then the right is right and the wrong is wrong. Then white is white and black is black. If you don’t know, then of course you are in a confusion.
You ask, “So how can you say that other religions are humbug?” What can I do? If they are humbug they are humbug. I am simply stating a fact. To me, it is a truth which has to be said. And the time for it has come.

The third question:
Osho,
My wife has become a Brahma Kumari with the Raj Yogis of Prajapita Brahma in Mount Abu. It is hard for me to accept her way, especially her ideal of purity and her believing in such things as the five-thousand-year cycle of mankind which will end in about 1987 with a big atomic war and natural catastrophes to start a new golden age. What can I do?
You need not do anything. Let her have her own way. You can see the nonsense that she is falling into, but that is her freedom. And one learns only by experience. If you try to pull her out she will not be able to live her experience totally.
In the first place it will be almost impossible for you to pull her out, because mind functions in a very different way; your very effort will push her deeper into the mire. And particularly a husband is the last person to transform a wife or convert a wife – impossible. Wives can convert husbands very easily, but husbands have never been known to convert wives.
A wife can nag you. She knows the art, that is part of her femininity. She will torture you in such subtle ways that finally you have to give in. It is very difficult to find a husband who is not henpecked. All husbands are bound to be henpecked. If somebody is not henpecked that simply means that he is not a husband. He may be somebody else but he is not a husband. And every husband knows it and every wife knows it. But wives are very clever. They go on giving the sense to the husband that he is the master, and deep down they know who is the master, so what is wrong in it? – let him pretend. So he can go and walk in the streets and in the factories and in the office as if he is the master!
The wife gives him enough rope, but remember, it is a rope and the wife keeps the other end in her hand. She gives enough rope and goes on pretending, but she is the real master.
So if your wife was trying to get you out of the hold of these so-called Prajapita Brahma and their Brahma Kumaris then it would have been very easy. But it will be almost impossible for you.
And I think it is a good chance to get rid of her. Don’t miss the opportunity. People are so foolish. When opportunity knocks on the door they complain about the noise!

A Jewish comedian telling jokes about women: “Now take my wife, for instance… Please!”

It is such a good opportunity, such a golden opportunity for you. You are out of the mousetrap. Why do you want to get into the mousetrap again? Let her do her own thing – she will learn by bitter experience. I know these fools because I have been visiting Mount Abu for almost twenty years.
India has given birth to two of the most stupid religious movements. One is Hare Krishna – that has become worldwide – the other is these Brahma Kumaris. It has not reached the whole world, it has remained confined to India. They talk utter nonsense, and they talk with authority, and they go on saying everything. This date that you mention – that in 1987 this world will end – has changed many times in thirty years, and it will change again. But fools are fools. ’87 is not far away, only seven years. And you will see that in ’87 it will become something else – ’97 or 2000 will be the exact, the right time. It goes on, it goes on changing, and people are so foolish, they go on believing.
The world is not going to end in any atomic war for the simple reason… It is not that humanity has become nonviolent, not that it has heard the message of Buddha and Mahavira and has dropped all violence, no. It has come to a point where total war is possible. It is strange, what Buddha and Mahavira could not do Albert Einstein has been able to do. The discovery of atomic energy on one hand has been one of the most dangerous discoveries – because two cities, Hiroshima and Nagasaki, were destroyed within minutes. One hundred thousand people in Hiroshima were reduced to nothingness within three minutes. But on the other hand, the discovery of atomic energy is going to change the whole future of humanity because it has made it possible to go into a total war.
All the wars in the past – and they have been many: in three thousand years we have fought five thousand wars – were partial wars. Even the First World War and the Second World War should not be called world wars because the whole world was not really involved; a major part was involved but not the whole.
The Third World War will be the first and the last world war, both the first and last because it will be total destruction – nobody can win it. That is one of the greatest blessings, that nobody can win it, neither Russia nor America. The difference between the victor and the defeated will be of only ten minutes at the most because if America attacks Russia first then it will take ten minutes for Russia to attack America. Just ten minutes – or vice versa. And we have so many atom bombs and hydrogen bombs available that the whole of humanity can be destroyed seven hundred times. In fact, a person simply dies on the first attempt. There is no need to kill a person seven hundred times. But politicians are very calculative: in case somebody survives they have made it in such a way that there is no possibility to survive. Not only men, but trees and birds and insects and all the amoebas you are suffering from will all be destroyed.
In fact, before the Third World War you cannot be free of amoebas! Amoebas are the longest-living beings. An amoeba can live at least one hundred thousand years. They are immortals, gods. And their reproduction system is really aesthetic. Man’s reproductive system is very ugly compared to the amoebas.
Amoebas are brahmacharis, celibates, absolute celibates. There are not females and males, remember. The way the amoeba reproduces itself is a very different one. The amoeba simply goes on becoming fatter and fatter and fatter, and then it splits in two; then there are two amoebas. Both are fathers, both are sons. And then they go on, start eating and becoming fatter and fatter, and a moment comes when they split into four. This is a beautiful way to reproduce.
Just think of a man doing push-ups on a woman. What nonsense! Amoebas must be laughing, “What are you doing?”
I have heard a story…

The first human couple reached Mars. And of course they were interested to know how the Martians reproduce. So they asked the first Martian couple they met, “How do you reproduce?”
They said, “It is very simple.” They invited the couple into their home. They opened the freezer and they brought out two bottles of some strange chemicals. They mixed the chemicals in a jar in the same proportions. They put the jar back into the freezer and they said, “After nine months we will have a baby.”
The human couple was very much puzzled. “What kind of reproduction is this?”
Then Martians asked, “And how do you reproduce?” And so they started making love. And while the man was doing push-ups on the woman – because they were Christian and they knew only the missionary posture, the Christian posture – those two Martians, the Martian couple, started laughing. They laughed so much that tears came to their eyes. And of course the human couple felt very awkward.
When they had finished they asked, “Why you are laughing?”
The Martians said, “This is the way we make coffee!”

Amoebas must be laughing at you and all the Tantrikas and all the tantra methods, and amoebas must be laughing at the whole nonsense – nonsense in the sense that they have a very simple method. No sex is involved at all, they are non-sexual beings. In fact, they are the only beings eligible to enter into paradise.
Your wife has gone into some stupid ideology. It is good riddance – forget her. She will come to her senses if you don’t try to force her. And the world is not going to end because everybody is aware that now war has become meaningless. The whole meaning of war is of becoming victorious. Now nobody can be the victor. The days of war are over, the days of love are coming. And this world is not going to end, but certainly it is going to go through a tremendous change, a radical transformation.
I am preparing you for that radical transformation. I want you to be the future of humanity.
And of course, you are worried about her ideal of purity. Indians have very strange ideas about purity. They have suffered much because of that. The whole country lives with such deep suppression, with such deep unnaturalness that everybody is miserable, everybody is sad and serious.
Just the other day three Indians came to visit and they had come from one of our friends, so Sheela received them as guests. And they were very rich people, belonging to the topmost, richest society of Mumbai. One of them asked Sheela, “We have heard many things about free sex here – this is against spirituality, this is against religion,” and all kinds of things. And then one of them asked, “Why don’t we see many Indians here?”
Sheela said, “You have come to see this place – first have a look around. You will have a better perspective, and then we can sit and talk.”
And the same man, do you know what he did? In the fashion department – Padma was alone – he grabbed her breasts. The same man who was asking why there are so few Indians.
Then Sheela told him, “Now, you know…” he was caught red-handed “…why there are so few Indians. We have to throw them out. Now we have to throw you out! We would have given you a good beating and handed you over to the police, but because you have come from a friend, a well-wisher of our commune, we will not do anything to you. We will just throw you out.”
Now a rich person, well-educated, behaves in such a way and thinks himself spiritual. Indians have a strange idea of spirituality. Their whole mind is sexual and they talk of purity in the sense of no sexuality – to drop sexuality is to be pure. Then only amoebas are pure!
You cannot be pure because you are born out of sexuality in the first place. How can you be pure? You cannot change your birth, it has already happened. You came out of your mother and father’s sexuality. Half the cells of your body belong to your father, and half the cells belong to your mother. They are sexual, those cells are sexual. Hence each man carries within him a woman, his mother, and each woman carries a man within her, her father.
And now psychologists have come to a certain insight about it. You will fall in love many times but every time you will feel frustrated for the simple reason that deep down the cells of your mother are projecting a chemistry in you which can be fulfilled only if you can find a replica of your mother in your beloved, and that is impossible. Where will you find your mother as your beloved? Or where are you going to find your father as your lover? Hence all love affairs are bound to fail; they can only be temporary affairs. No love affair can be permanent. Stable it can be; stable only because of security, convenience. But no love affair can be really fulfilling for the simple reason, a basic reason, that each man is trying to find his mother in the woman he loves. And of course that woman is totally different. She comes from a different sexual source: her father was different, her mother was different.
You fall in love with a woman who has something similar to your mother – maybe the color of the hair, maybe her eyes, maybe her nose, maybe her shape.
Just a few days ago, Vivek brought to me a picture of Krishna Prem’s mother. It was amazing! The mother looks exactly like Vasumati, exactly like Vasumati – the nose, the face. And Krishna Prem has been gay for many years, and suddenly seeing Vasumati his gayness has disappeared; he has fallen in love with a woman. And he has not even been consciously aware of his mother’s existence because his mother died very early. I think he was only two months old or something when his mother died, so he does not remember. But the chemistry remembers.
Each cell has its own memory. Falling in love with Vasumati, here in the ocean of so many women, just finding Vasumati is strange – and that too for a person who has remained gay for many, many years. In fact, it was one of his problems. He was asking again and again, “How can I get rid of my homosexuality?” and suddenly the meeting with Vasumati and the homosexuality disappeared. He has found something similar.
But it can be only similar; hence when they asked, “Can we live together?” I said, “Beware. If you live together then the relationship will be very short-lived. If you remain aloof and meet only once in a while, then your relationship can be prolonged, can be far more enriching.” And they understood it. They both understood it, which is rare. Because when you are in love you are crazy, you don’t understand anything. You go cuckoo. But they both understood. They both proved that they can see things clearly. They remain separate. Only once in a while – two, three times a week they meet. Now this can be a lifelong relationship – unless I disturb it!
So, it is good. Thank these Brahma Kumaris of Mount Abu – they have been of tremendous help to you.

Abe died of a massive heart attack. His wife, Rose, followed Abe’s instructions and had him cremated. She insisted on taking the ashes home to their small apartment in Brooklyn, and had the following conversation: “Abe, remember the Cadillac you promised me? Well, here are the keys.
“Abe, remember the trip to Europe you promised me? Well, here is the ticket.
“Abe, remember the condo in Miami Beach you promised me? Well, here are the keys.
“Abe, remember that blow job you always wanted? Well, here it is!”
And she blew the ashes, “Phooow!”

What else can you expect from a wife?
Don’t be bothered at all. Let her try her own way. And everybody has the freedom to do whatsoever he likes, she likes. Don’t interfere. You be on your path and let her seek her own path. She will come sooner or later because nobody is so foolish as to remain trapped into something ridiculous. But it helps many people at least to get rid of their absurd ideas.
In this world everything has a purpose. Because there are so many fools, that is why there are so many foolish philosophies. Wherever there is a demand there is going to be a supply. So your wife must have needed something like that, and it is not time for her to come to me. Let her wander around.
There is a famous Sufi story…

A man went in search of a master. He was ready to go around the world, but he was determined to find the master, the True Master, the Perfect Master.
Outside his village he met an old man, a nice fellow, sitting under a tree. He asked the old man, “Have you ever heard in your long life – and the way I see it, you look like a wanderer…”
He said, “Yes, I am a wanderer. I wandered all over the Earth.”
The man said, “That is the right kind of person. Can you suggest to me where I should go? I want to be a disciple of a Perfect Master.”
The old man suggested a few addresses to him, and the young man thanked him and went on.
After thirty years wandering around the Earth, finding nobody who was exactly fulfilling his expectations, he came back dejected and depressed. The moment he was entering his village he saw the old man, who had become very old now, sitting under the tree. And suddenly he recognized that he is the master! He fell at his feet and he said, “Why didn’t you say it to me that you are the master?”
The old man said, “But that was not time for you. You could not recognize me. You needed some experience. Wandering around the Earth has given you a certain maturity, a certain understanding. Now you can see. Last time you also met me, but you did not see me. You missed. You were asking me about some master – that was enough proof that you could not see me, you could not feel my presence, you could not smell the fragrance. You were utterly blind; hence I gave you some bogus addresses so you could go. But even to be with wrong people is good, because that is how one learns. For thirty years I have been waiting for you here, I have not left this tree.”
In fact, the young man, who was not young anymore, looked at the tree and was even more surprised. Because in his dreams, in his visions he was always seeing that tree and there was always a feeling that he would find the master sitting under this tree. Last time he had not seen the tree at all. The tree was there, the master was there, everything was ready but he was not ready.

Let her wander, let her search. Don’t try to pull her here, otherwise she will even distract you. You have come home. Drink as much wine as you can out of me. Maybe your transformation will help her too.
These are not things which can be proved or argued about. And never argue with a woman. You will always be defeated because she does not argue logically. She simply jumps from one conclusion to another while the man follows the hard way – he completes the whole process of arguments. That is why it is almost impossible between husband and wife to come to any conclusion.

Mulla Nasruddin was saying to me, “I have never argued with my wife in my whole life.”
I said, “How did you manage it?”
He said, “The day we got married we decided that every nonessential thing” – remember Desiderata – “every nonessential thing she has to decide and I will decide only the essential ones. And we have remained true to our contract.”
I said, “What are the nonessential things?”
He said, “Almost everything.”
“And what are the essential things?”
He said, “For example: whether God exists or not, whether Jimmy Carter should be chosen again or not, whether Communism is the right thing or not, how many hells there are, one or seven. All the essential things I decide, and everything else – what type of car to purchase, what kind of food to eat, what kind of restaurant to go to, what kind of movie to see, which school, which hostel the children are to be sent to… Almost everything is a nonessential thing. It covers everything except the most essential. That I decide. And there is no argument, there is no question of argument.”

I think that is great wisdom. If every husband and wife decided “You decide the nonessential and I will decide the essential”… Anyway the wife is going to decide it, so why bother?
Leave her alone. You be transformed. Maybe seeing the transformation in you, seeing your blessing and benediction, she may be transformed, she may be converted. That is the only possibility. But not by dragging her, not by pulling her out, but helping her to be herself. Tell her, “You are completely free.” Don’t make her feel guilty. That is ugly and irreligious.

The last question:
Osho,
Why do you call Morarji Desai a Polack?
It is very rare in life to come across perfection, but Morarji Desai is a perfect Polack. It is a rare phenomenon. Perfection is not easy.
I call him a perfect Polack because that’s how he thinks. He thinks only in words; he has no experience, no experience about the ultimate, but he talks about it. Only a Polack can do that.
Just the other day I read this statement. He said he had one ambition to be fulfilled: to know God and attain the heights of truth. “I have not acquired the truth in totality yet,” he said, “nor had Mahatma Gandhi.” Now these words are enough to prove what I mean by being a perfect Polack.
In the first place any ambition is a barrier. Ambition for truth is a contradiction in terms. He is a politician, and all politicians are Polacks. He is a politician, he knows only the language of ambition. He knows no other language. And the ambitious person suffers from an inferiority complex, otherwise he will not be ambitious. He knows perfectly well that he is mediocre, that he is stupid. Just to hide the fact of his stupidity he tries to create some status, some outside status; he wants to become the president, the prime minister. His whole lifelong ambition was to be the prime minister. The day he became prime minister, he said immediately, “This is one of my ambitions which has been fulfilled. Now only one more is left, and that is God-realization. I want to know truth. That is my only ambition now.”
It is okay if you are ambitious to be a president or a prime minister, but one cannot be ambitious about knowing truth. That is a contradiction in terms.
Truth is known only when all ambitions have been dropped – the ambition for truth is included in it. When all ambitions and all desires have been dropped, suddenly truth is available. Truth is not somewhere far away. It is not that you have to reach to it, it is not a goal. It is already a given fact, it already exists in you. You can be ambitious for money, for power, for prestige, but you cannot be ambitious for truth. If you are ambitious for truth that means you are trying to find, search, seek – and truth is inside you. It is not to be sought because it is in the seeker himself. The moment all your outer seeking stops, the moment you have understood the futility of desire, the futility of ambition… In that state of non-ambitiousness, desirelessness, truth is revealed. And it is not revealed as something objective. It is your own interiority, it is your subjectivity.
Søren Kierkegaard says, “Truth is subjectivity,” and he is right. Jesus says, “The Kingdom of God is within you,” the same thing expressed in a different way. Buddha says, “There is no God. There is no self to be sought, just go in, turn in – a one hundred and eighty degree turn – and you will be surprised. The thing that you have been searching for for lives has always been inside you.” God is hiding within you. He is not in the Himalayas.
Now to say, “I am ambitious: the only ambition to be fulfilled now is to know the truth,” is to live in just words. He knows the word ambition, he knows the word truth but he has not experienced any meditativeness. If he had experienced even a drop of the nectar of meditation, he would have dropped the word ambition, it would have been impossible to use that word. That word is ugly.
And then he says, “I want to know God” – as if God is a person, as if God is something objective that you can know. There is no God to be known in that way. It is not a question of encountering God, you will not meet him somewhere. God is the name of absolute silence, the name of profound peace, a name – just a name – for overflowing love and bliss. God is nothing but godliness.
H. G. Wells says Gautama the Buddha was the most godless person and yet the most godly. H. G. Wells has a great insight there worth meditating upon: the most godless and the most godly.
All godly people have been godless. They have to be – aes dhammo sanantano – because this is the ultimate law. When you know, you know there is no God. Your very knowing, your awareness, your consciousness, is all that is.
But people who live in words go on talking about these things unconsciously.

One hundred Italian soldiers had only ninety-nine rifles with bayonets. Their sergeant said, “Everybody rush up the hill. You, Luigi, without a rifle, you just say, ‘Bang-bang, stick-stick.’”
They charged up the hill. Luigi came face to face with a six-and-a-half-foot tall Polack.
Luigi shouted, “Bang-bang, stick-stick.”
The Polack said, “Tank-tank!”

This is how theologians go on talking: God-God, self-self, truth-truth! But there is nothing else.

“Why are you huffing and puffing, Zbigniew?”
“I have just been on the slippery slide.”
“Why should you be out of breath from sliding down the slide?”
“Ah, down?”

He was trying to go up. That’s what ambition is. Ambition means going up, and non-ambition means slipping down into a state of nothingness.

Pulpushki showed up one morning at work with a big smile on his face.
“Why you so happy?” asked a co-worker.
“Thursday I find wife in bed with the electric meter reader!” explained the Polack, “Friday, I catch her taking samples from a salesman on the living room sofa. Saturday morning, the milkman do business with her on kitchen table. But I fix them all. No one get last laugh on Pulpushki. I just phone ‘Goodwill’ and tell them to take away the furniture – all the furniture of the house!”

Morarji Desai is a Polack, and a perfect Polack.
Enough for today.

============================================================

Be yourself. Especially do not feign affection. Neither be cynical about love; for in the face of all aridity and disenchantment, it is as perennial as the grass.
Take kindly the counsel of the years, gracefully surrendering the things of youth.
Nurture strength of spirit to shield you in sudden misfortune. But do not distress yourself with dark imaginings. Many fears are born of fatigue and loneliness.
Be yourself. These two words are enough to transform the whole of humanity; they can give birth to a new man. They are immensely pregnant with meaning. The past of humanity has been a constant effort not to be yourself; hitherto we have been told by the priests and the politicians and the pedagogues to be somebody else. “Be a Christ,” they say, and the people who are trying to be a Christ are the Christians. “Be a Buddha,” they say, and the people who are trying to be a Buddha are the Buddhists. No other Christ has yet happened, neither has a Buddha, and it is not going to happen ever. It is not in the nature of things.
History repeats, existence never repeats. History repeats itself because history is constituted by the unconscious humanity. Existence never repeats itself because existence is nothing but godliness, creativity. Creativity is non-repetitive, consciousness is non-repetitive. Unconsciousness is bound to repeat, it moves in a circle: it goes round and round in the same circle, it becomes more and more efficient in doing the same thing again and again. And the more efficient it becomes, the more difficult it is to go beyond the known.
The creative person is always leaving the known behind and moving into the unknown. To repeat somebody else is nothing but pretending, cheating, deceiving. It is beautiful to know Christ, it is beautiful to love Buddha, it is beautiful to understand Lao Tzu, but it is ugly, humiliating to repeat them, to be imitators.
But for centuries man has been conditioned to be somebody else. There are vested interests against you being yourself. The vested interests want you never to be yourself because they are afraid of anything new; everything new seems to be a danger to them. They are at ease with the old, hence they say, “All that is old is gold.” The older it is, the better.
Hindus say, “Our scriptures are the oldest, hence the best.” They go on trying to prove that their scriptures, their Vedas are far older than the historians recognize. The scientific historian concludes that they are not more than five thousand years old, but the Hindu chauvinist believes they are at least ninety thousand years old. That is at least; it is possible they may be older than that.
Why this effort to prove: “Our religion is so old”? – because the old is more valuable, has been more valuable in the past. The new has been condemned because the new cannot be absorbed by the establishment.
Jesus is dangerous to the Jews because they lived a certain pattern of life: following Moses, repeating Moses, trying to be carbon copies of the prophets of the Old Testament. And here comes this man Jesus who starts saying things which go against the tradition, convention.
The Old Testament says that “tit for tat” is the most fundamental law. If somebody throws a brick at you, reply by throwing a rock at him. If somebody takes out one of your eyes, take out both of the eyes of that man: murder for murder, violence for violence. Jesus says, “If somebody hits you on one cheek, give him the other cheek too because God is love.” But the Old Testament God is not love. God himself declares, “I am a very jealous God.” Now jealousy can never be love; it is impossible for jealousy to be loving. In the Old Testament God says, “Remember, I am not nice, I am not your uncle. Beware! I am a very jealous God. If you worship somebody else, some other God, then be ready to be punished – punished for eternity.”
And Jesus says, “Love your enemies just as you love yourself.” Jesus brings a new horizon with him. Every awakened master brings a new light, a new universe, a new perspective – and that is the trouble. Otherwise Jesus was not a troublemaker at all but a simple, innocent man.
Why did the Jews want him to be crucified? He was shaking their foundations, their very foundations. They had lived according to a certain ideology, and this man’s presence was proof enough that they were wrong. He was talking about higher values, higher truths. The whole establishment was shaken up.
The Jews were slaves, they were dominated by the Romans – and the Romans and the Jews conspired to kill Jesus. It was not only the Jews, remember: fifty percent of the crime was committed by the Jews in the case of Jesus’ crucifixion and fifty percent was committed by the Romans – because the Romans were politically powerful and the Jews, of course, had the religious tradition. The priests and the politicians both conspired. They were enemies in a way, because the Roman conquerors were not friendly with the conquered and the conquered were not friendly with the conquerors. But as far as Jesus was concerned, both agreed that he had to be destroyed because he was cutting the very roots of both establishments, the religious and the political.
But now Jesus is imitated, and a strange irony has occurred: he was killed by the Romans, who are now Italians – and now the Vatican has become their headquarters. Strange, but in a way significant, in a way not just accidental. Once Jesus himself was absorbed by the establishment, then there was no problem; he started functioning just like Moses. Before him it was said, “Be like Moses.” Now they started saying, “Be like Jesus.” Now Christianity was itself a part of the vested interests. The same people who had killed Jesus started worshipping him.
And it has been happening almost all over the world. It happened with Mahavira, it happened with Buddha, it happened with Lao Tzu, it happened with Nanak, it happened with Mohammed. The same people… They are not different people – the same unconscious humanity.
One thing can be concluded: the unconscious humanity always worships the established structure because it is familiar with it. And a man like Jesus or Buddha or Krishna is a stranger. He does not belong to the common, he does not belong to the unconscious; he comes as if from another world. He speaks a different language, he brings new messages – and the masses are afraid to go into the unknown, into the unexperienced. They cling to the old, to the past, to the dead. They worship the dead and they destroy the living.
To perpetuate this stupid ideology everybody is told to be somebody else. That helps the establishment tremendously, for two reasons. First: by trying to be somebody else your life will be a mess because you can never be somebody else. That is impossible – you can only be yourself. So trying to be somebody else you are distracted from your authentic being; your energies will be wasted. You will be in a constant conflict with yourself, you will be in a civil war. Your mind will represent the past and your heart will go on saying, “Be yourself.” But the mind makes so much noise, you cannot hear the heart. You will be split, you will be schizophrenic: one part moving in one direction and the other part moving in the opposite direction. You will be always in a kind of tug-of-war. Your life will be of tension, anxiety, anguish.
And a man who lives in anguish can be easily enslaved because his energies are always wasted. He has no more energy to be rebellious. To be rebellious one needs energy, one needs to be a reservoir of energy. In fact, overflowing energy is needed to be a rebel because you will be fighting against millions, you will be fighting against a long, long tradition. You will be fighting many, many vested interests, and they are powerful people. The rich, the religious, the political, those who are dominating the society and exploiting it, are bound to be powerful. You will be powerless, so powerless that you cannot even raise your head. You cannot say no, you cannot assert yourself.
So on the one hand this is a very subtle psychological strategy to destroy your energy. It is just like this: watch a bull – he has energy. You cannot use the bull in a bullock cart; it is dangerous. If you use two bulls in a bullock cart it is very dangerous. First it will be almost impossible to keep them on the road, they will be so powerful. They can run into the fields – if they see some cow, a beautiful cow, they will forget all about you and your cart, and everything will go upside down! First the bulls have to be castrated. Once a bull is castrated he is no longer the same animal; the ox is a faraway echo of the bull. He is weak, his energies have been destroyed. Now he can be enslaved; it is so easy.
And to castrate human beings this strategy has been used: your parents say to you, your teachers say to you, everybody around you goes on saying to you, “Be a Buddha, be a Krishna, be a Jesus, be a Zarathustra,” but never, “Be yourself.” This is a psychological castration: they create guilt in you – if you are yourself you will feel guilty. And you can never be the person you are trying to be, but in the effort energy is wasted and their purpose is fulfilled. Your life will be a life of misery because you can feel joy only if you are yourself.
The rose is beautiful dancing in the wind, in the sun, in the rain, because it has not wasted itself in trying to be a lotus. The lotus is beautiful for the same reason. The marigold is beautiful, all the flowers are beautiful, for the simple reason that they are just themselves. Think of a rose trying to be a lotus. Sooner or later it will end up in a psychoanalyst’s office, it will drive itself crazy, it will go nuts! And in trying to be a lotus its whole energy will be wasted, and it will not be possible even for it to be a rose. Or if it becomes possible at all then it will be a very poor rose with no color, with no perfume, with no dance, with no song.
You can see it everywhere: people are looking so sad, so burdened, as if they are carrying mountains on their shoulders. And they are carrying a psychological weight; they have been burdened, they have been knowingly burdened.
If a child is continuously told that he is not to be himself, that he is worthless… The parents say, “I will love you only if you behave in a certain way” – that is, according to them, according to their idea. The child has to survive; hence he has to listen to the parents. All children are beautiful like roses – small children, before the age of three, are beautiful. You can see their joy overflowing; they are flooded with energy. You cannot compete with a child as far as energy is concerned.
In an American university they did an experiment. They told a great wrestler, a man of immense power, that he has to follow a small child and do whatsoever the child does. “If the child jumps, you jump; if the child runs, you run; if the child starts rolling on the ground, you roll on the ground. Do whatsoever the child does. If the child screams, you scream; if the child giggles, you giggle. Just imitate the child.”
Within three hours he was flat on the ground. He said, “I cannot continue. This child will drive me crazy!” And the child enjoyed the whole thing because, seeing that a grown-up person was imitating him, he did many more things that he had never done before. He stood on his head, he invented so many things just to see whether this man could do them or not. In three hours the child was as full of energy as before and he said, “Are you finished? What happened?”
You cannot follow a child; he has overflowing energy. But we start curbing, cutting, chunk by chunk. We start creating a small prison around the child – a psychological prison, of course. Slowly, slowly the child shrinks, becomes more and more encaged. By the time he comes out of the university he is stupid, mediocre, with no energy, with all kinds of foolish ideologies – full of bullshit. And all that he was is lost. Now he is just an imitator, a carbon copy.
Desiderata has a great message: Be yourself. And this has been the message of all the enlightened ones. Buddha says: “Be a light unto yourself.” That was his last statement. Dying, on the deathbed, he opened his eyes and gave his last message to humanity: “Be a light unto yourself” – don’t imitate anybody.
On the one hand imitation makes you weak, on the other hand it makes you miserable. Weak and miserable, that is how the vested interests want you. And they have found such a beautiful trick that unless you are very intelligent you are bound to be trapped – because who would not like to be like Jesus? The idea fascinates. Who would not like to be a Buddha? It hypnotizes. Buddha is beauty – pure beauty, pure grace. Who would not like to be a Buddha?
Hence the child cannot say to the parents or to the teachers that they are wrong. It appeals even to his reason; it feels reasonable, sensible. And it does one tremendous harm, it makes you hate yourself. You cannot love yourself, and the more you fail in being the other, the more you hate yourself.
I have observed thousands of people, I have been working on thousands of people continuously, and my own observation is that I rarely come across a person who loves himself.
Jesus says: “Love your enemies as you love yourself,” and you would think that it is a very difficult thing to love your enemies. No, it is not. The real difficulty is to love yourself. You can love your enemies, that is not that difficult at all. The real difficulty is to love yourself, to respect yourself, to accept yourself as you are, unconditionally. And that is the beginning of the revolution, the beginning of the transformation.
My whole teaching can be condensed into these two words: Be yourself.
Just the other day I quoted Morarji Desai as saying that he had only one ambition to be fulfilled: to know God and attain the heights of truth. What harm has God done to Morarji Desai? Why should he be after God? Is it not enough to know oneself? Does one have to know God? Why? For what? And what are you going to do even if you know God? You will still be as foolish as you are now – even if you come across God, what are you going to do? You will say, “Hello, how are you? The weather is fine!” What else? What are you really going to do? By knowing God you will not know yourself; and how can an ignorant person who does not know himself know God?
The authentic seeker has nothing to do with God; he wants to know himself. That is the most fundamental thing: to know oneself. Because out of that all knowing, all light arises. If one knows oneself one will know God too. In fact, only by knowing oneself does one become capable of knowing the ultimate, because at the very core of your being the ultimate is present. But religions say: “Know God, try to realize God.” That is again a strategy, the same strategy to distract you from yourself.
And these people like Morarji Desai think they are religious; they are not religious at all. The religious person has only one longing – and remember, it is not an ambition, it is a longing. And there is a difference, a tremendous difference, between ambition and longing. Ambition is of the mind, longing is of the heart. They belong to different centers.
When you fall in love with somebody it is not an ambition. You feel the pain in the heart, not in the head. You don’t have a headache. I have never heard of anybody falling in love who feels a headache, but heartache certainly everybody who has fallen in love has felt. Heartache, and that is a totally different phenomenon. Whenever you talk about love you don’t put your hand on the head, you put your hand on the heart. Your body knows better than you exactly where the center is. The heart longs, thirsts, yearns, but there is no ambition.
Morarji Desai is a poor politician; he knows only the language of ambition. Now he has fulfilled his one ambition of being the prime minister of India; there is no higher post in India than prime minister. Now that he has been prime minister the only ambition the political mind can have is to know God.
It is very strange. In the first place, how do you know that God exists? If you have not known God yet, how can you start being ambitious for God? One thing is absolutely certain, indubitably certain: “I exist.” You cannot deny yourself because even your denial will prove that you are.
There are a few things which cannot be denied. For example, you are in your house and somebody asks, “Are you in?” You cannot say, “I am not.” If you say, “I am not,” that is enough proof that you are in. If you are lying down with closed eyes and somebody asks, “Are you awake?” and you say, “I am not, I am fast asleep,” that is enough proof that you are awake, you are not asleep. There are a few things which cannot be denied because even the denial proves its opposite.
One of the great Western philosophers, Descartes, worked for years to find something which is indubitable, which cannot be doubted. Only something which cannot be doubted can be the foundation of a valid philosophy, and ultimately he decided, “I am the only thing that cannot be denied, that cannot be doubted, because even to doubt it is to prove it.”
And that has been the teaching of Socrates, Buddha, Desiderata. Socrates says: “Know thyself.” It is the same – be thyself or know thyself – because knowing who you are will help you to be yourself, or trying to be yourself will help you to know who you are.
Ramana Maharishi, one of the greatest masters who has lived in this age, used to say to his disciples, “I teach you only one mantra: ‘Who am I?’ Go deep into it: ‘Who am I?’ – not only repeating it but being in the feel of it. Let it become an existential question, not just words. Let your whole being become the question mark. ‘Who am I?’ Let it penetrate you like an arrow.”
Once you have known yourself, all is known and to know all is to know God. God is not a person that you have to come across; God is a quality. But to experience that quality, the first, basic thing needed is self-knowledge.
Morarji Desai also says, “I want to attain the heights of truth.” The same political language, the same political mind: “heights of truth.” The desire is to be higher than everybody else, and something unconscious has also come into it. He says, “I have not acquired the truth in totality yet, nor did Mahatma Gandhi.”
The first thing is: truth cannot be divided into parts. You don’t acquire truth in installments, truth is not acquired in degrees. Either you know or you don’t know. You cannot say, “I know only a little bit of truth.” That is impossible. It is impossible, just as you cannot say that an arc is a little bit of a circle. Circle means the whole; if it is not a perfect circle it is not a circle at all.
Truth is indivisible; you cannot have it in parts, by and by. Hence the realization of truth is sudden, not gradual. It is not that first you acquire one kilo of truth and then another kilo of truth, and so on and so forth. Either you have it or you don’t have it. It is a radical transformation, it is a mutation.
It is just like either you are alive or dead. You cannot say, “I am just a little bit alive.” That is not possible. Even if you are a little bit alive you are fully alive – you are alive.
Morarji Desai says, “I have not attained truth in its totality.” Truth is always total. And suddenly he brings Mahatma Gandhi in; that is something unconscious erupting, “…nor had Mahatma Gandhi.” Because that is his ultimate desire: to be like Mahatma Gandhi. His whole effort his whole life has been trying to be like Mahatma Gandhi. So suddenly he remembers that there is no need to be worried – Mahatma Gandhi has also not acquired truth in its totality. He wants to be another mahatma.
Mahatma Gandhi is wrong in saying that he has not attained truth in its totality; he was on the wrong track himself. He was also trying to be like Krishna. He said, “Srimad Bhagavad Gita is my mother.” He wanted to be like Krishna, but he failed – everybody has to fail in such efforts – and he was frustrated, deeply frustrated for it. His whole life he was trying to become perfect, but the idea is always of somebody else.
Once he had even contemplated becoming a Christian because Christ attracted him very much and he wanted to be a Christ. He was reading Tolstoy and Ruskin and Thoreau, and they were all great Christians – but Christians, remember – and they impressed him very much. And he started contemplating whether to become a Christian or not.
He was born in Gujarat, which is very much influenced by Jaina philosophy. Even the Hindus of Gujarat are almost Jainas. And from his very childhood he had seen Jaina monks and he was very much impressed by the Jaina monks and their idea of nonviolence. He wanted to become a Mahavira – but it is always somebody else.
Then he came in contact with a Jaina scholar, Srimat Rajchandra, and he became very much impressed. He says “These three people are my great teachers: Srimat Rajchandra” – the Jaina scholar. I call him a scholar because he is not a realized person. He knows all about the scriptures, he quotes scriptures, but he has not known himself. “Second,” Mahatma Gandhi says, “my teacher is Tolstoy” – who loved Christ very much and tried to be like Christ and failed, utterly failed, lived in great misery. Very few people have lived in such misery as Tolstoy did. His whole life was an agony, he never knew any moment of ecstasy. Imitators cannot know it. And he says, “My third teacher is Henry Thoreau” – who was also trying to be like Christ. They were themselves imitators, and Mahatma Gandhi was trying to imitate the imitators – a carbon copy of a carbon copy. And Morarji Desai is a carbon copy of the carbon copy of the carbon copy! He is trying to be Mahatma Gandhi.
Just this morning I came across another statement of his. He says, “I have complete faith in God, and that I consider to be my greatest achievement.”
This mind always talks of achievement, ambition, heights. It is always on a power trip. And how foolish it is. On the one hand he says, “I have the ambition to know God.” He has not known God, that much is certain. On the other hand he says, “I have attained to complete faith in God and that is my greatest achievement.” How can you have complete faith in something you have not known? Your faith must be repressing your doubts somewhere. Hence the word complete – he himself is afraid. Just the word faith won’t do; it has to be complete, it has to be absolute, it has to be categorical. The statement shows that there is doubt, otherwise faith is enough; there is no need to say, “complete faith.” Is there any possibility of incomplete faith?
When you say to a woman, “I love you,” that is enough. You don’t go on saying, “I love you absolutely, I love you categorically, I love you completely, entirely!” If you say all these things with all these adjectives she may become a little aware that something is missing – why this emphasis?
There is some unconscious fear.

A ventriloquist traveling in the interior of Brazil was taking a ride in a bullock cart with a Brazilian who was very silent. So to break the silence the ventriloquist decided to play with him a little. “Listen, friend, did you know that your bull speaks?” he told him.
The Brazilian did not believe him, but at that exact moment the bull started talking to him. The Brazilian was astonished. Then a horse passed by and said, “Good morning,” to the man; then came a cow and she spoke too.
Following these animals up the road was a very charming white goat. Moving her body graciously, the goat stopped right by the side of the cart, stared at the Brazilian and started to say something. But the Brazilian cut her off and said to the ventriloquist, “Don’t believe her, she is the worst liar!”

Now, some fear!
These people like Morarji Desai go on in very stupid circles – complete faith in something that he knows not, only ambition for that which he knows not, a claim that he has achieved a little bit of truth – as if truth can be divided. But in a way he represents the ordinary, unconscious humanity. He is representative; that is how millions of people go on thinking and behaving.
The greatest root cause of it all is that you have been told constantly, you have been conditioned and hypnotized constantly for thousands of years: “Don’t be yourself.” It has not been said so directly, it is said in a roundabout way: “Be a Buddha, be a Christ, be a Mohammed.” But have you ever heard your parents saying to you, “Just be yourself”? No parent will ever say that to any child, for the simple reason that he himself is afraid – if the child is allowed to be just himself he may not be obedient. He may start doing things that are against the ideas of the parents. He may start living a life that is not conforming, is not conventional. He may turn out to be a rebel. And it is better to kill that rebellion in the very seed.
Hence so much misery in the world, no laughter at all, and no love – because if you cannot love yourself, how can you love anybody else? The first person to be loved is your own being. Unless love happens inside you for yourself it cannot radiate and reach to others. A man who is a darkness inside cannot be a light to others. Only a man who is a light in himself may be capable of radiating a little light to others too.
The whole of humanity is living in a deep, deep sleep.

Miss Gambioni was a new patient and quite pretty. The doctor took her name and background and then said, “In order to determine what is wrong with you, I will have to give you a thorough examination. Please get completely undressed.
“Okay, doc,” said the Italian beauty, “but to make me feel right, you first!”

Your unconscious goes on erupting into your consciousness. If you watch a little carefully you will become aware of your sleep – you may even hear yourself snoring!

A drunk staggered into a pub in the East End of London and ordered a gin. He promptly threw up all over a small dog sitting beside the bar. His drink arrived, and in that moment of clarity when strong liquor hits the back of the throat, he looked down, saw the dog covered in vomit and muttered to himself, “That’s odd! I don’t remember eating that!”

A young monk went to a prostitute and said, “I know nothing about sex. Will you teach me?”
“Okay,” said the prostitute, “but it will cost you fifty quid.”
He agreed and paid her the money in advance. She disrobed, then undressed him and told him to lie down and said that she would start with the sixty-nine position. When she climbed on top of him, she accidentally farted in his face.
“Sorry!” she said, and climbed back on again farting one more time as she did so.
“Fuck this!” the monk shouted as he jumped up from underneath her.
“What’s the matter?” asked the prostitute.
“Well,” replied the monk, “I don’t think I can stand another sixty-seven of those!”

Man has been forced to remain unconscious, he has been forced to remain in a deep slumber. You are being driven through many subtle ways to remain drunk with power, with money, with prestige, with fame, name. All these are different kinds of opium. Power makes people so drunk, money makes people so drunk. Ambition is the greatest intoxicant invented ever.
Desiderata says:
Be yourself. Especially do not feign affection.
That too is of tremendous importance. When you are trying to be somebody else, naturally you start acting. The Buddhist monk acts like a Buddha, the Hindu sannyasin acts like Shankaracharya, the pope tries to imitate Christ. Just a few days ago the pope climbed up a hill near the Vatican, a small hillock, with a small cross on his shoulders, and thousands of Italians followed him. He was acting the role of Jesus, and Italians very much loved the whole play. It was a drama.
Just the other night I was telling an Italian sannyasin, “Come back soon because all the intelligent Italians are coming here. Where are you going?” She is going back. All the Italians who have eyes are coming here – I call them “Eyetalians”! Only the blind will be left behind; all “Eyetalians” are going to be here.
This pope is blind. In the first place a Polack being a pope, then trying to dramatize Jesus with a small cross – a child can carry it. When Jesus carried the cross up the hill, three times he had to fall and each time he fell because the cross was very heavy – a wooden cross, a big cross. It must have been at least seven or eight feet long; to crucify a man it has to be that long. He fell thrice, and each time he was whipped to get up again and carry the cross.
Now carrying a small cross… And do you know? The cross was made of gold! The pope carried a golden cross. At least they should have crucified him on the hillock! Let it be a golden cross – crucify him, be finished with this whole nonsense! But no, nothing like that happened – the real thing never happened. Just carrying the cross up the hill and down the hill.
And on the hill he did only one thing: he washed the feet of a poor man and kissed the feet of the poor man. And I know perfectly well that that poor man must have been prepared for this. You know Italians! He must have been given a good bath and a rubbing and massage, and his feet must have been clean. This whole drama! But in the name of religion there is drama everywhere.
And particularly when you start imitating, you will imitate everything. You will imitate love, and that is the most dangerous thing. Jesus loved, so you will start loving. But how can you love unless you attain the consciousness that Jesus attained? Love is a fragrance. When the one thousand-petaled-lotus of consciousness opens in you, the fragrance is released. If you start feigning it, that will be just artificial. You can bring perfume from the marketplace and you can start throwing the perfume all over yourself, and of course it will stink because it will not be your own flowering. It will be artificial and ugly.
And once a person starts feigning love, his whole life becomes false because love is the center of life. Love is the very purpose of life, the destiny of life. Desiderata has a great message there: Especially do not feign affection.
If you feign affection you will feign intelligence, you will feign freedom – you will start pretending everything else. A man who is capable of deceiving himself that he loves without loving is so stupid that he will imitate everything and will believe it, but your life will show that that’s not so.

I have heard about a Christian monk who was always sermonizing on the message of Jesus that if somebody slaps you on one cheek, give him the other too.
A man became interested in the idea and he thought, “Let us try it on him – whether he proves by his response that what he says he lives too, practices too or not.”
So he slapped him really hard on one cheek, and he was surprised: the Christian monk gave him the other cheek. But the man was not going to be defeated so easily – he slapped him on the other cheek too.
The moment he slapped him on the other cheek, the Christian monk jumped on him and started beating him.
He said, “What are you doing? Have you forgotten your sermon? Have you forgotten your Christ? What are you doing?”
He said, “Jesus said only once that if somebody slaps you on one cheek give him the other. And I don’t have another cheek anymore – only two. Now the message is finished! Now I am free! Now I will show you what it means to hit somebody.”

Once Buddha replied to one of his disciples who was asking, “Bhagwan, you always say forgive, but how many times?” In fact, to ask that question is enough proof that the disciple has not understood. It is not a question of how many times: forgiveness simply means you accept the person as he is, you still love him the way he is. Forgiveness means that you don’t judge him, that you are non-judgmental.
But ordinarily we think forgiveness means you know that he has done wrong, still you forgive him. First you judge and then you forgive. Your forgiveness is false.
Real forgiveness has no judgment. It never says, “No, you have done wrong, but still I forgive you.” It simply accepts the person as he is. There is no grudge, no complaint, no grumbling. There is no question really of forgiving because there is no anger in the first place.
But the man asked, “How many times?”
Buddha said to him, “At least seven times.”
The man said, “Okay.”
The way he said okay, Buddha said, “Wait! Seventy-seven times, or better, seven hundred and seventy-seven times.”

But even seven hundred and seventy-seven times will be exhausted – then what about seven hundred and seventy-eight? Then he will take revenge with a vengeance, because all those seven hundred and seventy-seven times have to be taken care of; he has to take revenge for all those too. He was somehow tolerating – somehow. It was not out of understanding.
If you feign, if you pretend, you become pseudo. A man who has a pseudo personality loses all intelligence, and that is the greatest loss in the world.

Lukowski had come to such desperate straits he kidnapped a millionaire’s son, a boy of six.
Lukowski wrote a ransom note, asked for half a million dollars in small bills – and signed his name. But he forgot the address of the millionaire, so he gave the note to the kid and told him to take it to his father. The boy did, and when he returned with the money there was also a note from the victim. “Here is your filthy money and I gotta say it is a rotten thing for one Polack to do to another.”

That is why I say the whole Earth has become Poland!

Kazewski and Candelli agreed to a bet on who could make love to his wife more times in one night. They took adjoining hotel rooms and decided that each time they succeeded they would carve a notch on the wall.
Candelli performed once at ten o’clock and placed a scratch on the wall. Then at two a.m. he drew another gash. By six o’clock he had three scratches.
At eight in the morning the Polack came in and looked at the marks. “My God! One hundred and eleven!” cried the Polack. “He beat me by three!”

Corporal Torlonia had been overseas for eighteen months. He came home and found he had a three-week-old baby. His wife explained that she dreamt she had intercourse with him, and she got pregnant.
Torlonia sued for divorce. In court even the judge was astounded by the wife’s story. He stood up and asked the audience if they had ever had intercourse with a ghost.
In the back, Torlonia’s father raised his hand. His Honor called him to the bench. “Now,” said the judge, “you say you had intercourse with a ghost?”
“Ah, scusa,” said the elderly Italian, “I thought-a you say-a goat!”

Pseudo people are bound to hear something else. They are bound to see that which is not. They are bound to miss that which is, because in their very beings they have deceived themselves. Now their whole lives will be again and again missing the point.
The first thing one has to remember is to be whole, not to be divided, not to become two persons. And the teaching “Be like somebody else” always creates two persons in you. One is just a facade, superficial, and you have to live a double life. In your drawing-room you are one person, in your bathroom you are another. You have to live a double life. At the front door you are totally different and at the back door simply somebody else. This split can become so deep that you completely forget: when you are one you forget the other, when you are the other you forget the first one.
This is what happens to schizophrenic patients. And now schizophrenic patients are growing every day in the world, in increasing numbers, as if humanity has come to a climax. Enough is enough! Thousands of years of stupid teachings have brought this sad state of affairs.
Neither be cynical about love…
Love is something natural. You can doubt God, there is no problem in it. In fact, one should doubt God because unless you doubt, the inquiry cannot begin. One should begin one’s inquiry into God as an atheist; to begin as a theist is to begin in a wrong way. You have already believed, now how can you inquire? I am not saying disbelieve in God because that again is a belief, a negative belief. Begin with doubt – doubt is natural.
Every child is born with doubt; no child is born with belief, remember. No child comes as a Mohammedan or a Hindu or a Jaina or a Buddhist or a Christian or a Jew. Every child comes with thousands of questions; hence doubt is a God-given gift.
But Desiderata is right: don’t doubt love because love is also a gift from existence; you bring it with you. Each child is loving, is very responsive toward love. Just smile at a child; the moment he feels your love he is ready to come to you – with great trust. Each child knows something of love.
Both love and doubt are gifts given by existence, but you should not doubt love because to doubt love is dangerous. One natural gift will start destroying another natural gift. You will be in a conflict. And if you start doubting love you will start repressing it. If you start doubting love you will become incapable of loving, you will become closed.
The moment your loving becomes encapsulated you are lost, because you lose the very bridge between you and existence.
Neither be cynical about love; for in the face of all aridity and disenchantment, it is as perennial as the grass.
A beautiful statement: a beatitude, a benediction, a blessing. Meditate over it: It is as perennial as the grass in the face of aridity and disenchantment. Your life is arid like a desert. If there is no love then your life will be dry, there will be no juice. There will be no flowering in your life, nothing of greenery. You will be just dry, hard.
And there is disenchantment, disillusionment on every step, because each desire is bound to come to disillusionment. You desire money and you hope that when the money is there you will be happy. The moment money is there, suddenly you realize you are not happy. Money is there, but the happiness has not followed it. Money cannot purchase happiness; it can purchase comfort.
I am not against money and I am not against comfort either, but comfort is comfort; happiness is a totally different phenomenon. Comfort is good, but it is not happiness, it is not blissfulness, it is not fulfillment. You can live comfortably and die comfortably, but that will not make you contented.
Money can purchase many things, but there are a few things it cannot purchase and those are the few things which are really valuable. The really valuable has no price, it is priceless, you have to deserve it.
Life is bound to be arid, desertlike, if you don’t have any love in you. It is going to be a continuous disillusionment, from one disillusionment to another. By the time you reach to the very end you are nothing but a sad, sad story: “…a tale told by an idiot, full of sound and fury signifying nothing.”
People die utterly disillusioned. People die complaining against life. And you cannot expect gratitude from them toward existence; you cannot expect prayerfulness, you cannot expect any thankfulness, because they have not known anything for which they can be thankful to existence. And the whole thing was missed because they missed love.
Love is …as perennial as the grass. Love is the only experience which transcends death. All that is given to you by existence, which are many things: intelligence is there, compassion is there, sympathy is there, creativity is there, sensitivity is there, and so on and so forth, but love is the only experience in which time disappears. Love is the only experience in which naturally you enter into meditation. Love is the only experience in which you are not afraid of death at all.
Lovers are the only people who can die joyfully because they have known something, tasted something of the nectar. They have tasted something of immortality. In those few moments of love, windows have opened and they have experienced that which is beyond.
Desiderata trusts deeply in love, so never doubt love. Doubt God, nothing is wrong in it; doubt truth, nothing is wrong in it; doubt everything else, but never doubt love because if you doubt love you close all doors. If you don’t doubt love, then sooner or later everything else will come on its own accord.
It is love experienced that one day becomes prayer, and it is prayer that one day becomes the experience of godliness.
Take kindly the counsel of the years, gracefully surrendering the things of youth.
People don’t seem to learn anything. They go on from one stupidity to another. From one disillusionment they immediately start moving toward another. They never seem to learn.
An intelligent person learns. An unintelligent person simply goes on dragging himself from one failure into another failure. He never sees the whole truth of all these experiences. How many times have you been disillusioned? How many times have you loved a woman? And each time something went wrong, and you started hoping again with another woman or another man; again the same thing happens. What do you learn out of it? Do you learn something or not? It is not a question of the woman; by changing the woman again and again you are not going to be fulfilled.

I have heard about a Hollywood actor who married forty times, and when he married the fortieth time he married a woman he had married already once before. But he could not recognize her, so much time had passed. He recognized her only because he recognized the mother-in-law – then he recognized that this was the same woman.

But this is not an exceptional experience. Whomsoever you marry you will be marrying the same woman. Mothers-in-law will be different, but the woman will be the same, the man will be the same, because you are the chooser – and you are as unconscious as before, you have not learned anything.
If your love fails, that simply means you don’t know what love is. It is not the fault of the woman, it is not the fault of the man. If you are a real inquirer you will see: “Something is wrong with my love. Either it is just pseudo – I am feigning it, I am just pretending – or my love has so many conditions that it destroys the other’s freedom, that it destroys and reduces the other person into a thing. Something is wrong with me, my love.”
But people always decide something is wrong with the woman, something is wrong with the man. They hope that if they can have a palace they will be happy, but they will be in the same situation, they will be the same. Hence, whether you live in a hut or in a palace does not matter; it all depends on you. The miserable person living in the hut will be miserable in the palace too. Maybe there he will have more space to be miserable! And vice versa is also true: there are many other fools who think if they renounce the palace and move to a beggar’s hut they will be happy; that is the same logic. If you are not happy even in a palace, you will not be happy in a hut either. Yes, more uncomfortable, but not more happy – unless you are a masochist, unless you enjoy torturing yourself. Then it is a different matter.
Take kindly the counsel of the years… Life teaches you everything that you need. Life is the only university. Take the counsel of the years very kindly, very understandingly: …gracefully surrendering the things of youth. In fact, each day one has to surrender many things of yesterday; each day one has to die to the past. When you were a child you were so interested in toys, all kinds of toys. When you became young you renounced those toys. In fact, you did not deliberately renounce, you simply became a grown-up and they withered away from your mind, they disappeared.
One day it was so difficult to go to bed without your teddy bear. But learning is difficult: the teddy bear has disappeared – now it is very difficult to go to sleep without your wife or without your husband. Now the wife is the teddy bear, or the husband. The child has his own ways. For example, he will cling to the blanket and then only can he go to sleep. Now you have to make love before you can go to sleep – just a replacement, but nothing has been learned. A new habit, a new substitute, but you are the same childish person.
The child used to go to sleep only when the mother gave her breast to him; now you will play with the breasts of your wife. It is the same old foolishness. At least the child has some reason; you don’t have any reason at all. Have you seen the silliness of it? Playing with the breasts of your woman, can’t you see your silliness? What are you doing? The child has some reason – the breast is his nourishment – but you have not gone beyond it yet. You are still clinging to something, of course unconsciously.

Mrs. Glowicki was walking down the street with her right breast exposed. A man stopped her and with some embarrassment pointed it out.
“Oh, my God,” cried the Polish woman, “I left my baby on the bus!”

The child has some reason, it is his nourishment – but a grown-up person looking always at the breasts of women, or avoiding them; it is the same. If you are a monk you will avoid, but what are you avoiding? Whatsoever you are avoiding you want to see. And women know it perfectly well, so they go on pretending to have big breasts: using artificial breasts, many artificial devices to make the breasts look young. The real breasts may be just hanging down touching their belly buttons, but fools are deceived.

Madhuri, one of my sannyasins, was telling me that she was traveling by car with her mother in Mexico; the mother was driving the car. Her mother is also a sannyasin. The mother’s breasts have been operated on, both the breasts have been removed, so she has plastic substitutes for the breasts. And of course, plastic substitutes look far better, hidden behind the clothes.
When she stopped at a crossroad to inquire from a policeman which way led to a certain place, the policeman’s eyes became fixed on her breasts. She said, “Do you like them?”
The policeman was a little embarrassed, but he said, “Yes, they are beautiful!”
So she took them out and gave them to him!

But for centuries man has been obsessed with breasts: in paintings, in poetry, in sculpture. Go to Khajuraho and see the fantastic ideas about breasts. In fact, the breasts are so big one feels sorry for the woman. How will she carry such big breasts? Impossible, it seems. Those women are just stone statues; that is good. If they were alive they would not be able even to walk – they would have to crawl! But who made these sculptures? The people who have not become grown-up yet; childhood is still there.
You become a young man or a young woman only on the surface; deep down the child is still trying to live. One becomes old, but the youth persists psychologically. It is very rare to find an old man and wise. You can find many dirty old men, but old men and wise is very difficult because wisdom’s first necessity is renouncing the past. Every day it has to be renounced, that is the counsel of the years: …gracefully surrendering the things of the past.
When you are young, surrender the things of your childhood. When you are old, surrender the things of your youth. Go on surrendering gracefully – and remember the word gracefully. Don’t escape, don’t run, don’t avoid, don’t close your eyes. That is not grace. That simply shows you are as ignorant as ever, just pretending to be holy. Gracefully means through understanding, through real growing. Growing in age is not growing up, that is only aging. Growing up happens only when you go on renouncing the past every day, every moment really. Each moment die to the past that is no more. Come out of it so you can remain fresh, so you can remain clean, so you can remain clear. Only that clarity can encounter the ultimate truth.
Nurture strength of spirit to shield you in sudden misfortune.
That is the only moment when you can see whether you have real intelligence or not, when there is something sudden. Otherwise you are always prepared. Even a stupid person can be prepared if he knows beforehand what is going to happen. That’s why people want to live always in the familiar and in the known, because there they can have the joy of being intelligent. Sudden situations for which you don’t have any ready-made answer in your memory store show whether you are intelligent, wise, or not.

A sergeant took his troop of new recruits to a nearby pine forest to practice tactics. “I want you to spread out among the trees,” he said, “and when I give the signal, you freeze. Imagine enemy planes overhead looking for you – one movement and they’ll blast you all to bacon! Okay men, get to it!”
During the maneuvers the sergeant spotted, to his annoyance, a few fidgeting figures and noticed, with pleasure, one promising young recruit so still he really seemed frozen. Hardly had the sergeant’s beady eye moved on than the same young soldier was suddenly tearing through the forest as if being chased by a whole army.
After rounding up the troop, the sergeant bellowed at the young recruit and demanded to know why he had suddenly bolted like a frightened rabbit after starting the exercise so well.
“Sorry, sarge,” said the young offender. “You see, a pair of squirrels got up my trouser legs.”
“That’s no excuse, boy!” bellowed the sergeant. “Even while sitting on an ants’ nest, in the sight of the enemy, you have to be still!”
“But, sir,” protested the soldier, “It was fine until I overheard one squirrel say to the other, ‘Wow, look at these nuts! Let’s eat one now and store the other for the winter!’”

In sudden situations, how do you respond? Only that shows whether you have any intelligence or not. Nurture strength of spirit… And what is strength of spirit? Intelligence.
But do not distress yourself with dark imaginings.
The mind always enjoys imagining about misfortunes. The mind lives, feeds on misfortune, real or unreal.
Desiderata says:
…do not distress yourself with dark imaginings. Many fears are born of fatigue and loneliness.
So don’t fight with yourself, otherwise you will be fatigued; you will be always tired, in a state of low energy. And then dark clouds will surround you, nightmares will happen to you, and loneliness.
Loneliness is felt only by those who have lost the capacity to love, who have forgotten the language of love. Then they are lonely. Lonely, fighting with themselves, fatigued, tired, they can be enslaved by the establishment.
Desiderata brings you a message of freedom, a simple but tremendously significant message. If you can follow it you will be a free man, you will know the joys of freedom. And they are the ultimate joys; there is nothing higher than that.
Be yourself.
Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
When my children knew I was coming to see you, the only thing they wanted was for me to bring back some of your jokes. They told me that all the stuff between the jokes was good for grown-ups, but for them just the jokes. So could you tell us some jokes for Nathan, twelve years, Andrew, eleven years, Rosemary, ten years, and Benjamin, five years.
They are such lovely intelligent people, but I have a soft spot for Benjamin because he is quite crazy – he wants to take sannyas. And my wife is also quite crazy, but the other way. She hides my red tailor-made suits and threatens to cut off the sleeves if I wear them, and she hides your pictures. First the photograph falls down, then it is turned to the wall, then it is on a shelf, then she cannot remember where it is. So I wear pink shirts and meditate in your presence without your photograph.
Perhaps you could tell her a story too.
Every child is intelligent, far more intelligent than the so-called grown-ups. The grown-ups are only “so-called,” it is very rare to come across a person who is really a grown-up person. The most fundamental quality in a really grown-up person will be that he still keeps the innocence of the child alive, the wondering eyes of the child, the inquiring heart of the child. The purity, the clarity of the child will remain intact in him. He has defeated the society. He has not allowed anybody to destroy his intelligence.
People only grow in age, they don’t grow up. Growing up is something vertical, growing in age is something horizontal. You remain on the same plane; just time passes by. And of course, time helps you to collect many experiences, knowledge, words and information, and you start thinking that you know. And that is the greatest calamity that can happen to any man: not knowing and believing that you know. It means now the doors for knowing are closed forever.
Socrates is a grown-up person. He said: “I know only one thing, that I know nothing.” His childhood is absolutely unpolluted. The time that has passed by has not been just dust gathering on the mirror. On the contrary, it has helped to sharpen his sword; it has not been like rust on the sword. Knowledge is rust: it destroys your intelligence and gives you poor substitutes; knowledge is a poor substitute for intelligence.
Remember, one can be very intellectual and yet unintelligent. The child is not intellectual. He does not know anything about the great philosophers, the great scriptures. He is not a scholar; he knows nothing. But out of that state of not knowing he functions. Hence he is always full of wonder and awe; he looks at the world feeling that it is a mystery. The more you know, the more you destroy the mystery.
The whole function of our so-called schools, colleges and universities is to de-mystify the universe. Even scientists brag about it, that they are doing a great service to humanity by de-mystifying the universe. In fact, they are creating more and more boredom in the world.
No child is ever bored; he is always finding something or other which is immensely interesting for him. He can get absorbed in any small thing – a butterfly, a flower, a stone, a rock – anything will do. He immediately becomes aware of something extraordinary in it. That is insight, that is intelligence.
If we help children in every possible way to remain as intelligent as when they come into the world, then there will be many grown-up people. Right now you can count the grown-up people in the whole world on your fingers very easily – because everybody has been manipulated, has been poisoned. It needs a totally different society, a totally different vision of life in which the child is respected.
For centuries we have respected the old man: the older the man is, the more we respect him. Why do you respect the old man just because he has existed for a hundred years? Just existing is not enough for respect; living is a totally different matter. Existing is very ordinary, living has a totally different flavor to it.
Living means living out of agnosia, living out of a state of not-knowing, living life as a mystery. That is the only way to live it. Others only exist, others only survive.
A grown-up person moves in a deep harmony. His body, his psychology, his spirituality are always attuned; they all move together. This does not happen to the people who only grow in age. Their bodies become older but their minds remain retarded.
At the time of the First World War, psychologists became aware for the first time of this fact, because for the first time on a large scale they tried to observe, experiment, to know how many people are really psychologically grown-up. And they were amazed, shocked: the average psychological age of human beings is only twelve years. The body may be eighty years old and the mind is lagging far behind. In fact, there seems to be no connection – the gap is of seventy years or eighty years. And the eighty-year-old person pretends to know because he thinks he is eighty years old, and he stopped growing when he was only twelve years of age. Really he should be counted as only twelve years of age, not eighty. And as far as the spirit is concerned he may be still in the womb of the mother, he may never have come out of the womb.
Grace, light, love: these three together in deep harmony create beauty. When they are all in accord, life is an orchestra – but they are in discord, the spirit is almost nonexistent. Hence George Gurdjieff used to say, “I have come across very few people who have any soul.”
Ordinarily everybody believes that he has a soul because the religions have been saying for centuries that everybody has a soul. Everybody has only the potential for being a soul, but that potential is not actualized, not realized. It is still a seed; it has not come to be a tree. It has not reached the point where spring comes and flowers open up and one feels fulfilled, contented.
A grown-up person is flowering. His life is not divided, his life is an organic unity. He moves in a kind of absolute unity; nothing is lagging behind, nothing has gone far ahead.
This disunity that we see in the world is multidimensional. The soul is in the womb; the mind, the psychology is somewhere hung up at the age of twelve, and the body is eighty or ninety years old. This is only one kind of discord; there are many kinds of discord.
The head goes on becoming bigger and bigger and the heart goes on shrinking. They lose all synchronicity. And when the head becomes too much, man is a monster.
If you watch, if you observe within yourself, you can see it. I am only stating a fact. You will not feel any heart in you. You will see your head is heavy, full of junk, but your heart is only a word. You have read about it in poetry, in novels. It seems to be a fiction, a myth. In fact, physiologists say there is no heart. What you call the heart, from where love arises, does not exist for the scientist. What exists is only a blood purifying system. Your heartbeat has nothing to do with the heartbeat the poets have been talking about, the mystics have been praising; it is something else.
But scientists are right in a way because the people they observe don’t have any hearts. They have not observed a Buddha or a Meera, they have not observed Chuang Tzu or Kabir. They have never come across a man of the heart, so what they know is only about lungs.
The mystics are talking about something else which is not grown-up in you. It is something behind your physical heart which has not started functioning. It starts functioning only when you shower much energy on it, when your energy starts moving it. But your whole energy goes to the head.
Our structure of education is such that we bypass the heart. In fact, we try in every possible way to ensure that nobody’s energy should enter the heart, because once the heart starts functioning it becomes difficult for the head to take possession of you.
Society needs heads and hands. That is why society is divided into two kinds of people: the heads – the people who work with their heads, the so-called intelligentsia – and the hands, the people who are laborers. The society does not believe in the heart because the heart has no utilitarian purpose. You cannot produce commodities out of the heart, you cannot make people rich, you cannot create bigger houses, sophisticated machines, you cannot reach to the moon. So what is the purpose of it? Its purpose is totally different: it is non-utilitarian. It brings joy, but the society is not interested in joy. The society wants people who are efficient robots. A joyful person is not a robot. The society does not want you to be loving; it wants you to be calculating.
A lover is never a calculator; he is always risking. He is not a good businessman. He lives in a totally different world; he sees things in a different perspective. For him flowers are far more important than all your scientific gadgets, stars are far more important than all your political ideologies, rivers and mountains are far more significant than all your churches and temples.
The vested interests are against the heart; hence, they have put it aside. They have created a shortcut: your sexual energy moves directly to the head without passing through the heart. That’s why your psychological age remains nearabout twelve, because that is the time when sexual maturity starts happening – twelve, thirteen, fourteen. That is when you become sexually mature, and that is where the society stops you because once the energy is ready to move, it starts moving it toward the head. That is the most important time in the life of a man, between twelve and fourteen. That is the time when either you move through the heart or you move through a no-heart directly to the head. And every society takes care that before the energy starts working in the heart – stop it, close that door completely, forever.
Psychologists have not been able to explain why the psychological age should be nearabout twelve – this is the reason. They don’t yet have any explanation for it, but this is the reason: because your sexual energy is the only energy you have got, and the moment it becomes ripe there is danger – because it can become love. If allowed a natural course it is bound to become love; it will move through the heart. And, in fact, once it moves through the heart, once the heart opens up, the head can never be the master; it will remain a slave because a higher value has entered in your being. Now logic can never be supreme, it will always be secondary. And it is good that logic should be a servant to love; then it is beautiful. But love is a dangerous energy.
All the social institutions are afraid of love because the whole society depends on unloving institutions. Our society is rooted in marriage; marriage is an unloving institution. Marriage has been invented against love. That is why parents never like it that their daughter or their son fall in love. They would like to choose the right wife, the right husband, for their sons and daughters. They would like to choose, and how can they choose? – they will choose through the head. They will say to the children, “You don’t know. You have not experienced life – we have experienced life, so we know what is right and what is wrong.” For centuries, all over the world, marriage has been arranged by parents at a very early stage so the child was not even aware of what was happening.

My mother got married when she was seven; she was not aware of what was happening. My father must have been nearabout ten; he was not aware of what was really happening. He enjoyed the whole thing because he was riding on a horse and so many people were following him – so of course he enjoyed it!
But when the marriage procession came to my mother’s home, she was puzzled because she was not allowed to come out and see what was happening. And a whole crowd was there, the whole village was there; only she was not allowed to go. She could not understand: “What is the matter? Why can’t I go?”
Of course she was interested in what was happening outside – music, a band, a horse, a procession – there was enough to get interested in.

Now, marrying a girl of seven years is a very dangerous strategy of society. If child marriages happen, love has been prevented forever. They will grow like brother and sister and they will start accepting each other and the convenience that they give to each other. They will like each other, but never love. And liking is not loving; they are not synonymous. You may like a person very much, but you may not love him, and you may not like a person very much but you may love him. Love is a strange phenomenon; it is illogical. Liking has a logic about it: you can give reasons why you like a person, but you cannot give any reason why you love a person; it is irrational.
To prevent love, child marriages were prevalent all over the world. To prevent love, pseudo love was taught: “You have to love your mother because she is your mother.” But there is no necessity. She may be a mother; that does not mean that the child has to love her.
That is what Desiderata says: “Never feign affection.” But we have been doing that for centuries. You have to love your mother, just because she happens to be your mother; you have to love your father, just because he happens to be your father. You have to love your brothers and your sisters. These things can be easily forced onto a child, he is helpless – and then you can force him to marry! And then, of course, the husband has to love the wife, the wife has to love the husband. This whole love is pseudo, it has never happened. You are simply fulfilling a formality.
That is why people remain psychologically retarded at the age of twelve, or somewhere between twelve and fourteen. The head becomes the suprememost center. That is why there is so much misery in the world, because without love, bliss is impossible. That is why there is so much irreligiousness in the world, because without love there is no godliness. Logic cannot prove godliness, only love proves godliness. Knowledge can never prove godliness, only innocence experiences it.
Your children are beautiful. They have understood what is most important.
Another sannyasin has just asked: “I write questions, but the moment I have written the question I immediately see the answer, and then both the question and the answer become unimportant. And I can never ask because they become unimportant. Why does this happen?”
This happens because you take life too seriously. You want your question to be very important. That will give you a reflected glory, that will make you important. You don’t want to ask an ordinary question; you want to ask something very important. And of course you will never be able to ask one. Any question is bound to be unimportant; no question is important – or all questions are important.
If you are a child, if you have the innocence of a child, then all questions are important – not only questions about God but questions about the dog are also of the same value. A child can ask, “Why does the dog start barking when the moon rises in the sky?” Dogs are very much against the moon! On a full-moon night they will bark and bark their hearts out. They go crazy. A child can ask. When you are a grown-up you cannot ask such a question. It looks so unimportant – what has it to do with you? If the dog barks, let him bark. And what will people think if you ask such a question? It seems unimportant. It seems unimportant because of the ego. You want to ask questions about God.
Hence, particularly in India, I have experienced people whose problems remain unasked, and they go on asking metaphysical questions because that gives them importance. They will come and they will ask, “Does God exist?” – as if that is something they are really interested in! What will you do if he exists?
When I was traveling around the country, thousands of times I had to ask people, “Are you really interested in God? What will you do if he exists? Is it going to make any difference in your life whether God exists or not? Is it a life and death problem for you?”
They will say, “No, but we are curious whether God is or not.” And sooner or later, when they become a little more acquainted with me, their real problems will come up: anger, jealousy, possessiveness. They are real problems, but they hurt the ego. To ask, “Why am I jealous?” is to recognize your jealousy, is to declare that you are jealous. Nobody wants that. Everybody is jealous, everybody is possessive, but everybody thinks it is not so. “It is not so with me – it may be with others.”
Nobody wants to look at his real face; people avoid themselves as they avoid nobody else. That’s why everybody else will be able to see your faults except you. You minimize your faults and you maximize others’ faults; you have double standards. When it comes to your fault you rationalize it; when it comes to somebody else’s fault you don’t accept any rationalization. You magnify it as much as you can; you make it look as big as you can because your fault brings your ego down. The other person has a bigger fault; the bigger it is the better because that helps you to feel, “How nice I am! How simple, how humble I am. And look at these people – they are all full of faults, they are all full of fallacies, superstitions, stupidities. I am not that bad.” That gives you a good feeling.
The sannyasin has asked, “Why does it always feel unimportant?” It is bound to feel unimportant because you are asking out of your knowledge, not out of a real inquiry.
Your children are far more intelligent. Children are always authentic because they are not worried about the ego; otherwise they would not have said this to you. They asked you, “When you come back, bring a few jokes.” A serious person cannot ask that. A serious person will ask, “Bring some great philosophy, great religion. Bring some truth for me.” But children are simple and innocent. They simply open their hearts and they say whatsoever their real need is.
If everybody is like a child, the whole quality of human consciousness will go through a transformation. We can bring a new humanity very easily. Jesus is right when he says: “Unless you are like small children you will not enter into the kingdom of my God.”
The first joke is for Benjamin.

There is the story about the fellow who walked to work each day and passed a window where he saw a lady hitting a boy over the head with a loaf of bread. The fellow decided it was none of his business and walked on. He saw the same thing happen every day for five months. Each day the lady was hitting the boy with a loaf of bread.
Then one morning he saw the woman toss an entire chocolate cake into the boy’s face. Astonished, he peered into the open window and asked why.
“Oh,” the lady said, “it’s his birthday!”

Second, for Rosemary:

Charlie the cat was scampering all over the neighborhood, down alleys, up fire-escapes, down cellars. A lady who knew Charlie’s little owner, Johnny, knocked on his door. “Your cat is running around like mad!”
“I know,” said Johnny. “He has just been neutered and he is rushing around canceling engagements!”

Third, for Andrew:

It happened in Naples. The teacher asked little Pierino, “Pierino, tell-a me, who was-a the first-a man?”
“I don’t-a know-a nothing!” replied the little boy. “I didn’t see-a nothing, and I will die before-a confessin’!”

And fourth, for Nathan:

Two children are playing, imitating the sounds of different animals. Suddenly Johnny says to his friend, “My grandfather is really good at imitating a wolf. Just listen!”
He goes to his grandfather, whispers something in his ear, and the old man starts howling, “Oooh! Oooh! Oooh!”
Astonished, the friend asks Johnny where his grandfather had learned to imitate a wolf so well.
Says Johnny, “Well, all I do is ask him how long it has been since he last fucked!”

And, as far as your wife is concerned, she certainly is crazy – but she loves me. In fact, she is afraid of falling into my love. The love is there, but she is afraid also. Hence all her maneuvers – hiding your orange clothes, hiding my photographs is nothing but an unconscious effort to hide herself from me. But she cannot hide for long.
There is a Sufi story:

A Sufi master wrote a small book which was outrageous in many ways to the traditional, orthodox mind and then he told one of his disciples, “Go to the imam, the greatest priest, and give this book to him as a present from me. And watch. Watch carefully what happens and come and report to me exactly what happens, without any interpretation of your own.”
This was a device, a double-edged sword. It was a device for the disciple – whether he can report exactly what happened without changing it, coloring it, interpreting it. His commentary was not needed; he just had to be absolutely factual, a pure, detached observer, as if he was not concerned at all.
He went there very alertly, he knew that this was a kind of test. He presented the imam the book. He was sitting in the garden – it was a winter morning and he was enjoying the sun. His wife was sitting there.
When he presented the book, the imam asked, “Who has written this?”
He told him his master’s name. The imam suddenly became so enraged that he threw the book outside the gate and said, “This type of nonsense, this type of outrageous, irreligious, sacrilegious thing cannot enter into my house! And you, get out immediately – never come here again. Your master is a danger to the society. He is creating chaos, he is destroying our religion.”
For a moment the disciple started losing his detachment because great anger was arising in him, but he remembered that the master had said that he has to be just a reporter; he has not to bring his emotions in, his sentiments in.
Just when he was leaving, the wife of the imam said, “You could have thrown it out a little later on when the man had gone. There was no need to be so enraged – it doesn’t fit you, your status. Or, as you have such a big library in which there are all kinds of books, you could have put that book in there also. If you don’t want to read it there is no need to read it. And I have seen all kinds of books – religious, irreligious, belonging to our religion, belonging to other religions – in your library, so why can’t this book also be a part of the library?”
Again the disciple felt some emotion arising, that the woman is more compassionate, more loving, more human. But suddenly he became aware that he has not to bring his attitude in at all; he has just to report. He came back and he just reported, but when he was reporting, at the last moment he forgot and he said, “One thing I must say, that the imam’s wife is a very nice, beautiful woman, and she even seems to understand you. Maybe one day she can be converted to your path.”
The master said, “Wait! Who has asked about your commentary, about your interpretation? You missed the point, you should simply report. And as far as your commentary is concerned, it is absolutely wrong. If you ask me, then I will say this imam is sooner or later going to be trapped by me, but his wife will never be a part of our commune, never, because his wife is indifferent. She says, ‘You can put it in the library.’ The imam hates me – hate can be transformed into love – but the wife is just indifferent: she does not love me, she does not hate me. She is not interested in me at all. She says, ‘There is no need to throw it out.’ But the way the imam became enraged shows his emotion; soon he will feel that it was not right.
“And I tell you: go again and see what has happened to the book – the imam must have taken it back into his home, he must be reading it now. A man who becomes so enraged is already interested. He cannot avoid reading it – he has to read it.”
And the disciple went again. And wonder of wonders, the master was right: the imam was reading the book.

Your wife may show anger, may show hatred. Don’t be worried about it. She is already getting interested; she is not indifferent. She is a little upside-down, but that is not a big problem – doing a headstand! We can put her right-side-up.
The fifth joke, for your wife:

Astonished to find the new nurse, Miss Flack, pursuing the patient down the corridor with a bowl of boiling water, the head of the hospital, Dr. Killcare, buttonholed the young intern on duty and asked what was going on.
“I told her to prick the patient’s boil,” the youthful sawbones said, “but that Miss Flack is such a dummy, she gets everything backward!”

You get it?

The second question:
Osho,
Would you talk about trust?
Trust is a mystery – that is the first thing to be understood about trust. Hence it cannot be explained. I can give you a few indications of it – just fingers pointing to the moon – a few hints, but it cannot be described or defined.
It is the highest form of love, it is the essential core of love. Love itself is a mystery and indefinable, but love is like a circumference and trust is its very center, its soul. Love is like a temple and trust is the innermost shrine in the temple where God is situated.
Ordinarily people think that trust means faith; that is wrong. Trust does not mean faith. Faith is emotional, sentimental. Faith creates fanatics. Hindus, Mohammedans, Christians, these are the people who have faith. Trust creates only a quality of religiousness. Trust never makes anybody a Hindu or a Mohammedan or a Christian. Faith is borrowed – borrowed from the parents, from the society in which you are born. Faith is accidental. You live in faith out of fear or out of greed, but not out of love. Trust is out of love.
Faith is a conditioning, imposed; it is a bondage. The man of faith is a prisoner. He may know it, he may not know it. He may have been living in a very beautiful palace, but he is imprisoned in it. The prison may be very well decorated – with Bibles and Korans and Vedas and Gitas – it may be made out of beautiful doctrines, philosophies, ideologies, but it is a prison because you have not entered into it on your own; you have been forced to enter it.

I was a small child and my father used to take me to the temple, and I always resisted it. I would tell him, “I will stay outside the temple – you go in.”
He would say, “But why can’t you come in?”
I would say, “When I feel like coming in I will come in, but I don’t feel like coming in. It is so beautiful outside. Why should I go in? And I don’t see any point in it at all. The trees outside, the birds singing outside, the sun… It is so beautiful. I will wait here for you. If you choose to be inside and sit in that windowless, closed place, that is your choice.”

He would try to persuade me but he was never successful. Every parent tries, and the intention is not bad. The intention is good – but unconscious intentions, even if they are good, are not of much help. They hinder, they harm. An intention can be really good only when it is conscious, otherwise prisons are created and you become attached to prisons. It is so difficult.
Even a man like Bertrand Russell, who does not believe in Christianity, has confessed that although he has dropped believing in Christianity, if somebody suddenly asks him, “Who was the greater man, Buddha or Christ?” somewhere deep inside he knows that Buddha is greater, but he will answer, “Christ.” That Christian upbringing, the mind that has been dropped, has left scars.
He says, “When I think about it, when I am alert, I can see the greatness of Buddha. Compared to Buddha what Christ says looks ordinary – but that is when I am alert. When I am not alert, if you wake me up suddenly from sleep and ask me, I will certainly say Christ. It hurts somewhere to put Buddha above Christ.”
I can understand his difficulty. The same will be the difficulty of a Buddhist. He may be convinced that Christ is far better, he may be convinced that Christ’s sacrifice is greater than Buddha’s, but deep down in the unconscious the training, the conditioning is there – he cannot put anybody else above Buddha.

A Jaina scholar who was a disciple of Mahatma Gandhi wrote a book on Mahavira and Buddha. He showed me his manuscript and he told me, “I am trying to synthesize both the religions.”
I looked at the title and I said, “You won’t be able to synthesize them, you will not be able to bring about a synthesis. Just your title is enough!”
He said, “What can you know from the title?”
The title was Bhagwan Mahavira and Mahatma Buddha. I said, “You cannot call both ‘Bhagwan’?” Mahatma means a very great man but still a man, and Bhagwan means one who has gone beyond man. I said, “How can you bring about a synthesis? You have already discriminated.”
He was shocked and he said, “I have shown my book to many people – nobody has indicated that. I have shown it to great scholars, pundits, and they have all appreciated it.”
I asked him, “Have you shown it to any Buddhist?” He said, “No.” I said, “Show it to any Buddhist and he will see the insult that you have done to Buddha. Ask him what he would suggest. He will say, ‘Write Bhagwan Buddha and Mahatma Mahavira – change it!’”

What is Mahavira compared to Buddha to a Buddhist? But to a Jaina, Mahavira is greater. Buddha comes very close, but close; a distance is still there. It may be only of one step, but that much distance has to be there. Our egos are involved.
Faith is egoistic, hence it is fanatic. Faith is borrowed, hence it is ugly. Faith is a bondage because you have been forced into it by subtle strategies. It is not trust. Trust is a total phenomenon, different, with a different flavor. It is your own growth that brings you to trust; it is your own experience, it is your own knowing. Faith happens through conditioning and trust happens through unconditioning. One has to drop faith before one can attain to trust.
The second thing to remember: trust is not belief either. Belief is again a trick of the mind to repress doubt. Man is born with many doubts, millions of doubts, and it is natural, it is a gift from existence. Doubt is a gift from existence, but it creates trouble for you. If you start doubting… You can doubt everything, and you have to live with people who believe; your life will be in constant conflict, you have to compromise. If you are born among Christians you have to believe; if you don’t believe you will be in trouble.
Why was Jesus crucified? – for the simple reason that he refused to believe; he tried to experience. In the Bible the major part of his life is completely missing; eighteen years are missing. And in a life of thirty-three years, eighteen years is a major portion. He is mentioned first when he is twelve and then he is mentioned when he is thirty, and by the age of thirty-three he is crucified.
What happened between the ages of twelve and thirty? Where has he been? In these eighteen years he lived with many masters, he moved in many mystery schools. Particularly, he lived with a secret school of Essenes; his whole teaching comes from that secret school. But all those eighteen years were of deep meditation, experimentation; he went to the deepest core of his being. When he arrived, when he came to know for himself what truth is, there was trust, it was not belief.
Trust has to be deserved; belief is a very cheap substitute. Belief means you are afraid of doubt because doubt creates trouble, and doubt keeps you in a state of confusion. And you are not courageous enough to live in confusion, not courageous enough to live in a state of chaos, in anarchy – and doubt creates that. So you immediately repress the doubt, and the way to repress is to believe.
The way to trust is doubt, and doubt to the very end. Go the whole way! Don’t repress your doubt at any point, otherwise you will miss trust. Trust arises out of doubt, not by repressing but by experiencing doubt to its ultimate extreme.
When you go on doubting and doubting and doubting, a moment comes when all beliefs are destroyed by the doubt, all faith evaporates in the heat of doubt, and all that is left is your being. Now there is nothing to doubt because you have doubted all and everything. When there is nothing to doubt, doubt dies, commits suicide, because there is nothing to keep it on, nothing to nourish it any more. That has been my way. I have not arrived through belief, I have arrived through doubt. It is better to begin as a great doubter than as a believer because the believer will always remain pseudo; he will always remain superficial, shallow. Belief can never be more than skin-deep: scratch it a little bit and immediately the doubt is there. Trust needs a continuous hammering; doubt has to be used as a hammer. Unless you reach to the rock bottom of it all…

An American tenor was making his debut in Pagliacci at La Scala Opera House in Milano. When he finished the exciting aria, “Vesti la giubba,” the audience applauded, and Carbogno, an elderly man sitting at the front, stood up and exclaimed, “Sing it again-a!”
The tenor, delighted by the request, did an encore. Carbogno, the opera-lover, again leapt to his feet and implored, “Sing it again-a!”
After five encores, the tenor walked to the edge of the stage and said, “Thank you for your very gracious reception.”
Once more the old man shouted, “Sing it again-a!”
“I’m sorry, sir,” begged the singer. “We must go on. I cannot sing it again.”
“Yes!” declared the opera fan. “You sing it again-a until-a you sing it right!”

One has to go on and on doubting – until-a you sing-a it right! Doubt is a sword: it cuts all beliefs, but it is a dangerous path. The path to truth is bound to be dangerous because truth is the ultimate peak. The higher you move toward Everest, the more you are entering into a dangerous arena. A single wrong step and you will be lost forever.
Truth liberates, but to reach truth you have to go through a very narrow passage, climbing toward the heights. It is dangerous. Hence, millions of people decide to live in their dark valleys. They believe that Everest exists, and it is sunlit and there is tremendous beauty because Jesus has reached there, Buddha has reached there: “We can believe in them. What need is there for us to go there? We can live in our dark valleys comfortably. There is no need to take any risk.”
But without risk there is no truth, without risk there is no life. You have to learn gambling, you have to be a gambler.
If you doubt and go on doubting, a moment comes when all that you have ever believed disappears, evaporates. It is almost a state of madness. One can fall any moment into the abyss that surrounds you. If one falls, it is a breakdown. If one keeps alert and aware, watchful, cautious, then it is a breakthrough.
Trust is the ultimate breakthrough: it helps you to know the truth on your own. And truth liberates only when it is yours. Somebody else’s truth cannot liberate anybody; it creates bondage and nothing else.

The last question:
Osho,
I have heard that you sometimes make up questions to fit your jokes. Is this so? Please be truthful!
It is very difficult for me to be truthful. I don’t believe in anything, not even in truth – I am not a serious person at all! I believe in playfulness. So, what does it matter whose question it is? And do you think when you write a question it is better than when I write a question? And do you think that when you are writing a question you are really writing or I am writing through you?
If I have to tell a joke tomorrow I can say something today and many questions will come tomorrow! There is no need for me to write really – I can create questions in you; there is no difficulty. Otherwise, how do so many questions come?
But you seem to be serious. And I am only serious about jokes, I am not serious about anything else. That is why you never see me laughing at the jokes – I am really serious – because jokes are not a laughing matter. It is not a joke! It is one of the most serious things in life, in fact, the only serious thing.
You ask me, “I have heard that you sometimes make up…” Sometimes? Always, every day, because whenever I come across a good joke, I cannot wait for tomorrow. Who knows? Tomorrow may come, may not come. I may not be here, you may not be here – and the joke has to be told!
Just look at these jokes: they cannot remain untold!

A Negro walks into the fish market and buys an eel for his dinner. He puts it into the pocket of his overcoat and decides to have a drink before going home. One drink leads to another and another…
Hours later he staggers home and stumbles into the toilet for a piss. Reeling backward and forward he fumbles inside his trousers and pulls out what he thinks is his johnny. He feels a warm tickle down his legs, then looks down and utters in wide-eyed disbelief, “I knew you was big and I knew you was black, but I sure as hell did not know you had such beautiful, big blue eyes!”

A man walks into an optometrist’s office holding a cardboard box. He hands it to the optometrist who opens it and upon seeing its contents exclaims, “Wow! That’s the biggest turd I’ve ever seen!”
“Isn’t it a beauty? I did it myself.”
“It must be at least two feet long!”
“Twenty-five and a half inches, to be exact.” boasts the man, “And four and three-quarter inches in diameter.”
“Incredible! How much does it weigh?”
“One and a half pounds.” comes the proud reply.
“That is simply amazing!” exclaims the optometrist, unable to take his eyes off this marvelous specimen. “But why bring it to me? I am an optometrist.”
“Well, you see, I have this problem: every time I do one of these monsters, my eyes water!”

Mary comes to the police station with her mother. She is sobbing loudly when she reports to the policeman that she had been raped. The officer, concerned, asks her when and where all this happened.
“Well,” says Mary, crying, “three days ago in the cemetery, the following day in the forest, and yesterday evening in Johnny’s own room!”

You missed it! Perhaps you will get this…

Dino was making pretty good time with Sally, the office steno. She agreed to go away for the weekend, provided he brought a sheath with him.
When they went upstairs to bed he admitted he didn’t know how to wear it, so she rolled it down his thumb to show him. Then they put out the light and really went at it.
In a few minutes Sally said, “I’m really sticky. I think you broke that thing.”
“No, I didn’t,” said Dino, switching on the light. “Here it is, still on my thumb!”

And you ask me, “Is this so? Please be truthful!” Even this question is invented by me! What more truth is needed to prove it? You have not asked it, but I have answered it.

Two Jews are walking. Ahead of them they notice Moishe walking like a duck along the footpath.
“I bet you he has hemorrhoids,” says Saul, “That’s why he walks that way!”
“No,” says Mo, “his balls are enlarged, that’s why.”
They catch up with Moishe and tell him of the bet they just made.
“You are walking this way because of bad hemorrhoids, right?” says Saul.
“No,” replies Moishe.
“Aha!” exclaims Mo. “Then it is because of your swollen balls, right?”
Moishe stops and turns toward them. “I am sorry, but both of you lose. You see, I thought it was going to be just a good old fart, but…”

Enough for today.