---
title: Hari Om Tat Sat 01
series: Hari Om Tat Sat 01-30
talk_number: 1
url: https://oshoworld.com/hari-om-tat-sat-01
language: English
duration: 01:18:07
author: THE MANTRA SERIES
scraped_at: 2026-01-03T09:15:35.673236+00:00
---
Osho,
I have heard you say, Hari Om Tat Sat: the divine sound – that is the truth.
When you speak I hear the sound of truth resonating in me, yet I am not enlightened. How is it that I can recognize that which I haven't realized?
Maneesha, Hari Om Tat Sat: the divine sound – that is the truth…. It is one of the mahavakyas, the great sayings which have been embedded in the hearts of the mystics since eternity. It is not something theoretical, not something philosophical, it is something existential.
Those who have gone within themselves have always heard a strange sound, which can only be called the sound of existence itself. It is difficult to reduce that sound into language. Hence for centuries, as far back as we can go, om, the sound, has been represented not by any alphabetical word but by a symbol.
That symbol is beyond any alphabet. It does not belong to any language. Hence the Tibetans can use it, the people who are writing in Sanskrit can use it; Mahavira can use it, who was using a language called Prakrit; Gautam Buddha can use it, who was speaking in a language called Pali. There is no other symbol in the whole world which does not belong to any particular language, but is simply symbolic of a certain experience that can happen to anyone. And why have they not reduced it to some linguistic form? It is not without reason.
The sound of om is heard only when your mind is completely silent, when you have gone beyond all language, all thinking, when there is pure silence, not even a ripple. Suddenly you hear a music. There is no instrument playing it. It seems it is simply the very heartbeat of existence. That’s why it doesn’t matter whether someone is a Buddhist or a Hindu or a Jaina. It does not depend on your philosophy, on your religion. It depends on the depth of your reach toward your very inner center. There, suddenly, you are overwhelmed.
It is not exactly om, but om comes the closest to expressing the sound. And the sound has been called the divine sound because it is not man-made. It is eternally herenow. Whoever wants to enter into the stream of eternal existence is bound to hear it. It says nothing, but it vibrates your being to such joy, to such celebration, to such dance that you have never dreamt of before.
The word hari is used as one of the names of God. I don’t want to bring God in; I want to avoid God completely because it brings all kinds of lies behind it. Nobody has ever experienced any God. There is no evidence, no proof, no argument to support it. It is an absolutely useless hypothesis – not only useless, but immensely harmful, because so much bloodshed has happened because of the name God. It is time that we forget the word and start using something else fresh.
The word hari in itself has another meaning which is far more beautiful than the word God. Hari in Sanskrit means the thief. And the sound of om, once you come close to it, certainly proves to be the master thief because it simply steals your very heart forever. Then you are part of the existence and you are no longer a separate personality.
You are not. Existence is.
Certainly this can be done only by a master thief: you are completely stolen, absorbed, not even a mark is left behind. Those who have used the words hari om would rather say that it is the divine sound. My own preference is to say that it is the master thief sound, which has stolen millions of hearts.
But whatever you say, one thing is certain: Tat Sat. Tat means that, and sat means truth.
This sound of om is our very truth, is our very being. We are made of it. The whole existence vibrates, and through different vibrations of the same sound there are different things, but they are simply different vibrations. A certain vibration creates a tree, another vibration creates a bird, another vibration creates a man, but the whole existence, according to the mystics, is made of sound. This sound is certainly the most sacred, the most divine, because there is nothing more beautiful, nothing more ecstatic. Once you have heard it, even from far away…just a glimpse and you will never be the same person again.
All that we are searching for in meditations is nothing but this master thief. We are searching in our being: what kind of dance, what kind of music goes on there in the living center of your life. Strangely enough all those who have entered in have found the same answer, without exception – Hari Om Tat Sat.
Maneesha, you are asking, “When you speak, I hear the sound of truth resonating in me, yet I am not enlightened. How is it that I can recognize that which I have not realized?” There are many things in this small portion of your question.
When you hear me you are hearing existence itself, just the way you hear the wind passing through the pine trees or you hear the sound of running water. I have nothing to say to you, that’s why I go on speaking continually, for years. If I had something to say I would have said it. Because I don’t have anything to say, I can continue for eternity.
When you hear my sound and truth starts resonating in you it is simply a bridging between the master and the disciple. If what is coming from me originated in existence itself and you are in love, in trust, feeling one with me, you will start resonating with the same truth that is making me a vehicle. It does not need you to be anybody special, it just needs a loving heart, a trusting heart with open doors so the breeze that is coming is not obstructed, so the fragrance that is flowing can overwhelm you, can surround you, can open your heart like a rose opening its petals.
But your problem is, “How is it possible, because I am not enlightened?”
Who said that to you?
I am saying every day you are enlightened, and you are so stubborn that sometimes I also start feeling it would be better I join you and become unenlightened. Why keep this separation? Either you become enlightened or I am going to become unenlightened. There is a limit to everything!
I don’t know who the person is who goes on spreading these rumors that you are not enlightened. What is the source of this knowledge? I know it, for thousands of years you have been told you are not enlightened. The people who were telling you that you are not enlightened were on an ego trip – they were enlightened, you were not enlightened; they had arrived, your journey is going to be very long, perhaps many, many lives.
Their whole effort was to create a great distance between you and themselves so they could be superior to you. They are divine, they are God’s incarnation, they are enlightened, they are messengers, they are messiahs, and you…you are just an ignorant person moving from one life to another, carrying the same load of ignorance that goes on increasing with every life. These people have insulted the whole humanity.
As far as I am concerned, I want to say not only are you enlightened, the trees and the rivers and the mountains and the stars, all are enlightened. Otherwise is not possible. I want it absolutely clear to you: to be alive is to be enlightened. Wherever there is life, wherever there is love, enlightenment is just hidden underneath. You may not recognize it. The whole effort is to help you to recognize it.
All the meditations are nothing but an effort to feel your enlightenment – which is already the case; whether you feel it or not it does not matter. If you feel it you will rejoice, your life will become a dance, moment to moment, of tremendous glory and majesty, of grace and gratitude. If you don’t recognize it you will remain miserable, asking all kinds of idiots, frauds, “How can I become enlightened?”
There have been masters like Bodhidharma. You ask him how to become enlightened and you will get such a good slap on your face that you will wake up immediately, saying, “I am sorry, I had just fallen asleep. I am enlightened.” Those days were beautiful, when it was perfectly accepted that a master can slap the disciple. Now people have completely forgotten those beautiful moments and those beautiful days and those beautiful people.

It is said about Chuang Tzu that when for the first time he entered the hut where Lao Tzu, his would-be master, was living, Lao Tzu looked at Chuang Tzu and said, “Remember one thing, never ask me how to become enlightened.” The poor fellow had come for that very purpose. But Lao Tzu made it clear, “Only on this condition will I accept you as my disciple.”
There was a moment of silence. Chuang Tzu thought, “It is strange. I have come to become enlightened, that is the very purpose of becoming a disciple. And this old fellow, so beautiful and so graceful, is asking such an absurd thing: if you want to be my disciple, promise me that you will never ask about how to become enlightened.”
But it was already too late. He had fallen in love with the old man. He touched his feet and he said, “I promise I will never ask how to become enlightened, but accept me as your disciple.”
Immediately came a hard slap, “You idiot! If you are not going to become enlightened, then for what purpose are you becoming a disciple? I was asking this promise because I could see in you such beautiful intelligence that you might have immediately realized the point of my asking. You are enlightened; there is no way to become enlightened. There is no need. In fact even if you want to become unenlightened, there is no way.”

Then why has this whole humanity become unenlightened? How have they managed? Just by forgetting, just by being too involved in other things. The world is vast, and the mind goes on taking you into new desires, new longings, new achievements, new greed. Slowly, slowly a curtain falls between you and your mind, and the mind completely forgets your being. It forgets completely that there is an inner world also, not only an outer existence.
The outer is very poor in comparison to the inner. But once you get involved with the outer, it is so vast that there is a possibility you may wander around in the universe for millions of lives. And you may not realize that you are wasting your time, that it is time to look in.
Maneesha, promise me to never ask again, “I am not enlightened, how to become enlightened?” I have my own ways of slapping, far more sophisticated. I don’t use my hand because I am a lazy man; moreover I don’t want to hurt my hand. But I have my own ways, and I go on slapping people – and you know it well!
And the last part of your question is, “How is it that I can recognize that which I have not realized?” You can recognize it – that is an absolute guarantee that you must have realized it in some unconscious way. Perhaps you have forgotten your realization. Each child is born with the realization.
I have condemned Gautam Buddha’s story many times, but this time I am going to appreciate it, just to put things in balance. The story is: Gautam Buddha is born while his mother is standing under a saal tree, and he is born standing. And the first thing he does is to take seven steps in front of his mother and declare to the universe, “I am the most enlightened person ever.” I have condemned it for different reasons; now I want to appreciate it for different reasons.
In fact, every newborn child, if he could, would say the same thing, “I am enlightened.” If every newborn child could walk, he would take seven steps and declare to the whole world, “I am the most enlightened person, unique.” Perhaps the story is simply a symbolic way of recognizing each child’s innocence as his enlightenment, as his ultimate experience.
But he will be lost in the world. Perhaps once in a while somebody comes back to his childhood again. My effort is to bring you back to your innocent childhood again. What you have not done in your first birth you can do in your second.
After I have gone from here tonight, everybody has to take seven steps and declare to the whole world, “I am the most enlightened person!” Try it, and you will really rejoice. And you will never fall back again into the old ignorance and start looking for how to become enlightened. Finish it tonight!
And you are asking how one can recognize if one has not realized. It is a question like if you are given a rotten egg in a restaurant and you say, “This is rotten.” And the manager comes and says, “Are you a hen? Have you ever produced an egg? If you have never produced an egg, on what authority are you saying that this is rotten?”
There is no need. You can recognize things which you may not have consciously realized, but which must be an undercurrent of realization within you. Except that there is no other way. How do you realize when you fall in love that it is love? Certainly somewhere deep inside you there must be a hidden corner that already knows what love is. How do you recognize when you see a roseflower and say it is beautiful? Have you ever seen beauty? Have you ever realized what beauty is? But certainly you realize that the rose is beautiful. I am simply saying that there must be a certain realization in your being about beauty, about truth, about the ultimate sound of existence. That’s what makes you recognize.
You are much more than you think you are.
You are not what all the religions have made you – sinners, condemned, just sitting in the waiting room for the train to take you to hell. And the waiting room itself is giving you enough experience of hell!
The word sin is used by all the religions without paying attention to the root meaning of the word. The root meaning of the word is to forget. It has nothing to do with morality, it has nothing to do with your good actions or bad actions; it has something to do with forgetting who you are. And if you have forgotten, you can remember.
Gautam Buddha continually says to his disciples, “It is not a question of realization, it is only a question of remembering. What you have forgotten you have with you”…just a little search in all your pockets – also in the pockets which you are keeping secret even to yourself.

I have told you the story of Mulla Nasruddin…He is traveling in a train and a ticket checker comes, and Mulla looks into everything for his ticket. He opens all his suitcases and bags and creates so much fuss that almost half of the passengers have to move to make space for all his things that he is taking out to look for the ticket.
Tired, the ticket checker says, “Forget all about it, just answer me one question and I will be satisfied. You have been looking in everything, in places where the ticket cannot be lost – you have looked in your shoes. Why should the ticket be lost in your shoes? But you have not looked in the right-side pocket on your coat.”
Mulla said, “Don’t mention that. I am not going to look into that pocket. That is my only hope, that perhaps the ticket is there. I can look everywhere in the world, but not in my right-side pocket.”
Everybody in the compartment said, “This is strange, the fellow thinks that perhaps…. If you think that the ticket may be there, then that is the first place to look. But no, there are different kinds of logic and different kinds of arithmetic. The man also has a point. He says, ‘That is my only hope, don’t destroy it. Let me look in the whole world first. That is the last resort.’”
Tired of his search, the ticket checker says, “You simply be quiet and collect your things, because you are disturbing all the passengers, and I will not ask anything about your right pocket.”
Mulla said, “That’s right. Nobody should ever make any indication toward my right pocket because I am not going to look there.”

Most of us are searching for things exactly where we know they are not. Now, people are searching for God in churches, in temples, in stone statues, and nobody ever thinks, “Is God going to be met there?” The statues are man-made, the temples are man-made and nobody is looking into himself, which is the only space not manufactured by man, the only place where perhaps the ticket is. It is simply a question of remembering. But you, whether you remember or not, are by nature part of the whole.
The experience that “I am part of the whole” is enlightenment. If you recognize it you start dancing. If you don’t recognize it you go on crying unnecessarily. Things which are very simple have been made unnecessarily complicated, just to cheat you, exploit you.
Religion has functioned in the world as the greatest business – greatest in two senses. It accumulates more money than any other business and it goes on selling things which are invisible.
Now, selling things which are invisible is a great business. You purchase something invisible, you keep it carefully in your suitcase, afraid that it may get lost – then to find it will be very difficult. So keep the suitcase locked, never open it, because who knows? – the invisible thing may have wings, may fly out.
The most intelligent people in the world are also purchasing God – who is absolutely invisible – purchasing tickets for heaven, depositing bank balances in paradise. And everything they give they see with their own eyes going into the pockets of the priests. But perhaps from those pockets there are invisible ways – the money that they are giving to the pope will reach. In the Vatican the pope has a bank. It is really a branch of the original bank; you deposit in the branch and it will reach the original bank. You need not be worried about it.
And this pope goes on wasting your money in unnecessarily traveling here and there. He came to India. And wherever he goes, the first thing he does is to kiss the earth. He could have done it in the Vatican. There was no need, the earth is the same everywhere, but certainly tastes are different…. When he touched down at New Delhi airport I was in Nepal, and I said to my people, “This is his first taste of Hinduism.” Because you cannot taste earth in India unless you taste cow dung, and that is the only essential Hinduism.
And he wastes your money, which you think is going to be deposited in paradise. On a single trip to Australia he wasted six million dollars – twice the cost of the visit of the Queen of England, Elizabeth. And three times he has been around the world, wasting six million, eight million dollars on each trip. This is your money.
Once George Bernard Shaw was asked, “Do you think a man can live joyfully just keeping his hands in his pockets and doing nothing?”
George Bernard said, “Yes, it is possible. Just one thing has to be remembered: the hands must be yours, and the pockets must not be yours. Just keep your hand in somebody else’s pocket.”
That has been the whole religion. And they are giving you things which even an idiot can understand…
The Italian consul from Calcutta was here. Before he came here to be slapped by me he had gone to Satya Sai Baba. He seems to think himself a seeker of truth. And what happened in Satya Sai Baba’s place? There they have an arrangement that in the office you fill in a form with your name, your country, your job, and what your essential question is, what you have come to ask. And then the Italian consul was taken in.
Many other people were sitting waiting for Satya Sai Baba. He was given a special place. Satya Sai Baba came in and directly pointed to him, saying, “You live in Calcutta. You are Italian. You work in the consulate.” A great miracle! And all the information he had filled in.
And these idiots like Satya Sai Baba are surrounded by other idiots not only of this country, they come from far away in search of truth. And he was immensely impressed: “This is your question. You want to know this, this is your inquiry. You are a great seeker of truth.”
Now, naturally he is going to write a book. I will wait for his book. Here he also got special treatment, but I don’t think he will have the guts to even refer to it. He was so afraid that he had an appointment with one of our sannyasins, Azima, to go with him to a dinner, but he simply escaped. He never reached the hotel where Azima was waiting for him for the dinner, afraid that Azima was bound to ask, “What do you think about Osho?”
And it is not that he will not think about me. He will think about me day in and day out! He will see me in his dreams, because he avoided seeing me here. When I pointed at him, he was holding his hand over his face. I could not believe that such cowards…. When I passed by the side I was looking from the window of my car; he had changed the position of his hand. Now he was keeping his hand over the side of his face. These are the people who are your diplomats, your politicians, your priests.
If religiousness means anything, it means fearlessness. It means taking a risk, putting at stake all that you have, all that is familiar, for the unknown; leaving the known and moving into the unknown. That simple step makes you religious. No other discipline is needed.
I have continually to postpone those funny and strange questions…. their time never comes. One is so great that I think tomorrow morning I will begin with it. Now a few things to contemplate seriously…

Gorbachev, Margaret Thatcher and Ronald Reagan are the guests of the king of Saudi Arabia, who has a magic swimming pool. The magic is that if you name a liquid while jumping into the empty pool, it will immediately be filled with that liquid.
Gorbachev goes first, and ripping off his clothes, he shouts, “Vodka!” and leaps into the pool, which is miraculously full of the finest Russian vodka.
Thatcher goes next, and bouncing along in her bra and panties, she yells, “Whiskey!” She lands with a splash in a pool filled with the finest, twelve-year-old scotch.
Not to be out-done, Reagan races toward the pool in his jockey shorts, stubs his toes on the edge of the pool and falling headlong, he screams, “Oh, shit!”

============================================================

Osho,
My girlfriend told me I am a little boring, not very juicy, very dependent and a victim. Then I felt very guilty and depressed and utterly unworthy. I began to feel inside me a big No: toward existence, life, love, you. Meanwhile I observed in me this destructive energy and I felt that I somehow enjoyed it!
Osho, is it possible to use this energy in some creative way?
Your question is an example of the stupid conclusions that mind comes to. Perhaps you may not have looked into it and its contradictions. I would like to go into the very psychology of such questions. They are not only within you, they are within many. You are courageous to expose yourself.
The exposure begins, “My girlfriend told me I am a little boring.” Your girlfriend is very compassionate, because each man finally becomes very boring, not a little boring. Do you realize the fact that what you call love is a repetition, the same stupid gymnastics again and again? And in this whole stupid game the man is the loser. He is dissipating his energy, perspiring, huffing, puffing, and the girl keeps her eyes closed, thinking, “It is a question only of two or three minutes and this nightmare will be finished.”
People are so non-inventive that they take it for granted that going through the same actions is making them more interesting. That’s why I say your girlfriend is very compassionate – she only told you that you are a little boring. I say to you, you are utterly boring. When the Christian missionaries came to this country, people discovered that they knew only one posture of making love – the woman underneath and those ugly beasts on top of the delicate woman. In India that posture is called the missionary posture.
India is an ancient land and the birth place of many sciences, particularly sexology. A book of tremendous importance, by Vatsyana, has been in existence for five thousand years. The name of the book is Kamasutras, hints for making love. And it comes from a man of deep meditation – he has created eighty-four postures for lovemaking. Naturally the love posture should change; otherwise you are bound to be boring.
Vatsyana recognizes the fact that the same love posture creates boredom, a feeling of utter stupidity, because you are always doing the same thing. He invented eighty-four postures to make the love life of couples a little interesting. Nobody in the whole world has written a book of the caliber of Kamasutras. But it could only have come from a man of immense clarity, of deep meditativeness.
What is your lovemaking? If you look at your lovemaking, you yourself will feel that it is all boring. And particularly for the woman it is more boring, because the man is finished in two or three minutes and the woman has not even started. And all around the world, cultures have enforced in the minds of women that they are not supposed even to enjoy or move or be playful – that is called “dirty”; prostitutes do it, not ladies. Ladies have to lie down almost dead and let that old guy do whatsoever he wants to do; it is nothing new, there is nothing new even to see.
You should not take it as a personal disrespect. Your girlfriend is telling you something really sincere and honest. Have you given her orgasmic joy? Or have you only used her to throw out your sexual energy? Have you reduced her into a commodity? She has been conditioned to accept it, but even this accepting cannot be joyful.
You make love on the same bed where you fight every day. In fact fighting is the preface: throwing pillows, shouting at each other, arguing about everything and then, feeling tired, some negotiation is needed. Your love is only a negotiation. If you are a man of aesthetic sensibility, your love chamber should be a sacred place, because it is in that love chamber that life is born. It should have beautiful flowers, incense, fragrance; you should enter into it with deep respect.
And love should not be just an abrupt thing – grab the woman. This hit-and-run affair is not love. Love should have a preface of beautiful music, of dancing together, of meditating together. And love should not be a mind thing – that you are continuously thinking of how to make love and then go to sleep. Love should be a deeper involvement of your whole being, and it should not be projected by the mind, but should come out spontaneously.
Beautiful music, fragrance, you are dancing hand in hand, you have again become small children playing with flowers…. If spontaneously love happens in this sacred atmosphere it will have a different quality.
You should understand that the woman is capable of multiple orgasms, because she does not lose any energy. Man is capable of only one orgasm and he loses energy, looks depressed. Even the next morning you can see his hangover, and as he goes on growing older it becomes more and more difficult.
This difference has to be understood. The woman is on the receptive end – she has to be, because she has to become a mother, she needs more energy. But her orgasm has a totally different way of happening. Man’s sexuality is local, like local anesthesia. A woman’s body is sexual all over, and unless her whole body starts trembling with joy, each cell of her body starts becoming involved, she cannot have an orgasmic explosion.
So it is not only in your case, it is the case for almost ninety-nine percent of women around the world. The whole situation has to be changed. The woman should not be under the man. In the first place it is ugly – man has a stronger body, the woman is more fragile. She should be on top of the man, not the man on top of the woman.
Secondly, man should remain silent, inactive, so that his orgasm is not finished within two minutes. If you are silent and let the woman go crazy on top of your chest it will give her good exercise and it will bring her to an explosion of orgasmic energy. It takes time for her whole body to warm up, and if you are not inactive there is no time. So you meet, but the meeting is not of beauty, of love, but just utilitarian.
Try with your girlfriend what I am saying. You be the inactive partner and let her be the active partner. Allow her to be uninhibited. She has not to behave like a lady, she has to behave like an authentic woman. The lady is just created by man; woman is created by existence. You have to fill the gap between her orgasms. The gap can be filled in only one way, that you remain very inactive, silent, and enjoy her going crazy. And she will have multiple orgasms. You should end the game by your orgasm, but you should not begin with it.
And your woman will not call you a little boring. You will be a really interesting, real wonderful guy who is behaving like a lady! Keep your eyes closed so that she is not inhibited by your eyes. So she can do anything – movement of the hands, movement of the body, moaning, groaning, shouting…. Unless she says, “Hari Om Tat Sat!” you are not allowed to be alive, you simply remain silent. This should be the indication. “Hari Om Tat Sat” simply means: this orgasmic explosion, this is the truth. Then she will be mad after you. Right now you must be behaving stupidly, as most of the men in the world do.
The second thing you say: “My girlfriend is saying that I am not very juicy.” So become a little more juicy! To become juicy is not very difficult. The juice of all kinds of fruits is available everywhere. Drink more juice, less solid food. She is giving you good advice and you in your stupidity are thinking that she is condemning you.
When she says, “You are very dependent and a victim,” I can see even through your question that she is right. A victim you are, just as every human being is a victim – a victim of stupid ideologies, which have created strange guilt feelings and do not allow you to be playful. Although you may be making love, you know you are committing a sin and that hell is not far off.

Becky Goldberg was telling Goldberg, “You are a great lover.”
Goldberg said, “But you never told me this before. I was waiting for somebody to say that I am a great lover, but I dropped the idea because it seems I am not.”
Becky Goldberg said to him, “No, you are a great lover, and I wanted to say it to you many times, but you were not there!”

…making love to Becky, and Goldberg is not there. He is counting his money, doing his accounts, and his mind is doing thousands of things. In every bed where there are two lovers there are at least – I mean minimum – four people. There are more inventive people – they may have a whole crowd in the bed. The woman is making love to Goldberg and thinking of Muhammad Ali. Goldberg is making love as a duty and is thinking of so many beautiful actresses; but his mind is not there, and neither is his wife’s mind there. Their minds are in their dreams.

A man told his friend, “Last night I had a tremendous dream. I have to tell you. I have been waiting for the morning to tell you the dream.” The man said, “What kind of dream?”
He said, “I went fishing in my dream and I caught such big fish that even to draw in one big fish was a strenuous job for me, and I caught so many fish. I don’t know where these fish disappear to in the day.”
The other man said, “Stop all this nonsense, you don’t know what I have dreamt. I found in my dream, on one side of me, Sophia Loren, absolutely nude. And I said, ‘My God, have I reached heaven?’ And on the other side was another beautiful woman. It was impossible to judge who was more beautiful.”
The other friend became very angry and he said, “You idiot! You pretend to be my best friend. Why didn’t you call me?” He said, “I did call, but your wife said you had gone fishing.”

Nobody is where you think he is. Nobody is at home. While making love make it a meditative process. Your whole presence has to be there, showering on the woman you love. The woman has to be there, showering all her beauty and grace on her lover. Then you will not be a victim, otherwise you are a victim.
Love is not accepted by your so-called, utterly idiotic religions to be a natural and playful experience. They condemn it. They have made it a condition: unless you leave your woman you will never attain to truth. And the conditioning has been going on for so long that it has almost become a truth, although it is an absolute lie.
You are a victim of traditions and you are certainly dependent. When I read your question further you will see how you are dependent – dependent on a girlfriend who tells you that you are boring, not very juicy and a victim.
Your dependence shows further: “Then I felt very guilty and depressed and utterly unworthy.” If your girlfriend, by saying such simple truths, can make you very guilty and depressed and utterly unworthy, she certainly seems to be your master. “I began to feel inside me a big No.” And this is where your girlfriend has been kind, not to say to you, “You are a little bit of an idiot too.”
You are saying, “I began to feel inside me a big No toward existence.” Now what has existence done? Do you think your girlfriend is existence? “…toward life.” Do you think your girlfriend is life? “…toward love.” And finally, “…toward you.” Why involve me? I have not been giving all these ideas to your girlfriend; I don’t know her. She is not getting these lessons from me about what to tell you.
This shows your utter idiocy. Are you here for me or for your girlfriend? I go on saying things every day and nothing changes in you. And your girlfriend just said that you are a little boring and you don’t doubt her. Perhaps you have come here following your girlfriend. And in what way can you say no to existence, to life, to love and to me? That really is hilarious. I had not said anything and you have included me – on what grounds?
Rather than listening to your girlfriend who was saying sincerely that you are boring, just a little, you should have asked her, “In what way can I become a little more interesting? Do you have any suggestions? If I am not juicy then tell me how I can become juicy.” That would have been an intelligent step. But instead of asking the girl you started having “a big No: toward existence, life, love, you.” Sometimes I think that…. I don’t even know you personally, nor your girlfriend. In what way am I involved in it?
But I can understand the reason. Perhaps you may not be able to explain it, but I can see the underlying reason for your big No. You believe in your girlfriend too much – naturally you could not ask her. That shows your dependence. You must be afraid to make much fuss about these things with the girl, because girlfriends are not your permanent wives, no law prevents them from moving with someone who is more juicy. And everybody in the beginning is juicy, but just a few days together and the whole juice dries out. You start looking around for some other girl, for some other man, because they are all looking juicy.
You will repeat the same thing life after life; you have done it already, without understanding the foundation. Living with one man more than a week the problem arises of how to get rid of him. He is also thinking about how to get rid of you. But it does not look right to say so to each other, so you start creating trouble, that somehow some other idiot may become interested in your girlfriend, because you both go on seeing that other girls are more juicy, other men are more juicy.
It is an old story that the green grass on the other side of the fence of your bungalow looks greener than your own grass. Distance creates that phenomenon.
Any woman may look to you juicier than your wife – she is just a pain in the neck. But what you don’t know is that all these women are following the same philosophy. For one or two days they are so groovy, and once they have caught hold of you the real story starts – they start becoming a pain in the neck. And the same is true about men. Meeting a girl on the sea beach, in the garden, by the side of a river, he pretends to be Alexander the Great, walks like a lion, and within two days the same fellow is reduced to a rat.
Nobody talks about the reality of why this is happening, why so many people are unnecessarily made miserable. This society will never be happy if we don’t allow people to move and not get stuck in marriages, not get stuck in their own promises. Out of freedom meet with each other, and the moment you feel that you have explored the whole topography of the woman and the woman knows that she has experienced whatever is possible to experience in the man, then it is time to say good-bye to each other in deep friendliness. There is no need to hang around each other’s neck.
A world completely free from any contracts between man and woman will be immensely lovely, beautiful, unboring, interesting. But we have created institutions, and to live in an institution is not a very great experience. Your marriage is an institution, although the newer generation is moving a little more freely, before settling after the age of thirty. I have been looking around the world to find a hippie who is at least of the age thirty-five. I have not found any. Nearabout thirty all hippies disappear, they become just square people whom they were fighting against before.
Seeing the situation, that living in institutions – of marriage, community, society, Lions Club, Rotary Club – you cannot live joyously, you have experimented. This is the first time in history that we have a younger generation. I don’t mean that in the past there were not young people, but there was no “younger generation.” A small child, seven years old, would start following the father’s business, would start going to the fields, would start taking care of the cows; or if the father was a carpenter, would start helping him. At the age of seven he had already joined the society.
For the first time in history there is a generation which can be authentically called younger and which has created a generation gap. Schools are there, colleges are there, universities are there and it takes twenty-five years, twenty-six years to come out of the university with a postgraduate degree or with a doctorate. But by that time you are no longer young. By that time you start having responsibilities: professorial, professional, family, marriage.
But during the time that you spend in the hostels and in the universities, before entering life, there is a long gap in which you are not engaged in any utilitarian, purposive activity. That has created the generation gap. Men and women become sexually mature – women at the age of thirteen, men at the age of fourteen – and they will be married perhaps ten years afterward or twelve years afterward. These twelve years have created girlfriends and boyfriends.
It is a great opportunity for the future to understand the whole phenomenon and its psychology. You have the choice to change the old habits, to create trouble but drop old habits. Every man needs to be aware of many women. Every woman needs the experience of many other men before deciding to marry. Their experience will help them to find the right person with whom they can melt and merge without any difficulty.
“Meanwhile,” you are saying, “I observed in me this destructive energy and I felt that I somehow enjoyed it!” Everybody has destructive energy, because energy, if left to itself, is bound to be destructive – unless it is used with awareness and becomes creative.
But the most important thing that you are saying is that, “Somehow I enjoyed it.” Then how are you going to change it? With anything that you enjoy you are bound to remain on the same level; you cannot change it, because you may not enjoy the change. And all this has come to your mind only because your girlfriend told you that you are “a little boring, not very juicy, very dependent and a victim.”
You have energy. To enjoy destructive energy is suicidal, to enjoy destructive energy as destructive is in the service of death. If you are aware of it you have to go through a transformation. Use your energy creatively, perhaps that will make you less boring, more juicy, less dependent, less of a victim.
And the most important part will be that you will not feel guilty and depressed. No creative person feels depressed and guilty. His participation in the universe by his creative actions makes him tremendously fulfilled and gives him dignity. That is the very birthright of every man, but very few people claim it.
Moreover, this big no will become a big yes if the energy moves into creative dimensions. And there is no difficulty, it is so easy to use energy in creative fields. Paint, do gardening, grow flowers, write poetry, learn music, dance. Learn anything that changes your destructive energy into creative energy, and immediately the big No will become even a bigger Yes. Then you will not be angry at existence, you will be grateful. You will not be against life. How can a creative person be against life, love? It is impossible, it has never happened. It is only the uncreative people who are against everything. And if you can be creative, life-affirmative, you cannot be against me, because I am giving you the directions for becoming an authentic, sincere, celebrating individual.
Your girl has raised very important questions for your life. The easiest way would be to change the girlfriend, but I suggest that your girlfriend is certainly a friend to you and that whatever she has said is absolutely sincere, authentic. Be grateful to her and start changing things. The day your girlfriend accepts you as juicy, as interesting, will be a great day in your life. So don’t be a coward and change girlfriends just because this girlfriend creates trouble in your mind, and you want to find some other girlfriend.
You must know of my disciples here. You are fortunate to find a very compassionate girl. Your next choice will be very difficult; she will make you feel absolutely guilty and unworthy. Because what have you done to be worthy? What have you done not to be boring? What have you done to declare your independence? What have you done not to be a victim? It is time you should do it. You will remain always grateful to your girlfriend.
I would like to tell your girlfriend, “Go on hitting this fellow until you are satisfied that he is not boring, but full of juice, utterly interesting, playful, celebrating. You may lose him somewhere on the path of life, but you will have prepared him for some other woman; otherwise the way he is now he is going to torture many women and torture himself.”
He is even planning to torture me! I am absolutely out of the game, I am not a partner in your relationship. In what way have you managed to think that a no arises against me? I understand why it arises. It arises because I respect women in every dimension as being equally capable as men. They have been beaten down the ages; they have never been able to say a single thing about their husbands.
Just three days ago it has been found that even in America husbands are beating their wives. But the wives have been hiding the fact up to now – because it does not look as if you have been beaten and you cannot do anything, nor does it look good to defame the husband. It does not look good to the children, if they come to know…. I used to think that wives are only beaten in India.
One of the great Hindu saints, Tulsidas, who is worshipped and read all over India by every Hindu, has a strange statement: Dol ganwar pashu aur nari. Ye sab taran ke adhikari. He is categorizing women with drums – dhol means drum, ganwar means idiots, pashu means animals, and nari means woman. All these four are constantly to be beaten. The dhol, the drum, will not work if you don’t beat it. So for thousands of years Indian women have been beaten. It has been taken for granted, there is no question.
I have come across situations where a husband was beating his wife and I could not tolerate it and I entered their house, and I was amazed: more than the husband, the wife was against me, saying, “He is my husband, you cannot interfere in our affairs. If he is beating me, it is perfectly okay.”
So deep has the conditioning gone. Here I am taking out all your conditionings and I am preparing the future man who will respect the woman as equal to himself, who will give opportunity for her growth as he takes opportunity for his own growth. And there will not be any kind of bondage. If two persons can live in love their whole life, nobody is going to disturb them. But there is no need of any marriage and there is no need of any divorce. Love should be an absolute act of freedom. But you have also been told for thousands of years that, “If you really love then your love has to be permanent.” I don’t see that anything in life has the quality of being permanent. Love cannot be an exception.
So don’t expect that love has to be permanent. It will make your love life more beautiful, because you know today you are together, tomorrow perhaps you will have to depart. Love comes like a fresh, fragrant breeze into your home, fills it with freshness and fragrance, remains as long as existence allows it and then moves out. You should not try to close all your doors or the same fresh breeze will become absolutely stale.
That’s what people’s lives have become – stale, ugly – and the reason lies in their idea of permanent love. In life everything is changing. And change is beautiful; it gives you more and more experience, more and more awareness, more and more maturity.
Just to change the subject…

The male dinosaur has been going out with the female dinosaur for two thousand years and finally he asks her for a kiss. She agrees.
Four thousand years later he asks if they might hug a little, and she agrees.
Three thousand years later he says, “Look, honey, we have been seeing each other for about nine thousand years. Don’t you think it is about time we…er…you know, get it on?”
She looks at him shyly, and says, “Oh, darling I would love to, but I’m having my decade.”

A little Jew is wandering through the Sahara desert carrying a watermelon under his arm. He stares into the distance where he thinks he is seeing a mirage. But no, it turns out to be Pope the Polack walking toward him, carrying a car door.
They greet each other and the pope asks the Jew why he is carrying the watermelon.
“Every time I get thirsty I eat a slice,” explains the Jew. “And what are you doing with that car door?”
“Well,” says Pope the Polack, “every time I get too hot I just roll down the window.”

============================================================

Osho,
When you said last night that I am enlightened, it really freaked me out. It looks like I'm much more at ease with being unenlightened and searching for it, rather than just being enlightened. I don't know what the question is but I feel I need a slap to wake me up!
The question you have asked must be reflecting the question of many people. It is significant in the sense that being enlightened brings a full stop to your desires, longings, searchings. All that you have done, down the ages, is only desiring, seeking, dreaming, hoping, and one is afraid to come to a point where suddenly you find there is no way to go, nowhere to go, that you have arrived.
You are saying, “When you said last night that everyone is enlightened it really freaked me out.” It freaked many out, it freaked many in, but it certainly freaked. And it brought to the surface something that you must have been carrying within your unconscious. Without this freaking out it may not have come to the surface.
You are saying, “It looks like I’m much more at ease with being unenlightened and searching for it, rather than just being enlightened.”
You are saying something immensely significant, not only about you, but about human mind as such. It is at ease in hoping, it is at ease if there is a tomorrow. The goal may be far away, but if the goal is there it is at ease. It does not want to come to a standstill – that feels very uneasy, because we have become accustomed to dreaming, running after goals, never arriving but always trying to arrive. The goal seems to be just close by, but the distance between you and the goal remains the same whatever you do. It is almost like the horizon. You go toward it; it goes on receding back in the same proportion. This has been the training of our mind, this is what we are; hence although you are just a beggar dreaming about kingdoms you are at ease.
It happens in many ways. You will not find poor people thinking about the meaning of life, you will not find poor people even bothering whether there is something like enlightenment or not. Only when a civilization becomes richer, people become educated, their bodily needs are fulfilled, do they suddenly start thinking about faraway goals. Then they start searching in many dimensions. They are searching, but deep down they don’t want to arrive at the conclusion. This is a strange dilemma, but if you understand rightly you can see the point. The point is, mind can live only in movement. When there is no movement time stops, mind stops, only you are.
It was not you who freaked out, it was your mind, with which you are absolutely identified. Unless you create a distance between the mind and you – you the witness – you will remain searching. Money, power, prestige, God, paradise, enlightenment – anything will do, just it should keep you going on. Any direction is okay, just stopping is dangerous, because the moment you stop mind dies. The moment you stop your personality dies. The moment you stop you disappear into the oceanic existence; hence the fear.

I have told you a beautiful story about Rabindranath Tagore. In one of his poems he has the same glimpse that is expressed in your question.
In the poem he says, “I have been searching for God for many, many lives. Sometimes I saw him near a faraway star, and I was immensely happy that although the star was far away, it was not impossible to reach. And I started moving there, but by the time I reached the star God had moved to some other place. But he was visible – so far away, but inviting, creating hope. And I went on running around the universe for many, many lives.
“One day it happened, I came to the house of God. I could not believe that I had arrived. It was such a shock, but still I stepped toward the door. As I was going to knock on the door my hand suddenly froze. A thought arose in me: Just wait a minute and think it over. It is written outside the door, ‘This is the house of God.’ If by chance it turns out to be really the house of God then you are finished. What are you going to do then?
“For millions of years your training has been only for searching. You are perfectly disciplined as a seeker, but finding? That is absolutely new; you are not acquainted with it. And moreover, a finding of the ultimate, the absolute God, beyond which there is nothing to search…. What will you do then? What will you be? And it is going to be forever – an eternal situation of a full stop.”
He took his shoes in his hands. He was afraid that as he goes back down the steps, if God hears some noise outside and opens the door…. And then he ran away, not looking back.
The poem is beautiful because it says, “I am again searching him. I know him, his house; I go on avoiding it. I go in every direction, but I keep myself far away from the house where he is, because I know that meeting him is going to be my disappearance.”

Enlightenment is nothing but your disappearance. It is nothing but a pure silence. Naturally one feels afraid and one starts thinking, “It is better to remain unenlightened and searching for it.” The story that I told you from Rabindranath’s poem is your story. It is everybody’s story. That’s why I say, you are enlightened, but you don’t want to recognize it. You want to find some way so that you can start searching for enlightenment again.
In the search is the mind.
In the search is the ego.
In the search is the personality, in the search are all the saints, the sages, the prophets, the incarnations of God – in the search. The moment you arrive you are just a pure silence, a nothingness – alive, abundantly alive, overflowingly alive, full of fragrance, but now there is no movement. You will remain in this silence for eternity. I think every one of you has returned from the house, knows the way, knows the house and is still searching and seeking and asking, “Where is the house of God? Where can I find him?”
The moment you understand that the reason for your search is not that you are not enlightened, the reason for your search is that the mind wants to go on living, and it can live only in your unenlightenment…. You have to choose. You can choose the mind and go on seeking for eternity that which is right now available, this very moment. Or you can choose the state of no-mind, no-movement, and disappear in the cosmos, in eternal peace, in the splendor of the universe. But it all depends on you; it is your freedom.
The biblical story that God drove out Adam and Eve from paradise is certainly wrong. It is Adam and Eve who escaped, because in the garden of paradise there was no possibility of being a prophet, no possibility of being someone special, no possibility of any ego arising. In the garden of paradise you and the trees and the animals are all equal. Seeing this situation, my own understanding is that Adam and Eve escaped, they were not driven out. It was a revolt against a state where everything was available and there was no way to find anything new. Escaping from that kingdom, man started searching.

I have reasons to say that…In India the twenty-four tirthankaras of the Jainas are all kings who renounced their kingdoms. Gautam Buddha was going to be the king, the only son of his old father. He escaped before he was crowned as a king. The ceremonies were prepared for – because the old man wanted Gautam Buddha to be crowned before him; he wanted to see his son on the throne. Seeing the situation, Gautam Buddha escaped. He had seen everything, he had all that was possible in those days for anybody to have in his possession. The most beautiful women of the kingdom were collected just for his pleasure. His father had made three different palaces in different places, for different seasons.
In India, just in my childhood, seasons were absolutely certain. They became disturbed only after the second world war; otherwise, each season was four months. And it was absolutely determined: the winter comes exactly on one date, the winter goes exactly on one date.
The old king had made three beautiful palaces in his kingdom, so when it was summer Gautam Buddha could move to a hill station; when it was winter, too cold, he could come to the plains, near a beautiful river; when it was too rainy…. He had found a place for him where it was a pleasure, not in any way a trouble.
There is a place just nearby where Gautam Buddha was born…. Perhaps in the whole world that is the place where it rains the most – five hundred inches per year! In Pune it rains only seventy inches per year. Even to live in a nearby place, Khandala, is very difficult – it rains two hundred inches per year. That means for days it goes on raining, you cannot come out, for days there is no sun, for days it is just rain and rain. Just conceive, five hundred inches…. In four months there will not be a single day perhaps when it is not raining, and great floods…. The father had found a faraway place where rain was nearabout forty or fifty inches per year – just a pleasure. Gautam Buddha became tired, bored, because everything that he needed was handed over to him, even without his asking.
It is a strange situation. When you are poor you want to be rich, and when you are rich suddenly you feel that you have gained everything, but you have lost hope. Now there is nowhere to go; you have come to the last rung of the ladder. Sitting there on the last rung of the ladder you look simply foolish and nothing else.
This accounts for the differences in the religions which were born in India and the religions which were born outside India. It needs a tremendous psychological insight…. Jesus was a poor man. Moses was also not a rich man – he could have been a rich man, but he discovered that he was a Jew and he wanted to be with his own race. He renounced all his powers and went into a great revolt against the Egyptian kings. Mohammed was also a poor man. These three poor men created three religions outside India. The three religions created in India were all created by kings. Rama and Krishna are kings; Mahavira and Adinatha are kings; Gautam Buddha is a king. And you can see the difference between the religions, because of these people’s situations.
Gautam Buddha does not promise you any paradise where beautiful women will be available to you, where rivers of wine will be flowing – strange, but not inexplicable. He is fed up with women, he is fed up with wine, he is fed up with everything that money can purchase. All that he can promise to his disciples is a pure silence.
But Mohammed cannot do that, Jesus cannot do that. Jesus has to provide in his paradise all those beautiful things which poor people are missing on the earth. Mohammed provides rivers of wine, beautiful women. And you will be shocked to know, because homosexuality was very much prevalent in Saudi Arabia, in paradise beautiful boys are also provided for the sages.
Jesus provides everything that a poor man can dream of and can hope for. Mahavira provides only absolute aloneness. This will not appeal to a poor man. He is already very lonely, and you have come…and to attain to that aloneness he has to go through all these disciplines. Are you mad? He wants things – he wants beautiful women, he wants beautiful men, he wants beautiful houses – and you have come here saying, “You have to fast, you have to train yourself in yoga, you have to meditate. And finally you will get a pure nothingness.”
This can appeal only to the very rich. They are tired of things, they want just silence; they are tired of people, they want pure aloneness. The poor man is not tired…he has not even had the chance to be tired of money. He is hoping some day he will have money, have a beautiful house.

One day I was stopped on the road – I was going to the university – and a beautiful woman gave me a pamphlet. I asked, “What is it?”
She said, “Everything is explained in it, and if you are interested the phone number is given.”
Going to the university, just driving, I looked at the pamphlet: a beautiful house by the side of a mountain river, great tall trees, and a question: “Do you want this house?”
I thought, “In this city at least there is no such house; perhaps I don’t know it? If it is available it is worth looking into the details.”
I turned the page and inside the details were given: “If you become a follower of Jesus Christ, in the kingdom of God you will have even better houses than the one you have just seen on the other side of the page.”

When a poor man creates a religion it is bound to be full of your desires, your greed, your lust, and a promise that everything will be fulfilled. When a rich man creates a religion his religion is going to be a purity, a silence, a beautiful space. But you are one with that beautiful space, not separate.
Looking at the religions, their holy books, you can decide whether those holy books came from poor people or from people who have known riches. And remember one thing, the poor man’s paradise is just a projection. That’s why all the religions that have been created outside India – just by coincidence – don’t have the quality, the superiority, the grandeur that Indian religions have.
But India is no longer rich. Those religions were created some seven thousand years ago, some five thousand years ago, some twenty-five centuries ago. Today even the Indian masses have turned to Christianity – Christianity is now the third greatest religion in India. They have turned to Mohammedanism, which is now the second greatest religion in India. Hinduism goes on shrinking, and more and more people go on turning toward Christianity, Mohammedanism, because more and more people are poor. And Hinduism has nothing to offer to the poor people.
They are not interested in nirvana, they are not interested in meditation, they are not interested in their inner being. You can see it here. If anybody descends from Mars and looks at this commune he will not be able to think that this commune exists in India. How many Indians are here?
The religion that I am providing for you is the highest possible. It is not for those who are seeking employment, not for those who are hungry, starving. It needs intelligence to understand me. It needs a kind of frustration with the world – the kind of experience where you feel that all that this world provides is meaningless, that it leads nowhere, that it is sheer wastage of life. Something more is needed – something that money cannot purchase, something that science cannot produce, something that is not available in the market, something that you have to find within yourself.
But why are people not interested in themselves? Perhaps in their past lives at some moment they had reached the house of God, and ever since they have been running away from it. Although they give good names for their running – they are running in search of God, they are running in search of self-realization, they are running for enlightenment – in fact they are running away from exactly these things, as far away as possible.
But you cannot run because your enlightenment is your very being, whether you like it or not. Existence has not asked you whether you want to be born or not; neither has existence asked you whether you want enlightenment in your innermost core or not. Existence does not treat you as separate; hence there is no question of asking you, you are part and parcel of this beautiful universe. And this universe goes on moving into different forms, but the innermost core remains the same: the same light, the same joy, the same celebration.
It is frightening to you because then there will be no movement. But I have been in this full stop for thirty-five years and not for a single moment have I felt that I am in a wrong situation.
People ask me, “For two hours you don’t move your legs…” I have also thought, “Why don’t I move my legs?” Then finally I discovered that there is no need. I am not walking, why should I move? It is not only here that I am sitting like that, the whole day I am sitting in my chair just like that. And you must be puzzled about what I am doing in my room, just sitting. And there is not even grass growing!
Nothing is happening and I am perfectly happy; there is not even for a single moment a desire – even to go into the ashram and see what kind of stupid things are happening. Just last night when you all had become enlightened…. Nirvano told me, “You should have been there.”
I heard the noise. I said, “This is enough for me, that my people have become enlightened, just I’m worried what will happen to their enlightenment in the morning.” And I can see that you shouted unnecessarily – not even a single one of you has become enlightened! You can try it today again, because this is the place where you have to become enlightened. And just watch Sardar Gurudayal Singh. Most probably he will become enlightened before anybody else. He shouts better, he laughs better, what more is needed?

Pope the Polack and a nun arrive in a small town in the middle of the Sahara desert, riding a very fresh and alive looking camel. The pope is completely exhausted and decides to have a few days vacation. He checks into a caravanserai for the night and the next morning comes out of the tent wearing his underpants and carrying a towel across his shoulder.
“Excuse me,” he asks one of the Bedouins, “but can you tell me how far it is to the water?”
“Oh,” the Arab replies, “a few hundred miles.”
“Shit,” says Pope the Polack, “I guess I will have to stay on the beach today.”

…hundreds of miles away, then it is better to stay at the beach.

Amos Saperstein dies suddenly with an enormous erection. The undertaker, Moishe Finkelstein, tries everything to make it shrink. He puts cold water on it, then packs it in ice cubes, but nothing works. Finally they decide that they have only one option: they cut a hole in the lid of the coffin and cover it with a sheet.
On the way to the cemetery the coffin is carried past two little old ladies sitting on a bench. “Well, there goes old Amos,” says grandma Kravitz. “I hope his family gave him a proper send-off.”
Just then a gust of wind blows the sheet off the top of the coffin.
“The tight fisted bastards,” says grandma. “Look at that! Only one lousy flower.”

And the last, before you start becoming enlightened again…

A priest with a huge prick has terrible trouble getting any woman to sleep with him. At the local whorehouse it is always the same answer, “Sorry father, I wish I could, but that monster is much too big for me.”
In desperation, the priest thinks up a cunning scheme. He visits a whorehouse on the other side of the town where no one knows him, picks out a girl and takes her to the bedroom.
Once they are inside the priest tells the girl he is very shy and then says, “Do you mind if I undress with the lights out?”
She agrees. Then as he climbs on top of her she says, “Do you know, father, I am really glad this is what you came here for. When you first walked through the door I was sure you were just going to talk to me about…. Jesus Christ!”

============================================================

Osho,
I always thought that one had to conquer fear, and then death would not be scary anymore. The other day I was sitting in a place in the hills where people were killed and I saw that death is sweet.
Now I think it must be more like this – that death helps one to understand fear; that first you experience death and she helps you see what fear is all about. Is it like this? Can you talk about it please?
Your question is based on complete misunderstanding, confusion. You will have to understand first where your confusion is. You say, “I always thought that one had to conquer fear.” This is the first point of misunderstanding.
You cannot conquer fear. Fear has to be understood. The moment you start thinking of conquering it, you have already accepted its existence, its power over you. And fear is just like a shadow: you can fight with it, but you cannot win. On the path one has to be very aware whether one is fighting with something that does not exist but is only his own projection; otherwise the journey goes on becoming longer and longer.
Secondly, the language of conquering is not the language of a meditator, it is the language of a soldier. We have nothing to conquer. We have to certainly understand everything concerning ourselves, our mind, its workings. For example, fear has never existed. That does not mean that people have not been afraid. That is a totally different thing. People have been afraid because they don’t understand many things and fear arises out of their ignorance.
You have seen death…. You think so, because death can be seen only in deep meditation, where it withers away like darkness withering away when the light is brought in. But everybody thinks he has seen death because he has seen somebody dying.
To see somebody dying is not to see death, because what is happening inside the person is invisible to you. He is only changing the house; he is moving from this body to another body. But once that consciousness that is his life moves out of the body, the body is dead. The body has always been made of dead, material things. It is the consciousness within which radiates through all that the body is constituted of and makes it look alive.
And you know perfectly well, when you are depressed, sad, you look less alive. And when you are joyous, blissful, laughing, you look more alive. Life comes from the inner sources of your being and life is eternal; hence, death cannot exist. Death is only a change which you cannot see with your eyes.
There have been experiments done: if there is something like consciousness or soul in man…. They have weighed a dying person. Certainly if something leaves him he will lose weight – it does not happen. Because he does not lose weight, the people who have been experimenting with such stupid things have concluded that there is no consciousness. Consciousness has no weight.
So first you have to understand that fear has not to be conquered; otherwise you will remain always afraid of the conquered fear – because the conquered fear is there. You may be on top of it, but things change. You may, in a certain weak moment, be defeated by the nonexistent fear again and it will be on top of you. And you do not always have the same vitality, the same aliveness; there are ups and downs. In every state when you are not feeling a well-being, fear will come back. And the miraculous thing is that fear has no existence except in your imagination.
You have not seen death. To see death there is one possibility, and that is deep meditation; the other possibility is to die. But the other possibility is not certain because death is such a great surgical phenomenon – the whole consciousness has to leave the body – and nature has made an arrangement that before people die they become unconscious.
Medical science learned it very late, that when you operate, first make the man unconscious. Either local or general, but some anesthesia, some unconsciousness has to be there. He will not be able to bear the pain – and this is about small surgery. Death is the greatest surgery. Your whole consciousness is taken out of your body. Naturally you become unconscious before it happens. So even if you die – and you have died many times – you don’t remember. Because you were unconscious, how can you remember? Memory has not made any record of it.
So the only certain way – a hundred percent proof – is meditation. Meditation creates the situation in which you know you and your body are absolutely separate. They are working together in deep harmony, in great synchronicity, but they are not one. Once you understand that they are not one, you know your consciousness is your life. And the moment life leaves the body, people think the body is dead.
It is always somebody else who dies. Have you observed it? You never die. One feels really great that somebody else has died and you have been alive for eighty years and still death has not come. In fact, the longer you live, the less is the possibility of your dying.
The data is, most people die nearabout seventy-five. Then the rate of death starts falling. Nearabout eighty, less people die. Nearabout ninety, even less people die. Nearabout a hundred, very few people die. Nearabout a hundred and fifty, it is very rare to find somebody dying. And nearabout two hundred, there is no precedent. So if you can go on pulling yourself up to two hundred, you will not die. You will see everybody else dying and you will enjoy!
But seeing somebody else dying is not an experience of death. You have to go inward so deep that you are only pure consciousness. The body is surrounding you, but it is not inseparable from you. You can see the gap. That very moment you have seen that death is a fiction – the greatest fiction. But it goes on haunting people because nobody meditates, and when they die, the fear of death makes them so unconscious that it becomes impossible for them to experience what is happening.
From outside you cannot experience; from inside you can experience only with awareness. But that kind of awareness is very rare. Those who have managed to create, through meditation, that crystallization of awareness are agreed on the point that death does not exist. There is no question of fear.
And then you go on saying: “If you conquer the fear then death will not be scary anymore.” Nobody knows anybody in the whole of history who has conquered fear. Even your greatest warriors are trembling inside. And you are making it completely upside down. First you will conquer fear…that is a Don Quixote experiment. How are you going to conquer fear? – aikido, jujitsu, archery? Even nuclear weapons in your hand will not allow you to conquer fear.
Fear is a by-product of your unconsciousness, so the only way to get rid of it, to know its bogus reality, is to become conscious. It is not a question of conquering; fear has nothing to do with it. Once you know what death is, fear disappears.
You are saying, “The other day I was sitting in a place in the hills where people were killed, and I saw that death is sweet.” Great! Other people are killed and you feel that the death is sweet. If it is so sweet, why are you living? Join those dead people in the hills, get killed. And in India there are such simple ways of getting killed – just on MG road, traffic will kill you, you don’t have to manage….
Strange laws exist in the world. If you are caught committing suicide, then the punishment is sending you to the gallows. A strange society we have created. The poor fellow was himself doing the same thing – that was crime. And now the punishment is the same crime. Now it is being done by the government, by the justice department. He himself may have failed, but now there is no possibility of any failure.
Death can be sweet if you move from one body, one existence, one form, with pure awareness into another and higher. Then it is sweet, really sweet. But not for others, only for you.
And you go on intellectually creating the whole question, based on absolute fallacies. You say, “Now I think…” Remember, thinking does not make any sense here. Here you have to know, not to think; here you have to experience, not to think.
Thinking is a poor substitute for experience – and a dangerous substitute, because it will prevent you from experiencing. Do you say to your girlfriend, “I think I love you”? Either you love or you don’t, but from where does this “I think” come? And if the girl belongs to my commune, she is going to give you a good slap to wake you up from your thinking. Love is not a thinking.
But you say, “I think it must be more like this…” Just imagination, guesswork, that death helps one understand fear. Death makes one understand fear, but it is not the death of somebody else, it is your own death, and that too with the condition that you are conscious.
“…that first you experience death and she helps you see what fear is all about.” Seeing the death of other people should create a sadness in you, not sweetness. And it is not going to help you to understand what fear is all about. Only your death…that too with an absolute condition. Moving out of the body with full awareness will not only allow you to understand fear, it will allow you to forget all about fear. It does not exist.
But people go on thinking about things which can only be experienced. It is one of the greatest problems, that thinking gives you substitutes and if you become satisfied with those substitutes, guesswork, then you will never encounter the real. It is because of this that I emphasize: first get rid of all your thinking. Be in a silent clarity, a transparency, so that you can see things as they are – not that you think about them or guess about them.
Then not only fear, many other things will disappear and many new things will appear in your experience. The same energy that was involved in fear, released, may blossom into flowers of love in your being. The same energy involved in anger may become a fragrance of tremendous joy in the silences of your heart.
You don’t have many energies, you have only one energy. But that energy is invested in fear, anger, greed, jealousy. This same energy, once you are alert, centered in yourself, turns into blissfulness, into ecstasy, into gratitude, into love. And a strange thing which no religion has ever talked about: every fiber of your being becomes prayerful – wordless, not addressed to any phony god. And all gods are phony. Simply out of gratitude arises the prayer toward this beautiful existence. Except for this existence, you don’t have any sacred place. This is the only holy, sacred temple. There is no other temple. All other temples are false, substitutes to deceive and cheat you.
So get out of your misunderstanding and guesswork. Reality cannot be discovered by thinking and guesswork. You will come to stupid conclusions. And the difficulty is, you may cling to them.

Edna and Zabriski have a lovely Polish wedding in Chicago.
“Let us be good Americans,” says Zabriski, “and have a black baby.”
“Okay,” says the young bride.
Nine months later Edna gives birth to a beautiful white baby. Next year their second baby is white, and a year later she gives birth to another white baby.
“We must be doing something wrong,” says Zabriski. “I will ask my friend at work.”
So Zabriski meets his friend, Dougie, the huge black foreman, and asks him why they could not have a black baby.
“Hey, man,” says Dougie. “Have you got a prick that is fifteen inches long?”
“No,.” answers Zabriski.
“Is your prick five inches wide?” asks Dougie.
“No,” replies Zabriski.
“Well, that’s your answer then,” says Dougie. “You are letting in too much light.”

Osho,
Could you please say something about curiosity? I often have experienced it as something which makes me feel alive and excited. But when I tried to meditate, it turned out to be a disturbance. And now, when I sit in your presence, getting more and more silent, I don't want to know anything anymore.
Curiosity is childish. It certainly keeps you excited, but it has never made anyone wise, in tune with himself and the universe. Curiosity is a kind of itching in the head. You scratch, it feels good, but don’t scratch too much; scratch in different places. But itching is not going to make your intelligence more pure, more clear, more far-reaching. That’s why in meditation it becomes a disturbance. It is your old habit, so you go on being curious about everything, what it is.
But in meditation you have to remain centered within yourself: no curiosity, no thinking, no question. And I am happy that you managed and that you can say, “Now when I sit in your presence, getting more and more silent, I don’t want to know anything anymore.” To not want to know anything anymore is to be at the stage of a sage. He knows nothing, he becomes again a child; he becomes immensely silent, no thought arises. He enjoys existence for the first time, because that old disturbance of knowing is no longer there.

There used to be a very knowledgeable man, Mahatma Bhagwandin. I came in contact with him when I was very young and he was very old. We used to go for walks in the forest and he knew about everything. He knew the names, Latin names, of all the trees, the flowers and their uses, medicinal uses, what miracles can be done with the roots or trees or flowers or leaves. The first day I heard him continuously for the three hours we were in the forest.
The second day I said to him, “You know so much, I don’t think you are going to die.”
He said, “What gave you this idea?”
I said, “Your great knowledge will certainly help you. I don’t know anything, but I enjoy the trees. I don’t know the name – and I don’t see the point that the name is needed to enjoy the tree, the name is needed to enjoy the flower, or its medicinal qualities are to be known.”
He was a very intellectual man, but when I said this to him there was silence for a few moments as we walked. And then he said, “Perhaps you are right. In fact I have never enjoyed anything, everything has been a problem: what are its qualities, what are its medicinal properties, how it can be used, in what quantities…. You are perhaps right, that I have missed enjoying existence. I always look, curious for more knowledge.”
The day he died it happened I was also in the same city. I was passing by and somebody informed me that Bhagwandin was on his deathbed. He was nearabout eighty years old. I rushed…he had almost become a skeleton; I had not seen him for five years. His last words to me were, “You were right. I wasted my life in unnecessary curiosity, I burned myself with knowledge. Innocence is the way to enjoy.”

It is perfectly good that now you are not interested in knowing anything anymore. Keep alert about it. Mind is cunning, it comes from the back door. It will try a few times at least, but remain alert.
Knowledge is of no use. When knowledge is not there, wisdom blossoms.
Meditation is only a technique to throw out all knowledge and make you capable of seeing with innocent eyes. Then everything – the sounds of the birds, this immense silence, the sun passing through the bamboos – everything becomes such a joy that one wants to sing, one wants to play a guitar, one wants to dance, or one wants simply to sit silently and enjoy the tremendous miracle of this existence.
You are moving in the right direction. Keep on moving. Never forget for a single moment that mind will try…it is old, long, long cultivated by you. It takes a little time for it to understand that it is no longer welcome. Up to that moment one has to be very alert.

A Viking longship comes to the shore and out jumps a large, hairy Viking in full battle dress. He strides across the beach, climbs the cliffs, and trots into the nearest village. Finding no one around, he hammers on the door of one of the huts and a pretty girl opens it.
The big Viking grabs her by the arm and snarls, “Have you been raped lately?”
“No!” shrieks the terrified girl.
“Okay,” says the Viking, “has your village been pillaged or burned down recently?”
The girl shakes her head. The Viking releases her and runs as fast as he can back to his ship. The ship sails further up the coast to another deserted cove. Exactly the same things happen.
The Viking arrives in another village and grabs the first girl he finds. “Have you been raped lately?” he asks. “And has your village been burned to the ground in the last three weeks?”
The terrified girl says no to both questions and runs away.
The Viking takes off his helmet and scratches his head. “Well,” he mutters to himself, “I wonder where the boys have got to?”

Osho,
Why do I have so much difficulty when I have to decide something, for instance, whether I should go or stay here longer? I do not seem to be able to solve such problems.
You are asking the question to a wrong person because I don’t have any experience of that type. Either I do it or I don’t do it, but I am never wavering. This is the wavering mind: to be or not to be. But that is the nature of the mind. It cannot decide anything, it goes on and on…. But have you noticed one thing? Whether you decide or not, something happens. Either you go or you remain. So why waste time? Just look directly into the situation, balance the alternatives. This is the only possibility right now for you.
If you have succeeded in being in deep meditation, there is no need. Meditation has a clarity – unwavering, unhesitating. It knows no alternatives, it simply goes on doing what the whole being says to do; it is undivided. But mind is split.
Now you are saying, “Why do I have so much difficulty when I have to decide something, for instance, whether I should go or stay here longer? I do not seem to be able to solve such problems.” These are not problems. They indicate your divided mind, the split mind, and the trouble with the split mind is that whatever you do, you will repent. If you stay here you will continuously think, “It would have been better to have gone.” If you go away, you will look back and you will think, “What kind of stupidity have I done? I should have stayed.”
When you ask such questions to me, you put me in great trouble. I cannot decide whether you should go or you should stay. You just, on the level of the split mind, weigh – what are the cons and what are the pros? Why do you want to go? What is there that is pulling you? And why do you want to stay here? What is there that is stopping you from going?
Watch very impartially, as if it is not your problem but somebody else’s problem. You have to work it out, and whichever side seems to be the weightier, do it. It will not be a hundred percent total, but at least you can attain seventy-five percent. If you want a hundred percent totality then this question, or any other question, is not the issue.
Meditate, so that the split mind disappears. The meditator simply goes, does things. He has no regret, no repentance; he never thinks for a single moment that he should have done something else which would have been better. He has put his whole totality in – nothing could be better than that.
That experience becomes one of tremendous transformation, when you put your whole totality there. If you can be totally here, be here, then forget about going anywhere else. If you want to go, then go totally, then forget about me and this place. But do things with a totality of being; otherwise you will be always feeling guilty that you have not done the right thing, that you have missed the train unnecessarily. I have never worked that way.

I was teaching in the university, and without taking any leave from the university I was traveling all over the country, because leave was only twenty days per year and I was traveling twenty days per month.
The vice-chancellor called me and he said, “I don’t want to lose you. You are part of our beautiful university; without you…nobody is going to replace you. But just take a little care – everybody thinks you are here and in the newspapers we hear that you have been lecturing in Madras, in Calcutta, in Amritsar, in Srinagar. It makes me embarrassed. People bring those news cuttings to me, saying, ‘Look, he is in Srinagar.’”
I immediately wrote my resignation and gave it to him. He said, “What are you doing? I am not asking for your resignation.”
I said, “You are not asking, but this is what I am doing with totality.”
He said, “I was always afraid…that’s why I was not mentioning it to you. Please take it back.”
I said, “Now that is impossible, you will have to accept it. As far as my work is concerned, I have completed it in this university. You cannot call a single student who can complain against me. What people do in thirty days, I can do in one week, so the work has not suffered. What concern is it for you, where I am?”
He said, “It is not my concern. You just take your resignation back; otherwise the whole university, particularly the students, will kill me!”
I said, “There is no harm in it. You need to be killed, it is time. You are seventy-five.”
He said, “You are a strange fellow.”
I said, “I have been here nine years in this university. Have you come to know now that I am a strange fellow?”
In the evening he came back to my home and said, “You just take it back; I have not told anybody. This resignation will hurt me.”
I said, “I don’t want to hurt you. What you said was true. You cannot give me that much leave – it is almost the whole year I am wandering around the country. But you cannot tell me that I am not teaching. I am teaching your people and I am teaching all around the country. I am teaching twenty-four hours a day.”
He said, “I understand. You take the resignation back.”
I said, “That is impossible, I never take anything back. And I am not angry at you – in fact, I wanted to get rid of this teaching job. When I can teach fifty thousand people, why should I bother with twenty people? It is a sheer wastage. You have helped me, you should feel good about it; you should have done it before!”
When my father heard about it, he came from his village to the university city and he said, “I know, with you nothing can be changed. I have not come to say to take your resignation back, because your vice-chancellor has written to me, saying, ‘Come and try to convince him to take his resignation back,’ but I know you more – he does not know you. So I cannot say anything about it. I have come only to say that if at any time you need money I will be always available, as long as I am alive.”
I said, “I will not need money. I have never contributed anything to the family except trouble. And you have enough financial problems.”
He said, “If you have said you are not going to take any money, there is no point in arguing with you. I will do something on my own without asking you.”
I said, “That is up to you.”
What he did was, he made a beautiful house with all the facilities that I would need; he put money in a bank account so that in case I wanted, I could come back. He created a beautiful garden around the house – he knew my likings. And I was not even aware of it. I became aware of it when he died. When he died, my brothers informed me, “This property is in your name and we all want to come to the ashram. So you have to sign a letter giving authority so that it can be sold and the bank account can be closed.”
I said, “I don’t possess anything and I have told my father not to do any such thing, but he never asked me.” So I had my secretary give an affidavit on my account, saying that I don’t write, don’t sign anything, and she is allowed to do all kinds of transactions for me. The officials of that village knew me perfectly well, so they did not create any trouble. The house was sold, the account was closed.

If you have a clarity, you simply follow your light that goes on leading you, and you don’t go astray here and there, you don’t become accidental.
What you are asking is to remain split, is to remain accidental. My suggestion is, meditate a little more so that this whole conflict disappears. Then whatever the result, whether you stay here or you go somewhere else, you have my blessings. It does not matter. What matters is your clarity and a decision, a conclusion out of that clarity.
Today let me leave you in silence.
Be utterly quiet, as if there is nobody here…

============================================================

Osho,
At various times I have heard you describe your work as “an experiment to provoke God” and “a model city for the future.” then there was the world tour.
In the present context of accelerating global crisis, how would you describe your work now, and what is happening to those who have gathered around you here?
There are many things you have asked. The most fundamental thing is to remember that whatever is happening here is not work. To call it work implies tension, worry, and a fear of failure. It is not work, but a playful relationship with existence.
As far as the world of man is concerned, I don’t think there is much chance of converting the masses against their own past. They are creations of the past, and their past will come to its crescendo in the coming crisis. The masses will be drowned in that crisis. I feel sad about it, but the truth has to be said.
Only a few people in the world will be able to survive after this global suicide, and those will be the people who are deeply rooted in consciousness: alert, aware, loving, and ready to disconnect themselves with the past completely and unconditionally, and ready to begin the New Man and the new humanity with the freshness of a child. I have been enjoying the fact that there are many people in the world who are capable of going deep into themselves. Their only hope is a self-realized being.
It is too late to do anything to prevent the immense destruction that is going to happen. If we can protect only a few genuine human beings, that will be enough, more than enough. The past of humanity has been absolutely accidental; they have been doing things without knowing their consequences. Now we are suffering the consequences and there is no way to change those consequences.
For example, the whole ecology around the earth has been destroyed. Life does not exist as separate islands; not a single man is an island. Everything is interwoven. You have heard these two words, dependence and independence. Both are unreal; the reality is interdependence. We are all so interdependent on each other – not only men on other men, not only nations on other nations, but trees and man, animals and trees, birds and the sun, the moon and the oceans…everything is interwoven. And the past humanity has never thought about it, that it is a cosmos. They went on thinking in terms of taking everything separately. It was impossible for people in the past to think that man and trees are connected, that they are interdependent.
You cannot live without trees, and neither can trees live without you. But it is too late. Hundred-year-old, two-hundred-year-old, even four-thousand-year-old trees have been destroyed and cut to create more newsprint for all kinds of stupid newspapers, without ever giving any consideration to what you are doing. You will not be able to replace them.

Just in Nepal…unfortunately it is the poorest country in the world. It has nothing except the eternal Himalayas and the deep forest, ancient and old. It has been selling its forest to different countries – that is the only commodity it can sell. In the last thirty years, half of the trees of Nepal have disappeared, and for the coming thirty years, Russia has purchased the rights to the remaining forest. And they are cutting trees not in the old way, with an ax, but by very modern techniques so that in a day thousands of trees simply disappear. Miles of land are becoming desert.
These trees were preventing the rivers of the Himalayas from coming down with too much force, because the rivers had to pass all these trees and every tree was lessening the force, slowing down the flow of water. By the time they reached Bangladesh, where they meet with the ocean, the quantity of water coming was exactly as much as the ocean could absorb. But now those trees have disappeared.
Rivers are coming with such great force, and with such a quantity of water, that the ocean cannot absorb it so quickly. It returns it, and Bangladesh is suffering continually, every year, from great floods, strange floods – rivers flowing backward because the ocean will not accept the water. They destroy all the crops of Bangladesh. Bangladesh is poor, and these floods are killing thousands of people, thousands of animals, destroying thousands of houses. And now Bangladesh cannot do anything. It is beyond its power to tell Nepal, “Please don’t cut the trees.”
In the first place, even if Nepal stops cutting the trees, the wrong has already been done. And in the second place, Nepal cannot stop cutting those trees; it has sold them even for the future thirty years. It has taken the money to survive.
A similar kind of situation exists in many areas of the world. There are many gases which are being produced by our factories which have made us aware of a strange phenomenon. Those gases move upward and make holes in a certain layer called ozone, a variety of oxygen, which covers the earth two hundred miles up, the whole area of air. Ozone is absolutely necessary for humanity, for animals, for trees, because not all sun rays are life-giving. There are a few sun rays which are life-destructive. Ozone turns those life-destructive rays back and allows only life-affirmative rays. Now great holes have been created by the gases that our factories and industries create, and from those holes, death rays from the sun are entering into our atmosphere.
This earth has never been so sick; it has never been so much in danger of new diseases. Now the vested interests are not ready to listen, to stop these factories or find alternatives. And scientists are engaged only in creating more war material. No government is ready to give them support so they can create more ozone and fill up the gaps which, unconsciously, we ourselves have created.
My emphasis is that our problems are international but our solutions are national. No nation is able to solve them. I take it as a great challenge and as a great opportunity: nations should be collapsed into one world government.
It was tried by the League of Nations before the second world war, but it could not succeed. It simply remained a debating club. The second world war destroyed the very credibility of the League of Nations. But the necessity was still there; therefore they had to create the United Nations organization, the UN But the UN is as much a failure as the League of Nations was. Again, it is still a debating club because it has no power. It cannot implement anything, it is just a formal club.
I would like a world government. All nations should surrender their armies, their arms to the world government. Certainly if there is a world government, neither armies are needed, nor arms. With whom are you going to have a war? To find the closest neighbor among the planets for some kind of war is almost impossible.
Nations have become out of date, but they go on existing – and they are the greatest problem. Looking at the world, just like a bird looks, a strange feeling arises: we have everything, just we need one humanity.
India has so much coal – and coal is not created in a day; it takes millions of years for wood to become coal. Then after millions of years more the same coal becomes diamonds. The elements that make up the coal and the diamond are the same. It is the coal under pressure for millions of years that creates the hardest thing in the world, the diamond.
India has so much coal; Russia has no coal at all, but they have an overproduction of wheat. Half the population of India goes on starving; it needs wheat, it certainly cannot eat coal. But in Russia in the time of Stalin they were burning wheat in their railway trains instead of coal. They don’t have coal but now they have a super-technological production of crops, fruits. It was easy for them to burn the wheat, but they didn’t know that they were burning millions of people, who were dying because they didn’t have anything to eat.
Problems are worldwide.
Solutions have also to be worldwide.
And my understanding is absolutely clear, that there are things…somewhere they are not needed and somewhere the very life depends on them. A world government means looking at the whole situation of this globe and shifting things where they are needed. It is one humanity.
In Ethiopia one thousand people per day were dying and in Europe they were drowning billions of dollars worth of food in the ocean, because they have better technology for production. Anybody looking from the outside will think that humanity is insane. Thousands of people are dying and mountains of butter and other foodstuff is being drowned in the ocean. One recent year when America drowned its foodstuff, just the expense of drowning it was two billion dollars. It was not the cost of the product, it was just the cost of carrying it to the ocean and drowning it.
America itself has thirty million people who cannot afford enough food. It is not a question of giving to somebody else, it is a question of giving to its own people. But the problem becomes complicated, because if you start giving free food to thirty million people, then others will start asking, “Why should we pay for our food?” Then the prices of things will go down. With the prices going down, the farmers will not be interested anymore in producing – what is the point? Afraid of disturbing the economy, they let thirty million people die on the streets and go on drowning the superfluous foodstuff in the ocean.
Not only that, exactly thirty million people are dying in American hospitals, nursing homes, from diseases caused by overeating. They cannot be allowed in the home, because in the home it is very difficult to protect the fridge from those people! They are dying because they eat too much, and on the street there are people dying because they have nothing to eat. An exact number: thirty million dying of overeating, and thirty million dying with not enough food. Sixty million people can be immediately saved with a small understanding.
But a bird’s eye view is needed to look at the world, all over, as one unit. Our problems have brought us to a situation where either we will have to commit suicide or we will have to transform man, his old traditions, his conditionings. Those conditionings and those educational systems, those religions that man has followed up to now, have contributed to this crisis. This global suicide is the ultimate outcome of all our cultures, all our philosophies, all our religions. They all have contributed to it – in strange ways, because nobody ever thought of the whole; everybody was looking at a small piece, not bothering about the whole.
For example in India, Jainas only do business. They don’t cultivate, but they need food. They can’t cultivate because Mahavira, their teacher, has told them that if you cultivate you will have to cut plants and plants have life, and nonviolence is his teaching. So they cannot be warriors, they cannot be cultivators, and of course, nobody wants to become sweepers, to become cleaners – because in India, these people are condemned as almost inhuman.
So the only alternative left for Jainas was just to do business, sell things, accumulate money. All their violence became their greed. That is the reason why they are the only people in India who don’t have beggars; they are the richest people in India. But this is a kind of sucking the blood of the society. Everything else is being done by somebody else, and the money somehow goes on moving into hands which don’t do anything.
Mahavira simply thought about his philosophy, but he never thought that this philosophy could not become universal. And that which cannot become universal cannot be true. People will have to cultivate, and certainly plants will have to be cut, crops will have to be cut. This violence cannot be avoided just by not doing it yourself; somebody else is doing it for you.
The situation is the same around the world. Everybody has taken a certain portion of life, ignoring the remaining parts which are essentially joined with it. There are people…for example, the man who created the Nobel Prize committee was the greatest arms producer in the first world war. He earned so much money out of the production of war materials that he created a Nobel Prize for peace.
There is so much money that every year dozens of Nobel Prizes are given – with each Nobel Prize two hundred and fifty thousand dollars also are given – and this all comes only from the interest on the money. The basic money remains in the banks of Switzerland. It will continue forever to give twelve Nobel Prizes per year for creating arts, for creating peace, for creating great poetry, painting, science. And the man who created the money created it by producing war materials. The whole first world war was fought with his weapons – both sides were purchasing from him. He was the greatest arms producer. All the people that died in the first world war, he was responsible for.
The same is happening today. Nobody is interested in the coming crisis, which is not far away. This century is going to end just in twelve years. Twelve years is not a long time; almost everybody present here will be able to see the end of this century. You will be fortunate if you don’t see the very end of life on this earth. Preparations are on the way to destroy the whole earth. And the people who are doing it are doing it behind great names: nations, religions, political ideologies, communism.
It seems man exists for all these kinds of things – communism, democracy, socialism, fascism. The reality should be that everything should exist for man, and if it goes against man it should not exist at all. The whole past of humanity is full of stupid ideologies for which people have been crusading, killing, murdering, burning living people. We have to drop all this insanity.
If nations disappear, the second great disease is religions, because they have been fighting, they have been killing, and for reasons in which nobody is really interested. I have never come across a man who is really interested in God. If you give him five rupees in one hand and God in another, he will take the five rupees and he will say, “God is eternal, we will see later on. For the moment five rupees will be helpful.”
Who is interested in God except the priests? – because that is their business, and they want their business to spread.

When I was being harassed in America, taken from one jail to another jail, my airplane passed over a beautiful city, Salt Lake City. In the night it looked tremendously beautiful, very planned. It is very intelligently managed by a certain Christian sect, the Mormons. Their leader was killed in America, shot dead because Mormons were teaching something against the old orthodox Christianity. They were saying that their president, their leader, had direct contact with God. That cannot be allowed. Only the pope has direct contact with God.
Now, all kinds of idiots become leaders, and because he was shot and killed – it always happens – the followers became very fanatical. They created this Salt Lake City. Ninety-eight percent of the people in Salt Lake City are Mormons and all around the world there are millions of other Mormons. It is the duty of every Mormon to send at least one dollar every day to Salt Lake City, which is the capital of their religion. One million dollars every day reach Salt Lake City.
What is being done with those one million dollars? The empire is spreading; Salt Lake City is becoming almost a big empire. And the people who believe in it are so fanatical – are bound to be, because their leader was saying the same stupid kind of thing as Jesus was saying. If Jesus could create such a vast Christianity…. They choose their president and every president, once he is chosen, has direct contact with God, and whatever he orders has to be followed.
I would not have come to know all this about the Mormons and their city…. Just by chance, where our commune was situated in Oregon, three magistrates had to decide whether to give Rajneeshpuram the status of a city or not. One of them was a Mormon, and he was the most influential of the three. One was against; the other was just wavering, but because of the Mormon he voted for the city.
The Mormon judge used to come to the commune, and he loved the place. And he himself told my secretary, “You should be alert and aware, because what has happened to our leader…. We were not doing any harm to anyone, but our leader was shot. And the man you are following is saying such outrageous things that the danger is always there.”
And what happened? Because of this Mormon judge the city was recognized. For two years the city was on the map of America, in geography books. The federal government was giving money to it, as to any city; the state government was giving money to it. They managed a very tricky thing. They persuaded the president of the Mormons to send a message to the judge, “You have been chosen by God to go to Nigeria for missionary work.”
I wrote a letter to him, saying, “It is very strange that in the whole world God has chosen you to go to Nigeria. I suspect there is politics behind it – Ronald Reagan wants you to be removed from the place. The only way to remove you is a direct order from God.”
And actually what I had visualized happened. The moment he was removed another person was appointed and the three judges decided that the city was no longer a city. That’s what Ronald Reagan and his government wanted: first take away the recognition, then it is easy to destroy it. And they destroyed it. I had sent a message to the magistrate, saying, “You will be responsible for the destruction. You don’t understand that it is a political strategy.”
After one year, when he came back, he recognized that something strange had happened. The people who destroyed the commune were also angry with the magistrate who had recognized it. They caught hold of him when he came back from Nigeria, and there was a case against him, alleging that he had taken a bribe from us. And what was the bribe?
He had fifty cows. When he was going to Nigeria, after the city was recognized, he wanted to put those fifty cows somewhere and we were purchasing cows, hens, all kinds of things for the commune. And he was ready to sell them as cheap as possible; he was even ready to contribute them. Because we had purchased those fifty cows, he was dragged to court: “You recognized the city because those people purchased your cows.” Those cows could have been sold anywhere.
Strangely enough those cows were purchased after the city was recognized, months after. When he has received a direct order from God, now what will he do with fifty cows, where will he take them? And where to find a purchaser so quickly? Because he was told, “Immediately move to Nigeria.” He thought that we were in need of them – and we were in need.
They took revenge on him. They removed him from his post; he lost his job and then he was condemned for taking a bribe. I came to know about the Mormons because of this judge, when I heard that God had sent him a direct message. But God is so crazy. He goes on sending different messages to Hindus; to Mohammedans, against them; to Christians against them. Even to different sects of Christians, different messages. Either there are many Gods or there are many pretenders.
And how do these people receive these messages? Nobody gives any evidence. They have been killing, butchering, doing all kinds of things which are inhuman. They have destroyed the one humanity, divided it into pieces.
First the nations should go, if the world is to survive; second, the religions should go. One humanity is enough – there is no need of India and England and Germany. And one religiousness is enough: meditation, truth, love, authenticity, sincerity, which do not need any name – Hindu, Christian, Mohammedan…just one religiousness, a quality, not something organized. The moment organization comes in there is going to be violence, because there will be other organizations in conflict. We need a world of individuals without any organizations. Yes, people who have similar feelings, similar joys, rejoicings, can have gatherings. But there should not be any organizations, hierarchies, bureaucracies.
First nations, second religions, and third, a science completely devoted to better life, to more life, to better intelligence, to more creativity – not to create more war, not to be destructive. If these three things are possible, the whole humanity can be saved from being destroyed by its own leaders – religious, political, social.
This crisis in a way is good because it is going to force people to choose. Do you want to die or do you want to live a new life? Die to the past, drop all that has been given as heritage from the past and start fresh, as if you have descended on this earth for the first time. And then start working with nature not as an enemy but as a friend, and ecology will soon be functioning again as an organic unity.
The damage can be repaired; it is not difficult to make the earth more green. If many trees have been cut, many more trees can be planted. And with scientific help they can grow faster, they can have better foliage. Different kinds of barriers can be created in the rivers so that they don’t flood poor countries like Bangladesh. The same water can create much more electricity and help thousands of villages to have light in the night, to have warmth in the cold winters.
It is a simple thing. All problems are simple, but the basic foundation is the trouble. Those three things will try in every way not to disappear, even at the cost of the whole world disappearing. They will be ready for this disappearance, but they will not be ready to declare, “We surrender to a world organization all our arms, all our armies.”
The function of nations will remain only simple: railway lines, post offices, a small police force to take care of internal affairs. But there is no need of armies. Millions of people are involved in armies, which are useless. They can be put to creative arts, to farming, to gardening. And they are trained people, they can do jobs which no other people can do. An army can make a bridge so quickly – that is its training – it can create more houses for people.
Science is capable now, if it is no longer engaged only in war and creating more war material, to create so much food that five times more people can live happily on this earth than exist today. Today there are only five billion people. Twenty-five billion people can live joyously without hunger, without suffering from diseases. But science should be released from the hands of nations, which are forcing their scientists to create more war material. Scientists are functioning almost like prisoners.
I want it to be known to the whole world: if you are not ready to be one, be ready to disappear from this planet. But I hope there are intelligent people who would like to survive, who would like this beautiful planet to grow more beautiful, this humanity to grow more intelligent. I am afraid perhaps the whole of humanity is not even aware of the danger that is coming closer every moment.
You are asking me, “At various times I have heard you describe your work as ‘an experiment to provoke God….’” It is still the same. I am still trying to provoke the God within you, the divine within you…more consciousness, more light, more aliveness, more ecstasy.
Miserable people are dangerous, for the simple reason that they don’t care whether the earth survives or not. They are so miserable that deep down they may feel that it is better if everything is finished. Who cares, if you are living in misery? Only happy people, ecstatic people, dancing people would like this planet to survive forever. So my effort continues to be the same: An experiment to provoke God.
“…and ‘a model city for the future.’ In the present context of accelerating global crisis, how would you describe your work now, and what is happening to those who have gathered around you here?” It is the same; nothing has changed, because the world crisis has not changed.
The people who have gathered around me are learning how to be more happy, how to be more meditative, how to laugh more, live more, love more, and spread love, laughter around the world. This is the only protection against nuclear weapons. If the whole globe can learn to love and laugh and enjoy and dance, then Ronald Reagan and Gorbachev will look surprised…what has happened? The whole world seems to have gone mad!
People who are happy, contented, are not the people to be forced to kill other people who have not done any harm to them. It is not strange that all the armies, down the ages, have been kept sexually repressed, because sexually repressed people are bound to be destructive. Their very repression forces them to destroy something.
Have you ever watched in your own being: when you are happy, joyful, you want to create something; when you are miserable, suffering, you want to destroy something. It is a revenge. All armies are kept in repressed sexuality so the moment they get to kill that becomes their joy; at least their repressed energies are expressed – of course in a very ugly way, inhuman way, but some expression is there.
Have you watched? – painters, poets, sculptors, dancers are never sexually repressed people. In fact, they are oversexual. They love too much, they love too many people. Perhaps one person is not enough to exhaust their love. They have been condemned by the priests down the ages: these poets, painters, sculptors, musicians, these are not good people. And these are the only people who have made this humanity something beautiful, who have contributed to the world some flowers of joy, some flowers of music, some beautiful dances. What have the priests done to the world? They have burnt women, calling them witches; they have killed people who belong to other faiths. They have not been creative people. They have not enhanced the earth and they have not enhanced life.
We need, with these three fundamental changes, a great respect for creative people of any dimension. And we should learn how to transform our energies so that they are not repressed, so they are expressed in your love, in your laughter, in your joy. This earth is more than a paradise, you don’t have to go anywhere. Paradise is not something that has to be achieved, it is something that has to be created. It depends on us.
This crisis gives a chance for courageous people to disconnect themselves from the past and start living in a new way – not modified, not continuous with the past, not better than the past, but absolutely new.
Find ways to relate in a new way. Forget marriages, start thinking how to inquire into life. Forget all your beliefs, start to meditate in search of finding exactly who you are, because by finding yourself you will have found the very essence of existence. It is immortal and eternal, and those who have found it, their bliss and their benediction is inexpressible.
We need more happy people around the earth to prevent the third world war. You will be amazed, surprised by my answer. You may not be able immediately to find what connection there can be between nuclear weapons and people’s laughter – there is. These nuclear weapons and these destructive war machines cannot work by themselves. They are being worked by human beings, behind them are human hands.
A hand that knows the beauty of a roseflower cannot drop a bomb on Hiroshima. A hand that knows the beauty of love is not the hand to keep a gun loaded with death. Just a little contemplation and you will understand what I am saying.
I am saying, spread laughter, spread love, spread life-affirmative values, grow more flowers around the earth. Everything that is beautiful, appreciate it, and everything that is inhuman, condemn it. Take this whole earth away from the hands of the politicians and the priests and you will have saved the world, and you will have changed the world into a totally new phenomenon, with a new human consciousness. And it has to be done now, because the time is very short. By the end of the twentieth century, either we will enter the first century of a new history of man or there will be no one left alive, not even a single wildflower. Everything will be dead.
There are experiments going on in Russia, and perhaps in America too, with death rays. Rather than dropping a bomb, it is far easier to spread death rays, which simply kill the living people, animals, birds, trees. Only dead things – houses, temples, churches – will remain. It will be really a nightmare. And those death rays are not visible. We know that death rays exist; they are just trying to find out how to spread them, to reach a certain destination and destroy all living beings that come across them.
Man has to be freed from these monsters. Our work here is to teach people consciousness, more awareness, more love, more understanding, more joy, and spread the dance and celebration around the earth. Reduced to a single statement, I can say: if we can make humanity happier, there is not going to be any third world war.

Giovanni wants to have a ride on a bicycle so he decides to go and ask his friend Mario if he can borrow his. On the way he starts to think, “For sure, Mario will tell me to be careful with the bike, but I will tell him not to worry; then he will tell me that his sister wants to use it, but I will tell him that I will be back in time; then I know Mario will get scared and tell me it is not the time of year for riding bikes…”
Meanwhile Giovanni arrives at Mario’s house and he looks up to the window and shouts, “Hey, Mario! Go and fuck yourself, you and your bike!”

Hamish MacTavish has not seen his old friend, Gordon MacPherson for forty years. So when they bump into each other in the street one day, they rush to the nearest pub to celebrate.
“It will be wonderful to have a drink together after all these years,” says Gordon.
“Aye, it will,” says Hamish. “But don’t forget, it is your round.”

There is an accident on the construction site. Seamus runs over to where Paddy is lying in a heap of rubble.
“Are you dead, Paddy, after such a terrible fall?” asks Seamus.
“Yes, certainly I am,” replies Paddy.
“Ah, bejabers!” says Seamus, “you are such a terrible liar, I don’t know whether to believe you or not.”
“That proves I am dead, you idiot,” says Paddy. “If I was alive, you would not be calling me a liar to my face.”

The last…

Hamish MacTavish is careening down the road in his old Ford car when a policeman pulls him over.
“Excuse me, sir,” says the cop. “Would you mind blowing into this bag?”
“By all means,” says Hamish. “Would you like me to play a jig or a reel?”
“No, no,” says the cop. “This bag tells you how much you have been drinking.”
“Oh, there is no need for that,” says Hamish. “I have got one of my own at home…. I married her!”

No, you need one more….

Pope the Polack is very sick. Doctors come from all over the world to try and diagnose his illness, and finally a little Jewish psychiatrist finds the cause of the problem.
He tells the pope, “Your holiness, because you have had nothing to do with women all your life, your hormones are unbalanced and there is only one possible cure. You must make love with a woman.”
“No, no!” cries Pope the Polack, “I can’t. All the vows I have taken…. I just can’t!”
“But, your holiness,” replies the shrink, “you must or you will die, and this too is a mortal sin.”
The pope retires for a few days to consider his fate, and then calls the psychiatrist again.
“Okay,” says Pope the Polack, “I have reached my decision. I will do as you ask. But please, be sure that the girl has nice, big tits.”

============================================================

Osho,
Every time you call homosexuality a perversion, even though you do not condemn homosexuals, I feel hurt as I am a gay. I have tried to look, to watch, to meditate on it but still my feelings, my love go naturally after men. Since being with a man I like and trust, I have felt silence and happiness. But it is difficult to accept myself totally joyfully.
Osho, how can I live these moments without feeling perverted? What is the difference between being totally accepted by you and not being condemned?
The question is immensely important, because the whole future of humanity depends on a few factors: one is homosexuality. First, I would like to explain to you why I call it perversion. And once you understand it, things will be simpler.
There is no biological program in you for homosexuality. The biological program in your sperm is for heterosexuality. I am simply stating a fact, that homosexuality has arisen under ugly pressures in the monasteries of all religions, where it is forced to happen in the name of the purity of celibacy – and in the schools, colleges and in universities where boys and girls are kept separate and teachers and professors function as gods so that no heterosexual relationship happens.
Men and women become sexually mature at the age of thirteen or fourteen. The natural thing would be to allow them the expression of their new area of exploration. Of course, all precautions can be taken so that small boys and girls don’t get into any trouble – particularly the girls, that they should not become pregnant at such an early age.
In the past there was no way, but now we are in a better position. According to me, the pill is the greatest revolution that has happened in history. And now, even better pills are available. The first pill was not a hundred percent foolproof. You have to take it continuously and if you miss one day and by chance you meet your lover…. The human tendency is to think that one does not get pregnant every time, why should it happen at this time? Take the chance. But if hundreds and thousands and millions of people are taking chances, then a few pregnancies are bound to happen.
The society managed forcibly to keep the two sexes apart. And I wondered myself, when I came to know that between the ages of sixteen and eighteen sexual energy, as it happens, is at its peak. It will never be the same power again.
We have arranged marriages after the boys and girls return from the universities – age twenty-four, twenty-five, twenty-six. Their peak point of energy has already passed six or eight years back. They are on the decline. Because of this decline…. And I suspect that religions wanted this decline to happen, because with this declining force you cannot have orgasmic experience. Orgasmic experience is a flood. You are so flooded that you disappear. And I respect the orgasmic experience because my understanding is that all meditations have arisen out of it. All spirituality has arisen out of it, because it has given a taste of the beyond.
By preventing young people until they are twenty-five or twenty-six, first, they will never experience orgasm. Second, they will never think that there is any possibility of a higher consciousness, of a more beautiful space within themselves; that they are not what they see in the mirror, they are much more. In an orgasmic experience they become almost one with the whole. It is the first glimpse – a window opens and they start searching for ways to widen the window, to fly in this open sky.
Nobody has worked it out, how man found meditation, how he started thinking of a spiritual experience of ecstasy. To me, it is very simple. Once the boys and girls have orgasmic experience, they have already tasted the spiritual, the divine, the sacred. Now, in their whole life nothing is going to be of that height.
And secondly, in an orgasmic experience one comes to know that thought stops, time stops. You come to a standstill – no movement. Those who were wise enough, they tried it in another way: how to get rid of thought, time and movement and become absolutely still. And they were surprised that it works both ways; you attain to the same orgasmic experience. But when the orgasmic experience is sexual you are dependent on the other person, and when the orgasmic experience comes out of meditation you attain a tremendous dignity as an individual – independence.
Religions did not want this orgasmic experience to happen to people. And to prevent it, they created the idea of celibacy. It is ugly and very cunning – but priests are cunning. Their whole concern was their own business. If people start experiencing individually, the spiritual and the sacred, then the brahmin priest is no longer needed; neither is the rabbi needed or the catholic priest needed. They have come in direct contact with the universe in such an intimate way that there is no need for any mediator.
To destroy this possibility there were two ways. In the past, they used early marriage: seven years, eight years old. Now, a seven-year old boy is not sexually mature, and neither is the girl. But because they are married, slowly, slowly they are being taught by their relatives and friends and they start playing. Sex becomes just a play to them, and at the most just a method to produce children. They don’t have any time to experience what could have turned them in a spiritual direction. This has been followed for centuries. They are too burdened too early. And the birth of children does not depend on orgasmic experience.
So sex has to be understood in two ways: on the one hand it reproduces the species, which is a biological phenomenon; on the other hand, it creates an energy experience which no religion, no politician would like people to have, because that will create the greatest revolution in the world. People will have a direct contact with existence – no hell, holy scripture; no priest, no mediators. And these are the people who have been the parasites of humanity. But the times changed, education came into the world; students had to leave their home and live in hostels, boys with boys, girls with girls. That also contributed to the perversion.
I am not condemning it, I am simply telling you how it happened. And when I say perversion, I don’t mean by it any condemnation. I simply mean going away from the natural course of things. If a boy from fourteen to twenty-five – that is a long period – becomes homosexual, then that becomes a deep-rooted habit in him, so even when he is married his interest is not in women. Religions don’t want men to be interested in women, nor do they want women to be interested in men. And they have made a very detailed strategy, slowly, slowly over thousands of years.
In the present, monasteries create homosexuals, universities create homosexuals, armies create homosexuals. Wherever one sex gathers, sooner or later they start finding ways to release each other’s energies.
So the first thing to remember: I will continue to call it perversion because it is perversion. It is against nature. Nature never produces anything which is useless. Homosexuality is useless; it does not generate anything in you. Neither can it produce children, nor can it give you an orgasmic experience. Have you ever heard of homosexuals having orgasmic experience? All they have is a sexual release. The energy accumulates and becomes a tension – it needs some release. Homosexuals know only ejaculation, they don’t know what they are missing – the orgasm.
So sexual energy runs parallel in two ways. On one hand it produces children, on the other hand it can produce in you a new being. Homosexuality destroys both. And do you want me to call it a natural thing? It is destructive, it is perversion. I can understand that it may be hurting you. But if you have cancer and the doctor says to you, “It is cancer,” it hurts, but it has to be said; otherwise there is no way to operate upon you, to remove the cancer. And homosexuality has become far more dangerous than cancer. Nobody was intentionally moving in that direction, but that’s how things happen – in the unknown, in the darkness.
Homosexuals, because they were perverted, created the disease AIDS. Heterosexuality creates life – life for your children and a divine life for you. Homosexuality is absolutely barren; it does not create anything. Slowly, slowly as it spread…perhaps it has been happening and we were not aware of it. The awareness came just within the last five years, when doctors found that the homosexuals with AIDS lose their resistance against any infection, and their life span is not more than six months to two years.
I was the first in the whole world to make people aware of it. Governments were hiding it, doctors were not wanting to talk about it, scientists were not revealing it to the people. They had their reasons; it looks ugly if the nation has to declare that it has thousands of homosexuals. It is not a glory, it simply means that so many people have become perverted. And because of AIDS, the danger became more.
To accept that one million people are suffering from AIDS in one country…. The problem is, what are the politicians going to do about it? Nothing can be done about it. There is no possibility, according to the scientists, to cure it. It is just like death, a slow death. You cannot cure death, slow or fast. And it looks ugly for nations to recognize it. Many nations have not even bothered to have a census about how many people are homosexual because they are potential AIDS patients. Doctors are afraid to tell anybody they have AIDS because then they will have to be admitted into a hospital.
The disease is such as man has never known. Anything infected coming out of the body… Even kissing…because through saliva is a way for the virus to be passed on, from one mouth to another mouth.
It is very strange that only one primitive tribe of Eskimos have never kissed. And when for the first time Christian missionaries arrived to convert them to Christianity, the Eskimos could not contain themselves laughing when they saw them kissing each other. Such a dirty habit! Saliva carries all kinds of viruses, all kinds of diseases. Particularly, kissing is not anything like as good as the poets have been praising it to be. It is certainly a dirty habit.
Eskimos also express their love. But love should be expressed in a cleaner way: they rub their noses with each other. Noses are very clean and cool – unless they are running. Those periods are avoided; Eskimos never kiss noses if their noses are running!
Sexual contact is bound to give AIDS to the partner who did not have it. A mother’s milk can give AIDS to her children. You will be surprised to know that there are now children who were born with AIDS – because the father must have been suffering from AIDS and the sperm carried the virus into the mother’s womb – small children…. When I condemned it in a world press conference, journalists laughed at me, politicians laughed at me. And they said that I was unnecessarily making a small thing too big, because I said that two-thirds of humanity is going to die through AIDS. I proposed what precautions should be taken, and now many civilized countries have adopted the same procedures – without, of course, mentioning my name.
My name seems to be dynamite. Even my own people are afraid to utter it, what to say about others? Now the same journalists are reporting in great praise about their governments, that they are taking precautions. This could have been done three years ago and would have saved millions of people from catching the disease. Now, as far as I can see, it is uncontrollable.
Doctors don’t want to admit it, so they simply give a certificate saying that the person does not have AIDS, because to admit an AIDS patient is dangerous: for the nurses, for the doctor. Coming in contact with such a man, the best way is simply to say, “We examined you and you are negative. You don’t have AIDS. You don’t need to worry.” They have shifted their responsibility, but they have created a danger for the society. Now this man will move….
Here, there are a few sannyasins…because I have made it an absolute rule that no AIDS-positive person should be allowed to enter the gate. If he wants to go anywhere, he should go to the Vatican. The Vatican is the most responsible for creating AIDS. And the pope’s position has to be changed – not as a representative of God but as the superintendent of an AIDS hospital. All people suffering from AIDS should move toward the Vatican.
I have prohibited their entry. People have to bring a certificate saying that they are negative. But you will not believe how irresponsible man can be. There are many doctors who are selling negative certificates, so you simply give some money…there is no need to be worried, take the certificate. It seems we will have to make our own lab to test people before we allow them into the campus. Their certificates can be bogus. You give just a few rupees, and in Mumbai you can get a certificate. And this is happening all around the world. But such irresponsibility has never been seen. They only think of themselves and the money that they are getting. They are not worried what harm this man can do – to his friends, to his family, to his children, to his wife.
People are trying to get negative certificates because they don’t want to be condemned by the society, and they don’t want their wives and their children and their parents to feel embarrassed that they have got AIDS. Friends will no longer be friends. So to protect one’s ego, people are trying to hide the fact. And because of the hiding of the fact, it is spreading like wildfire all over the world.
Do you want me to not call homosexuality perversion because it hurts you? If it hurts you, I am not responsible for your hurt. Your priests who have been teaching celibacy are responsible. But strange – governments are making laws against homosexuality, that it is now a crime. Anybody found to be homosexual can be sent to jail. But homosexuality is not the real root, the real root is the idea of celibacy.
Celibacy is the real perversion, but not a single man in the whole world has condemned celibacy, because nobody wants all the religions to be against him. But I am at ease because already the whole world is against me. What more can it do? I say it definitively: celibacy should be made one of the most heinous crimes. The religions which teach it should be banned.
And all celibates in the monasteries, the monks of different religions, should be told, “Get married, or at least find a girlfriend. You have lived with boyfriends long enough.”
The people who have AIDS should be segregated. They should have their own small cities, where all are suffering from AIDS – the doctors, the nurses, the patients, the scientists. Then there is no danger. You cannot have, like double pneumonia, double AIDS – single is enough!
If humanity functions sanely, then AIDS patients should be taken care of in remote places. They can work, they can earn, but their cities should be closed cities. They cannot move around in the world, spreading a fatal disease. And it is out of compassion that I am saying this. If the people who are suffering from AIDS understand the meaning of compassion, they themselves should move out of the crowd, live with the same kind of people who are suffering; make small villages, islands, if they want to save humanity. Otherwise, even without nuclear weapons humanity will be destroyed. And this destruction will be very ugly.
If you feel hurt, book a ticket to Rome. Hit as hard as you can at the pope: “You are not the representative of God, you are the representative of the homosexuals; particularly the people who have reached the point where homosexuality has created AIDS.” The name of the Vatican should be changed: “AIDS Camp” seems to be perfectly good. And I don’t want the pope to be demoted. He should remain the superintendent of the AIDS Camp.
But you cannot stop me just because you feel hurt. I am not only concerned with you, I am also concerned with the whole of humanity. To avoid hurting a single person and create a dangerous situation for many…. I cannot do that.
You say, “I have tried to look, to watch, to meditate on it. But still my feelings, my love go naturally after men.” It is a very strange perversion. The natural attraction is always for the opposite polarity. Man and woman are opposite polarities, like negative and positive electrons. If you are attracted only toward men, something is wrong in you. You should go through some groups, you should learn how to love a woman. In fact, it is so ugly even to think that a man is attracted toward a man and not toward a woman.
Women are doing the same because they want to be equal. The women involved in the liberation movement have become lesbians; their idea is to boycott men completely. Lesbianism is old, but not very widespread. There is a possibility that there may not be any harm in it, because two negatives cannot create anything – neither a child nor a painting. For creating anything two positives are needed. So perhaps lesbianism may not create a disease like AIDS, but one never knows. Up to now we were not aware that homosexuality was going to create AIDS. Perhaps it takes a certain time. And for the negative it will take a longer time. It is possible they may even create a far more dangerous disease.
But this is sheer insanity. The people who are homosexuals should move and create homosexual communes, the women who are lesbians should move and create lesbian communes. But leave the rest of humanity. Why torture them? Why destroy them? You don’t have the right. You are completely free to do what you want to do, but don’t interfere in anybody’s life. I have every condemnation when someone interferes in others’ lives.
And you are asking me, “Since being with a man I like and trust, I have felt silence and happiness.” That’s good – just go to a homosexual commune, feel happy and feel silence.
“But it is difficult to accept myself totally joyfully.” Why should you not accept? If you sow the seeds you should accept the flowers too. If you accept homosexuality joyfully, and you feel happy with men and you trust men and like them, then there is no need to feel any guilt. You have chosen to die within two years. It is your choice. Make as much happiness as you can within these two years. But you are not feeling totally joyful – feel totally condemned. I am preaching totality; it does not matter what is total. Feel totally condemned, feel totally corrupted, feel totally perverted and rejoice with all the perverts.
And you ask me, “How can I live these moments without feeling perverted?” There is no need. You are perverted. Why should you live these moments without feeling perverted? Live these moments knowing fully that you are perverted. Just as somebody is a man, somebody is a woman, somebody is a bird, somebody is a tree, you are a pervert.
“What is the difference,” you are asking, “between being totally accepted by you and not being condemned?” I do everything totally. I accept you totally in your natural flowering, and I condemn you totally in your perversion. And for me there is no problem, I am always total. My yes is total, my no is total. But if you have chosen the no, then I will condemn you totally. You cannot question my totality.
But the simple thing is – and homosexuals around the world are not doing it…. In Texas they created a law against homosexuality, that homosexuals can be jailed for years. One million homosexuals protested outside the parliament. I don’t think that homosexuality should be punished by jail. Homosexuals should be given different localities. They can live in their own world, in their own way, and be happy, but they should not be allowed to move in the wider society, spreading all kinds of dangerous viruses.
But nobody seems to do anything about it. There are deserts, there are islands uninhabited. Just give them to homosexuals. Divide the world into heterosexual and homosexual – and there should be no communication between them.
Or you change yourself. I know changing is difficult. Once you have become accustomed to a certain sexual behavior it becomes very difficult to change the behavior. Ten or twelve years are enough to make it your second nature, unless you are courageous enough, and can discipline yourself and drop that perversion and be natural. It is possible, but you will need guts for it.
I am not only answering you, I am answering all the homosexuals of the world. It is their duty to declare that they are homosexuals. It is their duty to say that they want their own communes. It is the duty of lesbian women to say that they want their own communes. And then it is perfectly okay – you leave the world at peace. Otherwise, my prediction that two-thirds of humanity will die from AIDS is coming closer.
In poor countries, we don’t even have any idea how many people are homosexuals, how many people are suffering from AIDS. The government is not interested in your life. So almost all the poor countries have no data; only the very rich countries have now become aware of the fact. And they are collecting data but the statistics should be multiplied by at least five, because it is very difficult to find someone who will admit that they are gay.
Now the very word has become condemned, homosexuals are going underground. They had their restaurants, their clubs – they have changed their names; the whole process is going on. And the people who create the law, most of them are homosexuals. It is a very difficult situation. Teachers, professors, principals are mostly homosexual, because they have access to beautiful boys. And the people of power, whether they are priests or politicians, have power and they can manage very easily. But they don’t know that they are risking the whole life of this planet.
If there is a choice to commit suicide, I would rather people are given poison than have an ugly disease like AIDS. If we decide to destroy the planet then destroy it. But destroy it as peacefully, as beautifully as possible, not with ugly diseases and everybody feeling guilty. And I know you are only a victim. You should not feel guilty, you should feel revengeful.
Guilt is inverted revenge.
Make it change into authentic revenge.
Who are the people who have created the situation? These people should be punished. If the government does not punish them, then you make committees and punish them. If there are one million homosexuals just in a small state, Texas, how many millions of homosexuals are there around the world? These millions of people should make their own committees and punish the priests and the people who have been teaching celibacy. They have perverted you. You need not feel guilty, you need to feel totally revengeful – because it is not only your question, the whole life on this planet is reaching, from many directions, to an end.
We can prevent politicians from using nuclear weapons, but what to do with AIDS? And people, even though they are intelligent, behave very unintelligently. One of my sannyasins and therapists, Veeresh, allows people suffering from AIDS into his groups. Just now I have been told that he tells people, “Osho teaches compassion, so you all be compassionate to this fellow. Hug him, kiss him, love him.”
Now, this is a great interpretation of compassion! He should have told the man who is suffering from AIDS, “Osho teaches compassion. Now, it is your compassion not to touch people. Tell them that you are suffering from AIDS and you don’t want to spread it.” Rather than telling him that, he is telling other group participants to hug him, and they are hugging him. That fellow may spread AIDS to the whole group. And because he is respected there, naturally he will feel very good.
Here, we will be creating an institute to check your AIDS report, whether it is authentic or not. I want my people to be saved not only from nuclear weapons, but also from inner causes that can destroy the whole humanity.

Hymie Goldberg is telling Moishe Finkelstein about the new town brothel.
“It is fantastic,” says Hymie. “You can screw all night, and when you leave they give you breakfast and twenty dollars.”
“Have you actually tried it?” asks Moishe.
“No,” admits Hymie, “but Becky has.”

A lawyer has been trying for months to get Mendel Kravitz to pay a bill, but all his letters and telegrams are disregarded. Finally, in desperation he sends Mendel a tear-jerking letter, with a photograph of his little daughter. The lawyer writes under the photo: “Here is the reason I must have the money you owe me.”
Mendel replies by sending a photograph of a beautiful redhead in a bathing suit. The caption on this picture says: “Here is the reason I can’t pay.”

Mendel Kravitz is trying to make out with his secretary. He wines her and dines her and when he gets her back to his apartment, he whispers sweet promises in her ear.
“If we get it together,” murmurs Mendel, “a fur coat or perhaps a trip to Europe.”
The secretary takes him by the hand into the bedroom and they are soon in bed together. Later, while dressing, she asks him when she will get the fur coat he promised.
“What fur coat?” asks Mendel.
“You promised me a fur coat,” insists the girl.
“When I am horny, I will promise anything,” says Mendel. And putting one hand over his heart and the other on his prick, he says, “When he is soft, he is hard. When he is hard, he is soft.”

============================================================

Osho,
I was with a very strict enlightened teacher, Lee Lozowick, in America for six years. While in Boulder, Colorado, I fell in love with your sannyasins, and then you. Now, after one week in Pune, a nagging feeling has arisen in me: have I truly taken sannyas, and are you truly my master?
Prem Majjhama, the question asked by you…you will have to be prepared for a shock. I am going to analyze it point by point. You say, “I was with a very strict enlightened teacher, Lee Lozowick.” I know Lee Lozowick very well. Neither is he strict, nor enlightened. And you remained with him in America for six years. That shows that you are not even intelligent either. If you were really with a master, there was no need to come here. Your innermost being would have been fulfilled, contented, blessed. If you could fall in love with my sannyasins in Boulder, Colorado, Lee Lozowick is not even worthy enough to be compared with my people there.
If you have looked into your question deeply, unprejudicially, silently, then my answer will be very clear to you. In the first place, a teacher is never enlightened. A teacher has teachings; he has a whole system of beliefs. A master is not a teacher. A master is a fire you have to go through so that all that is not gold in you is burnt, and only the pure gold comes out. To be with a master is not an easy job. It is the most difficult journey one can go on.
You wasted your six years. Lee Lozowick himself was with Da Free John. He is not only a fraud, he also betrayed his own teacher. Da Free John is also not a master, but at least he is a teacher of a far higher quality than Lee Lozowick. It happens all the time. People see that so many people are attracted toward certain doctrines, certain personality characteristics, and they feel they can also manage, if not so many people, then a few at least. Lee Lozowick betrayed Da Free John because he does not even mention his name, or that he has been a disciple himself. And how did he become a master? His own teacher has not recognized his enlightenment.
But in America everything is possible. I have heard a wise man saying, “A fraud is someone who can tell you to go to hell so tactfully that you start packing for the trip.” That’s what Da Free John and his disciple Lee Lozowick are. And when I am saying these things, remember, I have no personal antagonism toward anybody. But I have simply to say the truth to you, even if it goes against all manners, etiquette, culture. I am not here to teach you manners, I have to hit directly into your heart with the truth, howsoever much it hurts.
These people have sprung up all over the world. India has suffered from these people for many centuries, but this century is seeing a new phenomenon. The Indian frauds have created similar kinds of people all over the world – pretenders, who know nothing except some strategy that influences people to believe in them; and particularly at this time, when everybody is going down into a deep psychological crisis. Everything seems to be silent on the surface. You may not even be thinking about the third world war, the ecological crisis; you may not be thinking about AIDS. At least consciously you may not be concerned at all what is going to happen to humanity tomorrow, but deep down you cannot avoid it.
Your consciousness is a separate personality, but your unconscious, as you go deeper, becomes more and more part of the whole ocean. So whatever is happening in the soul of the cosmos has ripples in everybody’s unconscious. If you can read your own unconscious, you can read the whole future that is going to happen. But you may know or you may not know about your unconscious situation.
These frauds – the Indians and their by-products, mostly American – are doing a good business. It is said that psychologists build castles in the air, psychoanalysts live in them, and psychiatrists collect the rent. But I wonder who pays the rent? You! I say again, you! You pay the rent, and there are many others who are paying the rent. Those castles do not exist, nobody lives in those castles….
But in a psychological crisis of this intensity – in which we are – everybody is shattered inside, is somehow holding himself together, and anybody who pretends to teach you the way toward the beyond immediately attracts you. You don’t have any way, any criterion, any measurement to figure out whether the man is true or not, whether the man is authentic or not. In the East, because the tradition is more than ten thousand years old, slowly, slowly we have figured out a few indications of an enlightened master. Those indications may be helpful to you.
The authentic master is not at all interested in disciples, in the crowd, in the many numbers around him. He does not brag about it. He attracts only the very intelligent, because what he teaches and whatever he is, is understandable only by very highly intelligent people. Have you ever checked what intelligence quotient you have? Before figuring out whether a master is true or not, you should have a psychological test to find out what is your mental age.
The average mental age of humanity is fourteen years. Now, people with a mental age of fourteen years are not the people to understand something of the transcendental, something of the spiritual, something of the inner. It is time for them to play football, watch boxing matches, sit before their TV, glued to it for seven and a half hours every day. But I have always been wondering…. Nobody ever thinks about how much intelligence you have. Is it enough to be a disciple? Is it enough to be accepted by a master?
A master is not in any way interested in converting you to a certain system of beliefs. If any master is doing that, he is only a teacher. And a teacher carries only borrowed knowledge. He can say beautiful things, but they are all parrot-like. Sometimes he can talk even better than the masters because masters are spontaneous and the teacher has gone through many rehearsals. He is well prepared, he has done his homework, and he goes on teaching the same thing again and again to different people.
A teacher continuously remains consistent with a certain current of ideology. The master is basically contradictory, inconsistent. He has to be, because what he is saying is not within his hands. It is in the hands of the universe itself, he is only a vehicle. Whatever kind of song existence brings to his lips, he cannot edit anything out of it or make any additions, improvements. A master is very raw in the sense that he brings whatever comes from existence exactly as it is. He is never a polished man.
The master does not in any way humiliate you by making you disciples. By accepting you as disciples he gives you dignity and individuality. He asks nothing from you and he goes on giving to you things which have no price, but are immensely valuable. The effort of a master is to become a certain milieu, a certain presence so that he need not even say anything to you. Just sitting by his side, your heart slowly, slowly starts falling in tune with the master. And the master’s heart is in tune with the heart of the universe. Being in tune with the master, you are also in tune with the universe. It is not knowledgeability that makes a master, it is innocence.
And I know absolutely, with certainty, that this fellow, Lee Lozowick, is not an innocent man. He has betrayed his teacher – and you are doing the same here. You have betrayed him. But one cannot blame him, because when he went to Da Free John he must have thought of him as a master and slowly, slowly discovered that he is only a teacher – but if a teacher can attract so many disciples, what is the point of remaining with him? And he started collecting his own disciples.
If you have been with a master, it is almost impossible to desert him. Your love will prevent you from doing that. Your trust will become a Himalaya between you and the whole world. Your master is your whole universe.
And it is strange that you are asking, “Now, after one week in Pune, a nagging feeling has arisen in me: Have I truly taken sannyas, and are you truly my master?” What happened to Lee Lozowick? It took you six years and still you want to go back to him. The reason is clear: it is not that you have found a master in him, you have found in him a recognition for your ego.
Here, your ego is going to be destroyed every day. Unless you disappear completely, leaving only your essential being, you are not a sannyasin. What happens when a person like you, after six or seven days, takes sannyas? What is going on in his mind? He is thinking that by taking sannyas some miracle is going to happen to him. You are absolutely wrong. This sannyas that you take is not going to bring any miracle, it is simply entering into a commune of seekers, making yourself available, becoming an insider and not just a spectator. Then learn step by step the ways of love, the ways of trust; then learn step by step how to enter into your own being. The day you enter into your own center will be the true sannyas. This is only a formality.
With a true sannyasin, an authentic being who has come to his own, the question will not arise, “…and are you truly my master?” There is only one way to find out whether someone is truly your master. If in his presence, if in his universe of seekers, if in his caravan of searchers, you suddenly stumble upon yourself, and you find the ecstasy that you have never experienced, and the blessing that has not been even in your dreams; and after this experience no question arises in you…. That is the very definitive thing, that no question arises in you. All questions have simply fallen, as leaves fall in the fall time from the trees. Only in that experience of the disappearance of questions, and with them thoughts and mind, will you have the answer, that you have found the true master. You cannot decide beforehand, because it is not a market; it is not that somebody has written on his door, “I am the true master.”
You will have to learn patience and waiting. One never knows – it can happen today, it may take years; it all depends on you. The master simply creates a certain subtle atmosphere. That atmosphere is here. If you can get in tune with it, you are a sannyasin. And if you get slowly, slowly dissolved and become part of the dance and the celebration that is going on here, of the meditation and the ecstasy, suddenly you will realize you have come close to an authentic master.
If it does not happen, there can be two reasons: either the master is not authentic or your disciplehood is not authentic. Rather than jumping to the idea that the master is not authentic, it is better first to look at your disciplehood. What have you done by becoming a sannyasin? What changes have happened to you? In what ways have you become more involved in the movement, in what way have you entered yourself, in what way has your lifestyle changed?
Everything depends on you. Giving you sannyas simply means that we accept you, our doors are open to you, not more than that. Now, inside the temple what is happening will depend on you – your intelligence, your integrity, your sincerity, your authentic search for truth. And I cannot think that in six days you have found that meditation leads nowhere, that you have touched the presence of my being. But I will suggest to you, perhaps you should go back to Lee Lozowick, because I am not interested at all in gathering a crowd of unintelligent, impatient people, in a hurry.
You will come back – about that I am certain. But this time you go back; first be finished with Lee Lozowick. That is what is nagging you. You are thinking that perhaps you have left your right master and here you have come into a strange world. Why not go back home? I never want anybody to be here half-heartedly. Either you are here or you are not here; there is no other choice. So you can think it over.
Either say good-bye to your so-called teacher, strict teacher…strictly enlightened. That I have heard for the first time. There have been enlightened people, but strictly enlightened…! So it seems a few are lousy. Gautam Buddha is not a strictly enlightened person – a lousy person in comparison to Lee Lozowick. You just go back to him, because that is the only way to be finished with him.
Now that you know me and you know my people, and you know the space that is being created here, going back to Lee Lozowick you will have something to compare him with. And if you feel to come, then come with totality. Your totality will be respected and loved. And only your totality can make you discover the master that is here.
I am not a teacher, not at all. I have no teaching. I have simply a presence that I want to share with you – in my words, in my silences, in my presence, in my absence. I want you to feel that this small place is not part of the neurotic world outside the gate, that a different kind of consciousness is growing here. It is a nursery. But perhaps…it happens to many people: when they come the second time, then they recognize.
It is just like a joke. There are very few people who understand when they hear a joke for the first time. Most of the women, particularly, who get it for the first time…it simply means that they have good teeth; it does not mean that they have understood the joke. The Englishman never understands when he hears a joke for the first time. He wonders what it is. He gets it in the middle of the night. Thinking about it this way and that way, figuring it out, suddenly he catches the glimpse. He says, “My God!” And then he laughs in his bedroom silently so that nobody can hear.
The German never gets it. He laughs because everybody else is laughing, and if you don’t laugh they will think you are German. The Indian never gets it either. But he does not laugh like the German, just to give company to other people who are laughing. It seems to the Indian that he is too serious a person, far above, spiritual, how can he laugh? It is not that he is spiritual or far above, the real fact is that he does not understand the joke.
I have been searching for a purely Indian joke. I have gone through almost thousands of books in search of a purely Indian joke. I have to confess that there exists no such thing. All jokes that are available in Indian literature are imported.
Only the Jew understands it. But he understands it before you have even finished it. And to tell a joke to a Jew is a very embarrassing experience, because in the middle of the joke he will say, “Shut up! It is an old joke, and moreover you are telling it all wrong.”
I have been watching. Many people have come for the first time, and only the very intelligent have remained – and remained silently, without ever thinking that any other world exists except this commune.
A few remained here just to learn enough so they could go back and become great masters in their own right. They are not interested in truth, they are interested in their own egos. And now there are a few people around the world – they will not mention my name, and they have lived with me for ten years. They are afraid that somebody may recognize: “You have been Osho’s disciple.” They want to erase that part of their life completely so that they can say they are a master, unique; they have discovered the truth themselves, they are not repeating.
I go on receiving their pamphlets and their leaflets and I wonder…these people are either blind or utterly unconscious. They are quoting me, in their name, and they are sending those pamphlets to the sannyasins. And the sannyasins send them to me, saying, “Look what your people are doing.” They have never been my people. They were here just to learn some strategy so that they could be masters.
The third type is more sincere. They come and they don’t feel at ease. It is natural. When you change from one commune to another commune, it is changing from one river to another river. The taste of the water changes, the flow of the river changes. The climate changes, the trees on the banks are different, a different fragrance…everything changes. Naturally one feels to be back in the old, which you have become accustomed to.
I want you to go back, because that will reveal to you that your six years have been a wastage, and your six days here have given you greater insight. And when you come again, you will come clean – clean of your past hanging on. This will bring you a certain maturity that you need.

Little Ernie and little Elmer are outside the whorehouse, and after seeing the comings and goings their curiosity is aroused. So they knock on the door and ask the madam if they can come in and find out what it is all about, but she tells them the price is ten dollars.
After saving their pocket money for weeks they amass the sum of seventy-nine cents and approach the madam again. Being a businesswoman and sensing the possibility of future clients, she takes their seventy-nine cents and tells one of the girls to give them a quick flash of her pussy for their money.
Two minutes later they are leaving the place when Ernie turns to Elmer and says, “I didn’t like the look of that, did you?”
“No,” replies Elmer, “I’m glad we didn’t have ten bucks’ worth.”

Osho,
Why are you against marriage? Women have been, certainly, the cause of their husband's enlightenment.
It is certainly true that without women no man would have ever been enlightened. They create such hell that there is no way out except becoming enlightened. This also explains why very few women have ever become enlightened – and not very strictly enlightened, just so-so. The reason is that husbands are not capable of creating that great a hell. Who is going to help women to become enlightened?
But I am certainly against marriage. My being against marriage has many reasons. One of them is that if there is no marriage, man and woman will be moving freely with each other. And soon you will see there are an equal number of women enlightened as men; this disparity will disappear. There have been thousands of enlightened men and perhaps five enlightened women – you can count them on five fingers. And still, their enlightenment is lukewarm. Once you have released the man and the woman from this bondage, you will be creating a situation in which nobody nags you into enlightenment.
Enlightenment that has come out of nagging is not much of an enlightenment; it is simply escape. I want authentic enlightenment, and that needs absolute freedom from nagging. Nobody is nagging you, nobody is telling you to become enlightened, everybody is accepting you as you are, enlightened or unenlightened. Out of this freedom will come more authentic men and authentic women to become enlightened. But this will be out of freedom, not out of bondage. Not out of misery, despair, agony, but out of joy, out of love, out of orgasmic experiences.
You can see, the quality of enlightenment will be totally different. The first kind of enlightenment is bound to be dry, juiceless…the enlightened man unable to laugh because he is completely afraid, continually defending his achievement because anybody can pull him back into the world.
Gautam Buddha says to his disciples, “Never look, while you are walking, more than four feet ahead so that you will never see any woman’s face.” What kind of fear….? And these people are going to become enlightened.

One disciple is going for a journey, and Buddha says to him, “Remember never to look at a woman.”
The man seems to be some stubborn type. He says, “But there may be some accidental situation when, not knowing, I may have looked at a woman. Then what am I supposed to do?” He is right, because going into the world, there is every possibility of seeing a woman. You can close your eyes then, but you have seen.
Buddha says “Okay, you can see, but never touch.”
But the man is not in any way of a lesser quality than Gautam Buddha. He says, “There is a possibility that one may have to touch a woman. What about that? For example, a woman falls into a ditch and I am alone on the road, and unless I help her, she is going to die. Do you want me to let her die?”
Certainly Buddha cannot say that, so he says, “Okay,” reluctantly. “You can touch in certain emergencies. Don’t make it a common practice. But even if you touch, don’t speak.”
The man said, “This is putting me into a difficult situation. If the woman says something, do you want me not to answer? If a woman asks me where this road goes, should I remain silent, knowing perfectly well where this road goes, that she is going on a wrong road and may suffer for miles and miles and will never reach?”
Just desperate with this man, Buddha says, “Do whatever you want to do!”

But putting people under such conditions to make them enlightened is not my way, and I don’t think it is the right way either. Any kind of experience that may happen in this way cannot be joyous; it cannot blossom into flowers, it cannot release fragrance; it will be dry, dirty, escapist, fearful, always on guard. No, I don’t support any such enlightenment.
I want you to withdraw all miserable conditions from the world, and marriage is one of the most miserable conditions.
Let love be freed from the chains of marriage. Allow humanity to love, to laugh, to enjoy, to celebrate life, to experience life to its very depth.
And out of this intensive experiencing of life will arise a totally different kind of enlightenment which will be able to dance, which will be able to sing, which will be able to laugh. It will have a beauty of its own, a glory, a splendor.
I am introducing a totally new kind of enlightenment into the world. The old one, to me, looks rotten.
That’s why I am against marriage. It will go on creating the rotten enlightenment.

An optimist is a man who marries his secretary and thinks he will still be able to dictate to her.

If married life was supposed to be fun, it would not start in church.

Love is temporary insanity, curable by marriage.

Marriage is permanent insanity, curable only by enlightenment. But that enlightenment will come out of an insanity; its roots, its juices, all will be poisoned.

A single man is one who runs around and gets into all kinds of trouble. A married man does not have to run around.

…He is already in trouble. This trouble creates the possibility of thinking of a life beyond, because this life is finished. If there is not a life beyond, that would be a very terrible and shocking situation.

A wedding day is when rings are put on the finger of a woman and in the nose of a man.

Laugh and the world laughs with you. Weep and you sleep alone.

I am describing these different aspects of marriage…

Notice in a restaurant window: Don’t stand outside and be miserable, come inside and be fed up!

Not to take women seriously is to ask for trouble. To take them seriously is to get it!

All marriages are happy, it’s living together afterward that causes all the trouble.

He that will not reason is a bigot, he that cannot reason is an idiot, and he that dares not reason is a husband.

The best training up to now has been marriage, if you want to attain enlightenment. But that enlightenment will be as miserable as the sources from which it is coming. I want sages who can dance, sages so innocent that they can laugh, sages so innocent that they can enjoy small things of life with such joy, sages who can live on this earth as if it is paradise, not asking for any paradise beyond. But up to now our sages have all been psychologically sick.
A little time for enjoying enlightenment…. If you cannot enjoy it forever, there is no harm in enjoying it temporarily, even for a few moments. When you laugh you all look almost like Gautam Buddhas. When you sit silently, you look like a congregation in a church!

Mendel Kravitz arrives at a cabaret club and asks the doorman who he should see to get a booking for his singing act.
“You should see the concert secretary,” says the doorman. “By the way, you’re not a hypnotist, are you?” Mendel assures him that he is not, and goes in.
The concert secretary looks up suspiciously and says, “I hope you are not going to tell me you’re a hypnotist, are you?”
Mendel assures him he is only a singer, and is sent to find the organist for a tryout. The organist likes the songs but looks uneasily at Mendel. “You don’t do any side acts by chance, do you?” he asks. “No hypnotism for instance?”
Mendel is tired of the question and demands an explanation.
“Well,” says the organist, “last week we had a hypnotist here. He was so good that he had at least two hundred of the audience in a trance.”
“What’s wrong with that?” asks Mendel.
“Nothing,” continues the organist, “but half way through his act, he fell over the microphone, hurt his foot, and yelled out, ‘Shit!’ The cleaners have only just cleaned the hall.”

Kowalski and his wife are celebrating their thirty-first wedding anniversary. As a surprise he comes home with a little monkey.
“What’s that?” asks his wife.
“It’s a monkey,” replies Kowalski. “What did you think it was? This is my anniversary present to you.”
“You are crazy!” she cries. “What are we gonna do with a monkey?”
“Well,” says Kowalski, “he’s gonna eat with us, he’s gonna sleep with us….”
“Sleep with us?” shouts Mrs. Kowalski. “What about the smell?”
“Listen,” says Kowalski, “after twenty-five years, if I could get used to it, so will the monkey.”

============================================================

Osho,
The other morning, discourse left me feeling terrified and desperate: desperate to save this incredible, beautiful planet, and terrified because the odds against us seem so high and I feel so insignificant, and helpless to do anything! The only thing I can see to do is to be here with you as much as possible, nourishing my consciousness and supporting your vision. Is there any more that can be done?
I can understand your desperation, your helplessness. This is how perhaps every human being who is aware of the crisis feels. But you are not aware of a greater power: destruction is a low category power, creation is a high category power. Destruction is out of hate, creation is out of love.
You have seen where hate can lead humanity, to its ultimate suicide, but you have not seen the possibility of love; growing to its height, it may simply prevent this crisis from happening. No one is insignificant, because everyone has a heart and everyone has love and everyone has sensitivity, consciousness and he can reach to the very ultimate peak of existence. A single individual can prevent this great crisis, what to say of millions of people full of love and joy and silence?

I am reminded of an Old Testament story about two cities, Sodom and Gomorrah. The people in both cities became absolutely sexually perverted – all kinds of perversions prevailed. The story is very beautiful; it will give you courage, it will take away your desperation. It will make you stand up as an individual, representing life and love which cannot be destroyed by any nuclear weapons, by any politicians. Even God could not destroy Sodom and Gomorrah.
I have to remind you at this point that in the Old Testament version he destroyed the cities. It was impossible to change those people; they had become so accustomed to perverted ways. You may not know that the word sodom means making love to animals. That’s why the whole city was called Sodom. And even today making love to animals is called sodomy. And just the vibration of the word gomorrah is enough to give you the sense of what it means: gonorrhea.
But the story takes a very special turn, and that’s my point to emphasize. In the Judaic religion there is a small stream of rebels, revolutionaries – they are called Hassids. They are not accepted by the orthodoxy as authentic, because they go against anything in orthodoxy, in a tradition which does not appeal to the human heart, to reason, to sensitivity, to consciousness. They have written their own story.
Their story is that there lived a man – a Hassid – he used to live six months in Gomorrah and six months in Sodom. He approached God and he said to him, “Have you taken into account the possibility that there may be one hundred absolutely natural, wise people in these two vast cities? Are you going to destroy them also, because others are perverted? Then it will be great injustice, pure injustice and it will be a condemnation to you. So you reconsider!”
God had not thought of the possibility. Certainly in those two big cities, almost like Hiroshima and Nagasaki, there must be one hundred intelligent, natural, alert people. They will also be destroyed, and this will not be in tune with God’s divineness, it will be simply ugly.
So God said, “If you can prove that there are a hundred natural people, I will not destroy those two cities.”
The Hassid said, “And if there are only fifty, are you going to destroy?”
God was caught by the mystic Hassid. He said, “Even if you can prove fifty….”
And the mystic said, “If there are only twenty-five? What does it matter? Does the number matter to you or the quality? – quantity or quality?”
God said, “Certainly the quality.”
And the Hassid said, “If it is the quality then to tell you the truth, I am the only man who is not perverted, who is living a natural, blissful life. But I live six months in Gomorrah and six months in Sodom. Are you going to destroy those cities?”
God had never come across such a clever person. From a hundred he had brought him down to one. Only a Jew can do that! They know how to bargain – and he bargained. In the Jewish version of the story God destroyed those cities, but not in the Hassidic version. The cities were saved, because God could not destroy even a single person of quality, a single person of wisdom, just because the whole city had become perverted.

I am telling you this so that you need not be terrified. You have to be only alert. I will read your question:
“The other morning discourse left me feeling terrified and desperate.” There is no need to feel desperate and there is no need to feel terrified. If one Hassid can persuade existence to protect two cities, we have thousands of Hassids with us. Every sannyasin is a Hassid. Existence cannot allow a few idiots like Ronald Reagan to destroy this world.
But that does not mean that you have to remain just silent. You have to create a great atmosphere of love around yourself which will be the protection; you have to learn to dance and to sing. Let these politicians know that this earth is still full of beautiful people – so many songs and so much music and so much creativity and so many people meditating. They are bound to have a second thought.
On our part, we don’t need bigger nuclear weapons to stop the war – that’s the problem. We need something totally different. Love will provide the energy, meditation will provide you with tremendous strength. And you will not feel so insignificant, you will feel dignified and significant, because your love, your meditation, your blissfulness is going to save the world.
And don’t be worried that you are helpless to do anything. The idea of helplessness has arisen because you have never been told what your resources are. You have never looked into your resources – your love, your silence, your peace, your compassion, your joy. You have never looked into all this inexhaustible potentiality of your being. And if thousands of people blossom in love, music and dance, and the whole earth becomes a celebration, then any Ronald Reagan is not going to destroy this world. He will feel helpless; he will feel guilty to destroy such beautiful people and such a beautiful planet.
You ask me, “The only thing I can see to do is to be here with you as much as possible, nourishing my consciousness and supporting your vision. Is there anything more that can be done?”
It is enough. More is not needed; more will keep you unnecessarily worried. And worry is like a rocking-chair – it keeps you going but gets you nowhere! There is no need to worry and there is no need to feel desperate, helpless. A few idiots have prepared death for the planet; there are millions of intelligent people who can prevent it just by their love, by their joy, by their beauty, by their ecstasy. These are far more powerful experiences, because atomic energy, or nuclear energy, is part of the material world. It is the explosion of the atom, the lowest, smallest particle of matter.
We have not understood yet that nature has an absolute balance. If a small atom exploding can destroy…. Have you ever thought about a living atom of your being and its explosion? In other words, we have been calling it enlightenment. It is nothing but an explosion of your being into light. And then suddenly you have a far higher and superior power. It need not fight with the lower, its very presence will make the lower impotent.
It has not been tried on a vast scale, only once in a while. But those rare instances are certainly a proof that if tried, every human being can become an explosion of consciousness – which is a far superior energy – and make all these nuclear weapons and the people who hold them utterly impotent and guilty.
A few instances will help you. They look non-factual because they are rare, because not many people have tried them.

One follower of Gautam Buddha, Devadatta – his own cousin-brother – was naturally jealous of the immense glory and impressiveness, and the impact of Gautam Buddha on people. Whoever came to him never returned the same. Something changed in his very being. Buddha had sown a seed; the man would return at the right time, when the first clouds started raining.
But this was invisible to the blind Devadatta – not physically blind, but spiritually blind. He could not understand what the matter was. He was as beautiful as Gautam Buddha – his own cousin-brother – as educated, as cultured in the arts of those days. There was no question that Gautam Buddha was superior and he was not, because he could not see the superior aroma that surrounded Gautam Buddha.
Finally he asked him, “I would like to be declared your successor.”
Buddha said, “Whoever is capable of succeeding me will succeed me, I am not going to declare him. And anyway I am still alive, just in the middle of my life. And this is not my way to choose! Who am I to choose a successor? Existence itself will choose.”
Devadatta became so hurt that he left the commune and made many attempts on the life of Gautam Buddha. Those attempts look fictional, because we don’t know the power of love and we don’t know the power of awareness, and we don’t know the beauty of ecstasy and its tremendous power of protection.
Buddha used to meditate on a small rock at the bottom of a vast mountain. Devadatta tried to roll a big rock from the mountain in the direction of Gautam Buddha, so that that rock killed him completely and nobody would be blamed, nobody would even think that somebody had killed him. The rock came rushing down the mountain and everybody who was present was surprised, could not believe that it could happen: just two feet away from Buddha the rock stopped, changed its route, and moved away from him. Then it went on falling. It was very strange behavior of the rock; one would never think that a rock would do that. Even Devadatta was puzzled.
Devadatta himself was a king of a small kingdom, and he had a very mad elephant. The mad elephant was always kept in chains in the prison because he used to kill people. Devadatta saw another possibility. The elephant was brought near Gautam Buddha and released. He rushed toward Gautam Buddha, the way he would have rushed to anybody else. But as he reached near, he suddenly stopped, and with tears in his eyes he bowed down to Gautam Buddha and touched his feet with his head.
Nobody could believe that an insane elephant…how is he making a distinction? But blind people are blind people! Devadatta could not see what the rock could see, what the mad elephant could see – a subtle, invisible aura of love.

When, a few years ago, a man threw a knife at me in the morning meeting…. And it seems it was an absolute conspiracy, because just before the meeting, fifteen minutes before, the police informed the office, “Today there is a danger; a man is going to throw a knife at Osho. So twenty police officers should be allowed in.”
Now, this is stupid. If they knew that a certain man was going to commit a crime, they should have arrested him. Rather than that, they informed the office. As the story went on it became clear that it was absolutely a conspiracy. Those twenty police officers with loaded guns surrounded that man. The sannyasins thought that perhaps they were for our protection – that was wrong. They were for the protection of the man who was going to throw the knife. They were afraid that ten thousand sannyasins would kill that man if anything happened.
And that man shouted – which is on record – “Osho, you are against Hinduism and we cannot tolerate your existence anymore.” And he threw the knife at me. Because he was shouting I stopped and listened to him, what he was saying. It is on tape. He threw the knife from just fifteen feet away and it was strange, that the knife fell away from me – eight feet away. Not only did it not touch me, it did not even touch anyone in the crowded Buddha Hall; nobody was touched by the knife.
And then the police said, “It is a police case. We will arrest this man and bring him to the court.”
This was all strategy. You can see how politicians work – cunningly, inhumanely. They prevented us from putting a case against the man. They said, “There is no need. Ten thousand witnesses, his words are recorded, even the sound of the falling knife is recorded, and twenty police officers of high rank are witnesses – you need not be worried. It is going to be a police case. We will take him and produce him in the court.”
They took him away, presented him before the court, and the court released him, saying, “Such a thing has not happened at all.” And because we had not put any case against him, then it was too late. The police managed it in such a way that they did not insist that the case happened.
But I have been thinking about it: in such a crowded place even if a blind man throws a knife it is going to hit somebody. The knife behaved exactly like the rock and the elephant. It was a police conspiracy and you can see the justice. When twenty police officers are present, when ten thousand people are ready to be witnesses; the knife is there, his shout is recorded, the sound of the knife falling on the floor is recorded…
And what was the judge’s reason to reject the case? The reason was, “If it was an attempt on Osho’s life then why have they not brought the case? Why have they not reported the case to the police? And secondly, if a man was trying to murder Osho, those ten thousand sannyasins would not have let him go so easily.” And we had not done anything because the police had prevented us, saying, “There is no need.”
Still, one of the most important criminal advocates of the supreme court of India, Ram Jethmalani was there – we had asked him to be present. He wanted to say something; the judge said, “You cannot speak, it is not your case.” And certainly it was not our case. But I have seen things which make me certain that what appears to be a miracle is not a miracle. I am absolutely certain that I was poisoned in Oklahoma with a certain metallic poison, thallium, but it has not been able to kill me.
They put a bomb under my chair in the jail in Portland while I was at the court; they were expecting me to come any moment. I came, and the man there indicated to me to sit on a particular chair. That was also strange, because there were many chairs, I could have sat on any chair. And he immediately locked the door from outside and said, “I will be coming within fifteen minutes.” I had no idea that I was sitting on a bomb! But something went wrong; the bomb did not explode.

If millions of people are full of love and meditation there is no need to feel desperate or helpless. You are given by nature tremendous power which can nullify any nuclear weapons.
And that’s what I’m trying to do: to prepare you to love, unconditionally; to prepare you for friendliness even with strangers; to prepare you to drop your organized religions, because they create conflict; to drop even belonging to your nations. Formally you will have to carry their passport, but this is just a formality. Deep in your being you should not be a Hindu and you should not be an Indian, you should not be a German and you should not be a Christian.
If this wave spreads – and I have every hope that it is going to spread – then you can forget all about the third world war; the second was the last. The third is possible only if there is not enough love and meditative energy to prevent it.

Osho,
Alone, insecure, scared, I can see a door – to God's house or death or insanity, I don't know which. Sitting with you, intoxicated by your freedom, though my mind is like a cattle train, my heart knows no question.
Osho, can the curtain rise, and the world stop amid such beauty?
If your mind is silent and if you are feeling in deep synchronicity with existence, and with a great love for the beauty of this planet, then the door you are standing before is neither of death nor of insanity nor of God, because God died long ago. It is the door of your own inner being, of your own inner consciousness.
Don’t stand before the door, enter in and you will find yourself. There is no greater joy in the world than to find yourself. It brings such a serenity, such a settlement with everything. It simply puts you in such a harmony with nature, with existence, that life becomes a moment-to-moment ecstasy.
You need not feel alone, insecure, scared. It is natural to feel that way because you are standing before the door and you don’t know who is inside – God, death or insanity. I say to you on my authority that there is no God and there is no death and there is no insanity, but an eternal rejoicing of life, love, celebration.
Just enter through the door.
Don’t go on standing there, because the fear is that feeling alone, insecure and scared you can escape from the door. And then it may take lives for you to find it again – and with the same problem.
Be courageous and enter through the door, and you have entered the most sacred place, the most sacred that exists.

Osho,
Your gestures move me more deeply than your discourses. Your grace and beauty touch me even more than your silence.
Osho, wiggle a toe or give us a wink.
My God! You are asking very difficult things of me. I don’t know how to give a wink; I have never given a wink to anybody. And to do it for the first time will be very difficult. I know how to use both eyes together, but a wink means one eye has to remain open.
Once in a while Nirvano puts some drops into my eyes, if I have mistakenly put some shampoo or some soap in it and made the eye red. You can see, this eye today is a little red. She puts in the drops, but her problem is that either I can open both eyes or I can keep both eyes closed. So she keeps one eye closed with one hand, and opens the other eye forcibly – just inexperience.
I cannot hope to succeed to give you a wink, and I never do anything in which there is a little suspicion of failure. I will start trying in my room alone. When I am an expert I will give you a wink. As far as the toe is concerned, it is so lazy that even if I want to move it, it will not move. But I will make every effort to satisfy you.
But you seem to be a strange person, to ask me for such gestures. Do you want me to look funny? But I can do that, because I’m not concerned at all with the world, what they think. You will just have to give me a little time for practicing.
I have never moved my toe. It simply remains always enlightened, unmoving! Now to persuade it to come down from enlightenment is going to be very difficult, but I will make every effort to persuade it: “Just once in a while taking a holiday from enlightenment is not a sin! And you are not committing any sin, just moving….”
Of course the problem with the wink is more difficult: whom to give it to? Because anybody who gets it will become enlightened. And with all you people, I love you so much that I can not choose somebody, to whom to give the wink. So I will have to figure it out. It is a very difficult job.
Everybody knows how to wink, because they have been doing it all the time; it is a language. The toe is more spiritual than the eye, because I don’t think anybody takes any offense if you move your toe. But if you wink, particularly at a woman – and here homosexuals are not respected…. So I will have to find a woman who does not get disturbed by the wink. It is a very complicated question.

Sign on a bookstore: Going out of business – words failed us!

That is the beauty of the gesture, it never fails. Although nobody teaches it, it simply is understood naturally.

“The world today does not make sense” – it is a statement of Picasso – “so why should I paint pictures that do?”

Now, these are absurd gestures: winking an eye, whistling behind a woman. And the toe is absolutely your own invention. I have never heard that to attract a woman you have to move your toe. Perhaps it is to distract her – seeing that the man is mad…. Instead of winking his eye he is moving his toe!
I am very inexperienced in such great affairs. But I promise you, I will try with the trees, I will try with the rocks, because they will not feel offended. And they will not fall in love with me either. Once I am satisfied, then I will give you a wink – not to anybody in particular. That is my way.
Nirvano was asking me, “Do you see people?” Even when I am looking at you I am not seeing you. It is so tiring a job. You cannot expect of me such a thing! I love you, but I don’t know you. I know only very few people who came in the very beginning and stayed with me for all these fifteen years. But others, who have come afterward, have the same share of love.
But when I am speaking, I am just speaking to the walls. I love Bodhidharma for that particular gesture. For nine years, he was sitting facing the wall. His audience was sitting behind him and he would speak to the wall. Emperor Wu asked him, “What strange kind of thing is happening here? I have never seen a speaker speaking to the wall, and the audience sitting behind listening to it.”
The answer of Bodhidharma was, “It doesn’t matter. Even if I face them, I am facing a wall. But that wall is a little disturbing – somebody moves, somebody changes his posture. That distracts me. So I decided on a new method: I speak to the wall. They can go on changing their postures, coming and going, whatever they want to do. Whether they are listening or not, I am not concerned. And it is strange, that since I have started speaking to the wall there is utter silence behind me, because everybody wants to get what I am saying. Nobody is moving.”
So I will have to find a way how to wink. Perhaps I can wink at the wall. And the toe is more difficult, because it is absolutely new. In the whole history of man, nobody has moved his toe as a gesture – gesture for what?

There is one incident in Gautam Buddha’s life…. A great king, Prasenjita, had come to listen to him. Of course, being a great king, he was sitting in front. Buddha suddenly stopped in the middle of a sentence and said to Prasenjita, “Why are you moving your toe?” When he asked this, the movement stopped and Prasenjita said, “I don’t know, it just happened.”
Buddha said, “Your whole life is just like that. It is just happening – accidentally. You are not conscious.”

But except that incident, I have never come across any incident where the toe is even mentioned. But for your satisfaction I will practice. By the way, are you a student of psychology? Because only psychologists ask absurd questions.
In America in the nineteen seventies, twice as many psychiatrists committed suicide as mental hospital patients, each year. The number has grown since the seventies – it is now 1988 – now four times as many psychiatrists are committing suicide as people from any other profession. Naturally, if you are concerned with absurd things…. Eyes are not meant to wink, and toes are not meant to be moved. When you do such things you disturb the inner ecology of your body.
But once in a lifetime it won’t hurt me. Just how long it will take for me to practice, that I cannot say. You will have to learn patience. And if in your patience some understanding arises and you withdraw your question I will be immensely happy. That patience, absolute patience, may turn out to be a new birth to you. You may be reborn.
There is only one problem with going through a second childhood: this time you can’t blame your parents.
Just two jokes, not related to your question, but certainly related to you…

Paddy lurches out of the pub and bumps straight into Father Murphy, the village priest.
“Patrick,” says the priest, “I am so sorry to see you come out of such a place as that!”
“Well, then,” says Paddy, turning around, “I will go right back.”

Uncle Albert is staying for the weekend, and little Ernie is asking him all sorts of questions.
“Uncle Albert,” he asks, “why are some men bald on the front of their head?”
“Well,” replies Uncle Albert, “these men are the great thinkers.”
“And what about the men that are bald on the back of their head?” asks little Ernie.
“These men,” explains Uncle Albert, “are the great fuckers.”
“So what does it mean,” continues little Ernie, “when they are bald all over?”
“That’s obvious,” replies Uncle Albert, “these men think they are great fuckers.”

============================================================

Osho,
What is existence? Is it something like what people call God?
Existence is that which is, and God is that which is not. Existence is a reality, God is a fiction. Existence is available only to meditators, people of silence; God is a consolation for sick minds, sick psychologies.
Existence is not your production – God is. That’s why there is only one existence, but thousands of gods. Each according to his needs, each according to his suffering, each according to his expectations, creates a god or accepts an old belief about God.
God is a great consolation, but it is not a cure. Existence is not a consolation. To be in tune with it is to be healthy and whole. All the religions of the world have been teaching God; I teach you existence. I teach you to be in tune with that which surrounds you, which is within you and without you. Once you are in tune with it, there is no death for you, no misery, no tension, no worry, but a tremendous peace surrounds you, a contentment which you have never even dreamt of.
God is for those who cannot grow in consciousness, who are retarded as far as consciousness is concerned. It is a kind of toy; retarded people need it. And the moment I say it is a toy, then it is up to you how you want to make it – looking like a monkey or looking like an elephant. It is just up to you whether to give him four hands or one thousand hands. It is your creation. Strangely enough, man believes God created everything. The truth is that God himself is a creation of man’s imagination.
God is the greatest lie you can ever find, because on that lie thousands of other lies depend. Churches, religious organizations go on multiplying lies upon lies, just to protect one lie.
You have to understand the psychology of lying. The first thing about lying is that you need a good memory because you have to remember. You lie to someone about something, to somebody else about something else; you have to remember what you have said to one and what you have said to the other.
Truth needs no remembrance. Truth is always there, just the same. You don’t have to cram it in your memory. Memory gives you a bondage, a prison; it clings around you, covers you so much, slowly, slowly that you disappear completely. Truth is uncovering yourself from all lies. And there is a sudden revelation that you are part of the immense truth I am calling existence.
You don’t need any churches, you don’t need any temples, you don’t need any mosques; you need only a prayerful heart, a loving heart, a grateful heart. That is your real temple. That will transform your whole life. That will help you to discover not only yourself, but the very depths of this immense existence.
We are almost like the waves of the ocean – just on the surface, and the ocean may be miles deep. The Pacific Ocean is five miles deep. But a small wave on the top will never know the depth – her own depth, because she is not separate from the ocean. She will cling to her small entity, be afraid about death, be afraid of losing herself in the vastness, the oceanic infinity. But the truth is, the death of the wave is not a death, but the beginning of an eternal life.
God has been invented. It was people’s need; people needed a protector. In the immensity of the universe, a man feels so alone, so small. The vastness creates trembling in him. What is your existence?

I am reminded of a story by Bertrand Russell. The archbishop of England sees in a dream that he has reached the pearly gates of paradise. On one hand he is immensely pleased, and on the other hand he is very much troubled, because the pearly gates are so vast, in both directions, that he cannot see the whole gate. It is so high that it is beyond the capacity of his eyes to see. And he himself seems to be just like a small ant, compared to this great gate. He is a little bit afraid. He is no ordinary man, he is the archbishop of England. He feels humiliated just by the gate, and the fear arises, “If this is the situation at the gate, what is the situation going to be inside?”
With fearful hands he knocks on the door, but in the immensity of that space only he can hear his knock. It takes days for him, but he goes on knocking harder and harder. Finally a small window opens in the gate and Saint Peter looks out with one thousand eyes, trying to figure out who has been making a noise. Those one thousand eyes are so shiny, like stars, that the archbishop feels even more reduced – almost to a nonentity.
And Saint Peter asks, “Please, whoever you are, wherever you are, come in front of me.”
The archbishop declares himself. He says to Saint Peter, “Perhaps you don’t know me. You can check with Jesus Christ, I am the archbishop of England.” Saint Peter says, “Never heard of any such thing as England.”
The archbishop says, “Perhaps you may not have heard about England, but you must have heard about our beautiful planet, Earth.”
Saint Peter says, “I don’t want to hurt your feelings, but unless you give me the index number of your Earth, I cannot figure out what you are talking about. I will have to go to the library and look – if you give me the index number – to which solar system you belong, because there are millions of solar systems and each solar system has many planets.”
But the archbishop has never thought that the earth has any index number. He says, “I don’t know any index number, but I am the archbishop. You just go and tell Jesus Christ.”
He says, “You are giving me puzzle after puzzle. Who is this fellow Jesus Christ?”
The archbishop is very much shocked. He says, “You don’t know Jesus Christ, the only begotten son of God?”
Saint Peter says, “As far as I am concerned, I have never seen God; I don’t know whether he exists or not. I am just a doorkeeper. Perhaps somewhere in the most interior parts of paradise somebody exists who thinks that he is God, but I have never come across….”
It is such a shock that the archbishop wakes up perspiring.

The story is significant because it shows how small we are and how big the universe is. Naturally primitive man was not able to adjust himself to the idea of this vastness of the universe without giving it some personality and without making himself in some way related to that personality.
God was an effort of the primitive mind of man to give existence a personality. Then he becomes God the father. Then you can make some relationship with him. You may even be against him, but at least there is someone you can be for, you can be against; there is someone who is greater than you, who is going to protect you, who is your guarantee. God is simply the poverty of human consciousness.
The people who attained to their inner consciousness and its highest peak, like Gautam Buddha, denied the existence of God. Anybody who has ever become inwardly healthy, gone beyond the mind which is basically sick, has denied God. God as a fiction is good for kindergarten school children. They need it – parables, fables, stories. But very few human beings have gone beyond the kindergarten school.
God exists because you are not aware of yourself. God exists because you have not made any contact with your own center. The moment you know yourself, there is no God and there is no need of any God. In fact I am in absolute support of Friedrich Nietzsche: “God is dead.”
The second part of his sentence is even more significant, “God is dead and man is now free.” That second part has not received much attention from the philosophers, from the mystics, from the psychologists, but the second part is the most important; the first part is not much. In fact, the first part is basically wrong. God cannot die – fictions never die. The moment you know they are fictions there is no question of their death. Neither are they born, nor do they die. God was never born in the first place – how can he die? Death is the other extreme of birth.
So the first part is not very important, but that has been given much importance by theologians, because they became afraid: “This is sacrilegious, to tell people that God is dead. That means that now no religion is needed.” They became afraid for their own business. But they forgot the second part which is more important. It has tremendously significant implications. It means that God was a bondage, God was a retardedness, God was out of fear. God was not a treasure, but a heavy, mountainous weight on your heart and on your growth.
Once God is removed, man’s possibility to grow and blossom is absolutely free. A God is a despot, a fascist. Without God, the world becomes freedom. Existence gives a tremendous dignity to every individual. From the smallest blade of grass up to the greatest star in the universe it gives immense significance and love; it makes no difference. There is equality and equal opportunity. And there is no need unnecessarily to pray and waste your time, to read the holy scriptures, which are the most unholy books in the world. There is no need to be exploited by the priests. You are certainly and suddenly free from all these chains. Now you can be yourself.
While God is in existence you can never be yourself. You are just a puppet, your strings are in the hands of God. The ancient saying in India is that not even a small leaf of a tree moves unless God’s order is received for it to move. Whatever you are, according to religions you are made out of mud. The word human comes from humus, which means mud. And the word in Hebrew, Arabic, Urdu, Hindi, is admi – it is used as the name of the first man, Adam. Admi means the earth. God made man out of the earth and then breathed life into the puppet.
Now, what kind of freedom do you have? Somebody has breathed life into you, and it is in his hands to stop breathing life into you any moment. Whatever you are doing, the religions believe it is your fate, it is written on your forehead. And there have been many con men who have even been trying to read what is written on your forehead. Astrologers, palmists, all kinds of cunning people have been exploiting the simplicity and innocence of humanity. There are people who are reading your hand, looking at the lines, telling you what those lines mean. The whole emphasis is that you are not living a life of your own, you are just a part in a drama, and the part that you are playing has been decided beforehand.

That was the argument that the Indian god’s incarnation, Krishna – in the great Indian war, Mahabharata – gave to his disciple Arjuna. Seeing the immense massacre that was going to happen, Arjuna simply lost his nerve. He was a man of immense courage and great intelligence.
He said, “I don’t see any point in this war. Even if I win…and I am certain I am going to win” – there was no other warrior of his quality – “But sitting on the golden throne of victory surrounded by the corpses of all my friends and all my enemies, all the beautiful people, does not appeal to me at all. The scene makes me feel insane. Rather than fighting, I will leave it to the other party – who is nobody, another cousin-brother. Let him rule over the country and I will go to the mountains, to the Himalayas to meditate, to become a sannyasin. I have lost all interest in fighting.”
Krishna tries in every way to persuade him, but Arjuna is a great intellectual; he goes on arguing against him. Finally seeing no other way, Krishna takes the last resort and says, “It is written in your destiny. Going away, you are going away from God. This war is predetermined by God to destroy those who are not virtuous and only let those survive who are virtuous.” Now there is no argument against it, because Arjuna himself believes in God and destiny.
Arjuna fought the war. Krishna was responsible, five thousand years ago, for destroying this country by giving a false argument, absolutely fictitious, to Arjuna. That war killed so many people. And it is not only that it killed people, it also destroyed the courage of the country; it became afraid of any small calamity.
Two thousand years of slavery…I want to make it absolutely clear that the people who are responsible for these two thousand years of slavery are the greatest people of India. The list is headed by Krishna; Arjuna is just his shadow. Then came Mahavira, who taught people to be nonviolent to such an extreme that his followers cannot even cultivate, because plants have life; if you cultivate then you will have to kill the plants when you reap the crop. Gautam Buddha comes third, who taught people to accept, to be contented wherever and with whatever they have – poor, hungry, starving, enslaved, remain utterly contented.
Their teachings were great. This is something to be remembered; otherwise I will be misunderstood by everyone. Their teachings were great, but they never thought about all the implications of their teachings. They never thought that if you teach a country nonviolence, if you teach a country to drop all weapons, when the whole world is not doing that, then you are putting that country in a state of being victimized, exploited by anyone.
And for two thousand years invader after invader came to India, exploited it and went back. Finally Mohammedans came and they thought, “What is the need to go back? We can not only exploit people, but rule them and remain here.” And then came the Britishers and the French and the Portuguese, and they all tried to exploit the country. They all had their small pockets. Britain proved to be far more clever. But the Portuguese had their small islands of Diu, Daman and Goa, and the French had a small portion of the country, Pondicherry. Britain had the whole country.
People have remained starved and hungry, and people have gone on dying because of hunger, and nobody has ever thought that these great principles in some way are responsible for this unfortunate situation that for thousands of years India has had to pass through. And even today nobody is trying to see all the implications. Every great principle has its own black cloud behind it. And unless you understand the black cloud also, you are soon going to be absorbed by the black cloud. If you understand it, you can avoid it.
God seems to be the greatest principle that has been preached to man down the ages, but nobody has looked at its implications. If God created man then man has no individuality of his own, then he cannot claim any dignity, any freedom. There is no question of a puppet declaring, “I want to be free.” If God created the universe, then whatever has happened in the universe has had to happen. It was God’s will. No effort on our part was going to change anything.
And finally you can see, if God created the world, and if he is behind nuclear weapons and the people who are creating them, then no effort on man’s part can prevent the destruction of the whole planet. To give the creation of the world into the hands of a fictitious God is very dangerous. It makes us absolutely impotent. We cannot do anything.
Hence, my simple understanding of consciousness is that if God did not die with Friedrich Nietzsche’s declaration, then we have to kill him! Wherever you meet him, there is no need even to say hello. First kill him and then you can say hello – just to fulfill the formality. But God is not needed at all. With God above in the sky, man will always remain a slave, and man will always remain unconscious, and man will never strive to reach to the peaks of his potential. With God removed you may feel a little fear – just out of old habit – but that fear will disappear.
Once you recognize that you are standing on your own feet and you have to do something to create a better consciousness in you, to create a more loving heart in you, that prayers are useless, there is nobody to answer them…. Yes, sometimes they have been answered. At least once, certainly…

A poor man asked God for months continually, “Give me fifty dollars. I don’t want much, just fifty dollars.”
First he prayed, but then he thought, “Millions of people are praying, and there is one God and there are millions of prayers. Whether my poor prayer ever reaches to him…. And there must be around him so much noise – prayers from all the churches, all the mosques, all the synagogues, all the temples – who is going to take care of me? It is better that I write a letter.”
He wrote a letter saying, “This is to remind you that for months I have been praying, but the answer has not come. It seems my prayer has not reached you. I can understand, because of the noise around you of so many prayers. And great people are praying – the pope and the archbishop and the shankaracharya – so who is going to take care of my small prayer? And I am not asking much – no paradise, no heaven, nothing, just fifty dollars. Finally I decided to write the letter.” And he wrote in big letters, “Fifty Dollars! Remember, it is urgent.”
But then he was very much disturbed, because he didn’t know the address, whom to address it to. He thought, “The best way is to address it to: God, c/o The Postmaster General. If the postmaster general cannot find his address, who else can?” The letter reached the postmaster general. He looked, he laughed, and then he felt sad also. He thought, “The man must be in desperate need – nobody writes letters to God. And he is not asking much.”
So he said to all his friends, “Please look at this poor man’s letter. You all contribute, and we will send those fifty dollars to him. At least for once let a prayer be answered.” They collected the money, but they collected only forty-five dollars. The postmaster general said, “No harm, at least we should send this much.”
When forty-five dollars reached the man he counted the dollars, and he looked above and shouted, “God, remember one thing. Next time you send any money to me, never send it through the post office! Those cunning fellows have taken out their commission. I have received only forty-five dollars!”

Except this, I have not come across any prayer which has been answered – and that too not fully. There is no one to answer. Existence has to be approached in a different way.
God has to be worshipped.
Existence has to be loved.
God has to be prayed to.
Existence has to be contacted in meditation.
There are only two kinds of religions in the world: the religions of prayer and the religions of meditation. You can see my point. The religions of prayer all believe in God and the religions of meditation don’t believe in any god. Because meditation takes you inward, and fulfills you, there is no need to pray, there is no need for any consolation. You are in such a rejoicing, in such a blissful state; you can bless the whole world.
I teach you existence, and the entry into existence is through your own being; hence meditation is not prayer – remember, it is against prayer. Prayer is part of that phony jargon about God, heaven, hell. Prayer is part and parcel of that whole rubbish. Meditation is simply the only pure way of coming in contact with existence. And this contact immediately becomes a merger and a melting. You become existence yourself. Then you are in the clouds and you are in the stars and you are in the flowers and you are in the rains. You are everywhere. You are no longer a drop, you have become the ocean.
Remember the clear-cut distinction between existence and God. God is a condemnation of our intelligence. It is accepting humiliation, it is accepting that, “We are only puppets; you are the power. Whatever you want to do with us you will do. All that we can do is to pray.” It makes you so crippled. The very idea of God is nauseating. But existence has a freshness and a beauty and a truth.
Never get mixed up with these two words. One is reality, one is simply fiction.

Osho,
We have heard your comments about jazz music.
Osho, this question comes from two jazz musicians: is our love of jazz music an obstacle on the path to enlightenment?
My comments about jazz music were made in a totally different context. Compared to classical music, jazz music is in the lowest category, because rather than creating a spirituality in you it simply activates your sexuality. The great classical music takes you higher, beyond your mind, to silences which can give you a taste of meditation, a taste of existence.
But always remember that a certain reference in a certain context does not mean my whole approach to a thing. You are saying, “This question comes from two jazz musicians. Is our love of jazz music an obstacle on the path to enlightenment?” It depends on you. You can make your jazz music free from the lower gravitation of sexuality. You can make it connected with your higher centers of being, and then it will not be an obstacle on the path to enlightenment.
In fact, as far as my people are concerned, they are going to enter enlightenment with jazz music! It has never been tried; hence it is a great challenge and must be tried.
Nothing is wrong in the world if it is used in the right direction – with awareness, with clarity. You can purify anything, just as you can make anything impure. It is wholly a question of your clear understanding. If your meditation goes on growing side by side with your music, soon you will find that even jazz music starts having some quality of meditativeness. And if the distinction between music and meditation drops, then whatever classical music was able to do, you can also do it. And you can do it more rejoicingly, more dancingly, with a greater celebration.
So I don’t say that there is any obstacle, but meditation must become part of your music; otherwise just your music cannot help you to go beyond the lower instincts, biological drives. It will keep you closer to the earth, but far away from the stars.

Pope the Polack and Ronald Reagan meet in the middle of the Sahara desert. The pope is carrying a telephone booth, while Ronald Reagan has a car engine strapped to his back.
“What are you doing with that telephone booth?” asks Reagan.
“You see,” says Pope the Polack, “if a lion comes along, I put it down, go inside and lock the door. But why are you carrying a car engine with you?”
“Well,” replies Reagan, “for just the same reason. When a lion comes I drop the engine and then I can run faster.”

Hymie Goldberg is trying to hold a small mirror in his hand while he adjusts his tie. The mirror slips and shatters on the ground.
“Oh, no!” he complains to Becky. “Now I am going to have seven years’ bad luck.”
“Nonsense,” replies Becky. “My uncle Sollie once broke a mirror, and he didn’t have seven years’ bad luck.”
“Really?” says Hymie, encouraged.
“Really,” repeats Becky. “He died the same day.”

It all depends how you understand things…

Miss Goodbody, the teacher, is too shy to conduct the sex education class in school, so she asks her class to make this a homework project.
Little Ernie asks his father, who tells him some story about a stork. Grandma says that she was found under a gooseberry bush. Great-grandma blushes deep red and whispers that children come from God.
The next day, little Ernie gets called to report on his homework.
“Well,” says Ernie, “I am afraid my family has been a little abnormal. Apparently there has been no sex at all for three generations.”

Paddy Murphy is on his way home, when he comes across a woman crying hysterically.
“What is the matter, lady?” he asks.
“MacTavish is dead!” she sobs. “MacTavish is dead!”
A few minutes later he comes across another woman sobbing, “MacTavish is dead! MacTavish is dead!”
Soon he finds another woman crying the same thing, and then as he approaches the railway crossing he sees a ghastly sight.
A train has run over a man and cut him in pieces. And there on the street next to the body is lying his foot-and-a-half long prick. Several women are standing around crying, “MacTavish is dead! MacTavish is dead!”
When Paddy arrives home, he says to Maureen, “I just saw a terrible thing. A train ran over a guy and cut off his pecker. And would you believe it? His prick was eighteen inches long!”
“My God!” cries Maureen. “MacTavish is dead!”

============================================================

Osho,
I have been in Pune for two weeks, and every day I feel more and more stupid and helpless. You say that only intelligent people who understand can be with you. Listening to you, enjoying every word you say, I wonder: do I really understand, or am I just happy to be in your presence?
The same thing happened to me last time I was with you. Is there a way out of feeling stupid?
The madman never realizes that he is mad. The same is the case with the stupid – the stupid person never realizes that he is stupid. To realize that you are mad is the beginning of sanity; to realize that you are stupid is the beginning of intelligence.
There is nothing wrong in being stupid. But to be stubborn and to insist that your stupidity is wisdom, that is a problem. I am happy that is not your problem. You are relaxed, sensitive, understanding. This is one of the greatest understandings, to feel one’s stupidity. There is no need to go out of this circle.
I have told you about Socrates. He used to say, in his old age, that when he was young he thought he knew all. As he became a little more mature, he started feeling that he did not know all, he only knew a little; there was much more which was unknown to him. A few years later, he started realizing that even the little he used to think he knew, he really did not know. It was only information; it was not his own knowing.
Finally, his ultimate statement came in a certain situation. The oracle of Delphi had declared Socrates to be the wisest man of the world. Obviously the people who loved Socrates were very happy. They ran to Socrates to inform him, “The oracle of Delphi has declared you the wisest man.”
Socrates said, “I used to think that the oracle never commits mistakes, but this time the oracle has committed a mistake. Go back and tell the oracle that Socrates denies it. He says, ‘I know nothing. How can I be the wisest man?’”
The people were very much shocked, but out of curiosity they went back to find out what answer would come from the oracle. And they said, “We are very unhappy. We delivered your great message to Socrates but his response was very strange. He says he knows nothing, how can he be the wisest man in the world?”
There was laughter and the oracle said, “That’s why. Because he has come to the point of realizing that he knows nothing, that makes him the wisest man in the world.”
What do we know? Life remains a mystery. Our not knowing simply indicates the mysteriousness of life. Our knowing is so superficial; it is not worth calling knowing. So if every day you feel that you are more and more stupid, it is a good sign. You are moving toward the state of Socrates. One day the miracle will happen when you will be able to say you know nothing.
Just try to experience the feeling of the freshness and the innocence of not knowing anything. The mind is unburdened. You are light, so light that it seems if you want you can fly into the sky. And while experiencing this great not knowing you have entered the temple of the mysterious universe.
What we are doing here is not trying to make you more knowledgeable. We are trying to make you more innocent, utterly not knowing anything. When it happens to you spontaneously, from your heart, that you know nothing, all the doors of existence suddenly start opening for you – not that you will become knowledgeable, but you will become mysterious.
That’s why I call this path the path of the mystic. The mystic is not a learned man, the mystic is an innocent man, who can dance in the rain, who can love beautiful rainbows, who can fall in tune with the universe, whose life becomes a constant rejoicing.
So whatever is happening to you is perfectly right. Rejoice and be grateful to existence.

Osho,
If Zen is the path and you are the gate, then who lives in the house?
Zen is the path and I am the gate and you live in the house. You have completely forgotten – that’s what makes the possibility of making a path, to remind you. The path is only a reminder. You have completely forgotten that you are in the house. You think you are out of the house; hence a gate is needed to bring you in.

I have told you the beautiful story of Chuang Tzu…. One early morning he is sitting in his bed, covered with his blanket, very sad. His disciples have never seen him looking sad. They are worried – is he sick, ill or something? They inquire.
Chuang Tzu said, “It is much more difficult than you think. Last night I dreamt that I had become a butterfly.” The students, the disciples started laughing. They said, “That is not much of a problem. Everybody thinks many things in his dreams.”
Chuang Tzu said, “I don’t know about everybody, I know only this much: it has created in me a very existential question. If Chuang Tzu can dream that he has become a butterfly, why can a butterfly not go to sleep and dream that she has become a Chuang Tzu? Now the problem is whether I am the butterfly who is dreaming she is Chuang Tzu or I am really Chuang Tzu.”
The disciples were at a loss how to figure out the problem. And then came Lieh Tzu, who had gone to another village for some work. He heard the situation: “Chuang Tzu is still sitting in his bed. He does not want to get up until the problem is solved. And we are all trying to solve it but there seems to be no solution. It seems to be perfectly right, that if Chuang Tzu can dream he is a butterfly then why can the butterfly not dream she is Chuang Tzu? Now we are also puzzled.”
Lieh Tzu said, “Wait, I will solve the problem.” He went to the water well, pulled up a bucket of ice-cold water, went in and poured it over the head of Chuang Tzu. Chuang Tzu laughed, and he said, “You came at the right time; otherwise, the whole day I would have been sitting here, sad. You solved the problem.”
Lieh Tzu said, “Do you need another bucket?” He said, “No! The water is so cold. I am Chuang Tzu, because if I was a butterfly your bucket of ice-cold water would have killed me.”
Your question is beautiful. “If Zen is the path and you are the gate, then who lives in the house?” You live in the house, but you have forgotten. And to remind you, a path has to be created; to remind you, a gate has to be created. To remind you, you have to be taken on the path and given help to enter the house, which in fact you have never left.
Just an imaginary game – getting out on the path, doing great disciplines, meditations, the master…. Finally the gate comes and you say, “Aha! I have arrived.” And this is the house which you have never left.

Osho,
I don't know.
Can you tell me a joke?
Your question is very beautiful. To be in the state of not knowing…what is left? Then to have a good laughter or sit in absolute silence and listen to the birds and their sounds…. Not knowing is the ultimate knowing.
You have asked for a joke…

Hymie Goldberg has been told by the doctor that he is dying. Becky is sitting by the bedside.
“Listen Becky,” says Hymie. “Soon I will be dead and I don’t want you to be living alone. I want you to get married again.”
“Darling,” weeps Becky, “don’t talk like that. I will never find another man like you.”
Holding her hand, Hymie continues, “Look sweetheart, in a few weeks you will see things differently. I leave everything to you – the house, the cars, the money in the bank. You will have no worries in your next marriage.”
“No, Hymie,” wails Becky, “I will never look at another man.”
“And you know,” says Hymie, “those expensive hand-tailored suits I had made? I want your future man to wear them.”
“What!” cries Becky. “Your suits? But Sollie is at least two inches taller than you.”

You have asked for one joke, but it would be very miserly of me. I will have to tell you at least two jokes more.

The Goldbergs are touring India and one day Hymie finds that he has left his watch in the hotel. He has been photographing an elephant with his trainer, so he asks the trainer what the time is.
The man slowly reaches out, takes hold of the elephant’s balls, shifts them slightly and says, “It is five to one.”
“My God!” gasps Hymie. “That’s incredible. Wait, I want to fetch my wife.” A few minutes later, Hymie comes racing back with Becky and again he asks the time. The man reaches out, cups the elephant’s balls as though weighing them, then moves them to one side and declares, “It is three minutes past one.”
“Fantastic!” cries Becky checking her watch. Hymie digs a hundred dollar bill out of his pocket and offers it to the Indian if he will show them how he tells the time. The man shrugs and folds the money in his dhoti. He motions to the Goldbergs to kneel beside him. They hold their breath as the man once again cups the elephant’s balls in his hands. Moving them to one side, he says, “Now, do you see that clock over there?”

For five years in a row the Annual International Joke Contest, held in New York, has been won by Rabbi Finkelstein. But amazingly enough, this year his joke only comes second. And the organizers are forced to phone him to break the bad news.
“My God!” says Rabbi Fink. “I refuse to accept the verdict until I hear the joke that beats me.”
“Well,” says the man, “the winning joke this year was submitted by Osho and I am afraid that it may be a bit much for your ears. But I’ll tell you what I can do. I will read you the joke, and when I come to a part that is too much for you I will substitute it with ‘la-di-da-di-da.’”
“Okay,” says the rabbi, “fire away.”
The man clears his throat and then begins to read: “La-di-da. La-da-di-da. La-di-da. Fuck.”

Osho,
This is the very first time in my life I have the feeling of being “at home.” My heart is strongly beating and I feel a deep gratitude.
Why Osho, do I lose this feeling of being at home when I am not physically with you, or even when you stop talking?
To feel at home is one of the most spiritual experiences. Ordinarily, nobody feels at home anywhere. People go around the world in search of a place where they can feel at home, but wherever they go, they are the same person – they carry all their worries, their tensions, their anguishes. And because of their anguish and anxiety, they continue to feel a certain unease; otherwise, you can feel at home anywhere.
This whole existence is our home. It is the anxiety, worry, tension, anguish, misery, suffering, desires…they create many, many curtains around you, and you cannot feel at ease because of them.
Here you feel at ease, at home, but your problem is…. You say, “My heart is strongly beating and I feel a deep gratitude. Why Osho, do I lose this feeling of being at home when I am not physically with you, or even when you stop talking?” There is nothing mysterious in it – a very simple thing. When I am talking you have to stop chattering within yourself. That’s the whole purpose of my talking, so that you stop, at least for a few moments, the inner chatter.
The moment there is no inner chatter in you, you are at home. That chattering disturbs the peace, the joy, the blissfulness. So when you are away from me, your mind goes on like crazy and you miss the feeling of being at home. And even here when I am not talking, the same happens. So you can understand. It is not a question of space, it is not a question of whether you are here or somewhere else. When I stop talking, you start chattering.
What is your chatter? – rubbish, crap. Naturally you start feeling not at home. But when you are silent – and you are silent only when I am speaking…. Slowly you have to learn to be silent even when I am not speaking, even when I am not present, even when you are not physically close to me. Can’t you feel the sunrise and the birds and the trees? Everything is at ease.
Except man, nobody commits suicide – no tree, no bird. Except man, nobody needs a psychiatrist. Except man, everything is exactly where it should be – perfectly happy. In these sounds of the birds, do you hear anywhere any sadness? – just overflowing joy. Not that they are talking about great philosophical ideologies, not that they are praying in their churches, not that they are specifically saying something – just the joy of overflowing energy makes them feel at home.
And they don’t have anything – no money, no power, no prestige. They don’t suffer from any inferiority complex, nor from a superiority complex. They never become schizophrenic. One has to learn much from the trees, from the birds, from the animals. And your problem is absolutely clear.
These meetings with you, these talks with you are not sermons in a church, where a certain belief system is being delivered to you. These are a special device, never used before by anyone. I speak so that you can be silent. I do your chattering, you do my silence – a simple bargain! The whole day I am sitting in silence; I also get tired. So twice a day I take revenge. You are chattering the whole day. Twice a day, take revenge – be silent.
And you will be at home anywhere.

Hymie Goldberg has a little trouble with the police and he goes to see his lawyer. “If I win the case,” says Hymie, “I will give you five hundred dollars.”
“Okay,” says the lawyer, “get some witnesses.”
Hymie rounds up a few witnesses and wins his case.
“Now,” says the lawyer, “you won your case. What about my five hundred dollars?”
“Okay,” says Hymie, “get some witnesses.”

Just a simple arithmetic…. It is not a difficult job to be silent; it is immensely blissful. Suddenly you find yourself in tune with the heartbeat of the universe. And that is the greatest ecstasy that can happen to anyone. This very moment can become a momentous revolution in your life if you can taste the silence of it.

It was the usual practice of Gautam Buddha that whenever somebody came to him – and every day great philosophers, thinkers, theologians were coming to him to ask questions…. Maulingaputta, one of the great philosophers of Gautam Buddha’s time, had debated with many other great saints and defeated them. Now his only desire was to defeat Gautam Buddha.
He came to Gautam Buddha with his five hundred great scholars and he asked, with humbleness, “I want an open discussion with you, with the condition that if I win you and your disciples will have to become my disciples, or if you win I and my disciples will all become your disciples.”
Gautam Buddha said, “Settled. But there is one thing you have to remember. You will not start your discussion right now. My routine is: for two years you and your disciples have to sit silently among my ten thousand disciples. You are not to ask a single question in these two years, you have just to listen. And after two years I will remind you that the time has come, you can start the discussion.”
The condition was accepted. Maulingaputta was not just an egoistic scholar, he was a sincere inquirer. He was debating with all these saints for the simple reason that perhaps somebody can defeat him – defeat his mind, defeat his inner chattering. Somebody may question everything that he believes, take away all his thoughts, destroy them completely by his arguments. Because of this reason, he agreed with Gautam Buddha, “I will wait for two years.” And he sat by the side of Gautam Buddha.
As he was agreeing, laughter was heard from a faraway corner. Under a tree, a strange fellow was sitting – a follower of Gautam Buddha, but very strange. He rarely spoke; except for this laughter, nothing is mentioned about that man in all the great scriptures of Buddhism. And it has a tremendously vast literature; it is a whole world of literature on its own. No religion’s literature can even be compared to it – they are very poor. This man’s name was Mahakashyapa and his laughter became the beginning of Zen.
He had not spoken anything, but Maulingaputta was shocked: “Why should this person laugh?”
Gautam Buddha said, “You can ask him. He ordinarily never speaks, never laughs. He is not a man who belongs to ordinary humanity. He is a very silent fellow. You can ask him.”
Maulingaputta asked Mahakashyapa, “Why have you laughed?” He replied, “There is not much in it. Just beware of the strategy of this guy Gautam Buddha. He deceived me, and in the same way he is going to deceive you too. I laughed because again he is at his game. Two years ago I had come, and he made me sit under this tree silently for two years. I even forgot the calendar.
“Two years of silence is such a long time. For a few days I remembered that one day has passed, two days have passed, one week has passed…. Then slowly, slowly I forgot all about it. One day he suddenly said, ‘Mahakashyapa, this is the day you had come for, two years ago – to have a discussion with me. Now stand up and start your discussion. What do you want to say?’”
Mahakashyapa said, “You have destroyed everything that I could have said two years ago. This silence has been such a cleansing. It has taken away all the nonsense that I have carried, thinking that it is scholarship, it is knowledge. This silence has transformed me. I don’t have anything to ask, just please allow me to touch your feet in deep gratitude. Your compassion is infinite, that you did not allow me to discuss with you. Rather than that you made a condition of two years’ silence.
“At first I was angry – this is strange. But then I thought, it is a beautiful place: a mango grove; beautiful faces, so silent, as if they are statues; Gautam Buddha so beautiful, so graceful. There is no harm just to sit silently and watch what is going on here, what this man is continuously saying to his people. And just listening to you, you have taken everything away.”
He said to Maulingaputta, “The same is going to happen to you. If you really want a discussion, don’t accept the condition, have the discussion today. We have never been entertained by Gautam Buddha in all these years; it will be a great joy.” But Maulingaputta had agreed. And he could understand the point that unless you are utterly silent you cannot absorb the presence, the grace, the beauty of the master.
He sat by his side for two years, and after two years when Buddha said, “Now two years are over. You can start your discussion,” he said, “Mahakashyapa was right. I have nothing to say, everything has dropped. Just allow me first to touch the feet of Mahakashyapa and then I will touch your feet. He had provoked me and I had felt humiliated by his laughter. I have to ask his forgiveness.” He went to Mahakashyapa and touched his feet.
This is the only incident related about Mahakashyapa. But this is the source from which the river of Zen started. Mahakashyapa laughing was the beginning of a tremendous force, and it has been continuously improved by each Zen master.
Bodhidharma was the sixth Zen master who improved much upon Mahakashyapa’s laughter. And in these twenty-five centuries much has been improved, much has been added, many new dimensions have opened. But when I think about it, I look at it, I find that Mahakashyapa’s laughter is still the greatest contribution. Everything else that has been added is good, but Mahakashyapa’s laughter was complete in itself. He has said everything worth saying in his laughter.
It happened in the past that many masters slowly, slowly became deaf, because their only function was to talk to the disciples. The disciple’s sensitivity in listening became more and more clear, but the master had nothing to listen to. There was nobody to say anything to him. Masters have many times become deaf, because their ears are not used at all.
The experience of being at home has to be spread slowly so that for twenty-four hours you are at home – waking, sleeping. But this is possible only if you learn the greatest art of being silent. Then you are settled in yourself. Then your whole energy is turned into a silent pool without any ripples.
If you can attain this state…existence does not want you to fulfill any other condition. This is enough. You will be accepted, welcomed by all the mysteries and all the splendor of existence. Right now, it is a small taste. But I have made it clear to you why it is happening.
You have to try it on your own. Just go into the forest and sit silently, or by the side of the river, just sit silently. Or just here in the ashram, anywhere, sit silently – just being alert of whatever is happening all around, not thinking about it, what this bird is saying. They are not saying anything, they are just feeling so joyous in the early morning with the new life that the sun has brought again – one day more to dance, to sing, to enjoy the whole expanse of the sky.
Just listen to them, the way you listen to me, and you will feel at home. And slowly, slowly you have to learn that it is not a question of listening, it is a question of the inner chatter stopping. Then whenever you find the inner chattering is starting, simply say, “Shut up!” and you will suddenly be at home.
Once the mind understands that you have found something greater, something better, something higher, slowly it recedes into the darkness. Its function is fulfilled; it is no longer needed; it is an unwelcome guest.