---
title: I Am That 01
series: I Am That 01-16
talk_number: 1
url: https://oshoworld.com/i-am-that-01
language: English
duration: 01:41:57
author: THE UPANISHADS
scraped_at: 2026-01-03T09:16:06.504049+00:00
---
Om
That is the whole.
This is the whole.
From wholeness emerges wholeness.
Wholeness coming from wholeness,
wholeness still remains.

At the heart of this phenomenal world,
within all its changing forms,
dwells the unchanging Lord.
So, go beyond the changing,
and, enjoying the inner,
cease to take for yourself what to others are riches.

Continuing to act in the world,
one may aspire to be one hundred.
Thus, and only thus, can a man be free
from the binding influence of action.

Unillumined indeed are those worlds clouded
by the blinding darkness of ignorance.
Into this death sink all those who slay the Self.

Om
purnam adah
purnam idam
purnat purnam udachyate
purnasya purnam adaya purnam evavashishyate

Om
That is the whole.
This is the whole.
From wholeness emerges wholeness.
Wholeness coming from wholeness,
wholeness still remains.
Today we are entering one of the most enchanting and mysterious worlds – that of the Upanishads. The days of the Upanishads were the highest as far as the spiritual quest is concerned. Never before and never afterward has human consciousness achieved such Himalayan heights.
The days of the Upanishads were really golden, for many reasons. The most important of them is contained in this seed mantra:
Om
purnam adah
purnam idam
purnat purnam udachyate
purnasya purnam adaya purnam evavashishyate
The emphasis of the Upanishads is on wholeness. Remember, it is not on perfection, but on wholeness. The moment one becomes interested in being perfect, the ego enters. The ego is a perfectionist, the desire of the ego is to be perfect, and perfection drives humanity toward insanity.
Wholeness is totally different, its flavor is different. Perfection is in the future, it is a desire. Wholeness is herenow, it is a revelation. Perfection has to be achieved, and of course every achievement takes time, it has to be gradual. You have to sacrifice the present for the future, today for tomorrow. And tomorrow never comes, what comes is always today.
Existence knows nothing of future and nothing of past, it knows only the present. Now is the only time and here the only space. The moment you go astray from now and here, you are going to end in some kind of madness. You will fall into fragments, your life will become hell. You will be torn apart, the past will pull a part of you toward itself and the future the other part. You will become schizophrenic, split, divided. Your life will be only a deep anguish, a trembling, an anxiety, a tension. You will not know anything of bliss, you will not know anything of ecstasy because the past exists not.
People go on living in their memories which are only footprints left on the sand; or they project a life into the future, which is also as nonexistential as the past. One is no more, the other is not yet, and between the two, they lose the real, the present, the now.
Wholeness is of the now. If you can simply be here, then this very moment the revelation! Then it is not gradual, it is sudden, it is an explosion.
The word upanishad is tremendously important. It simply means sitting down close to a master, it is a communion. The master is living in wholeness, he is living herenow, he is pulsating herenow. His life has a music, his life has a joy, a silence of immense depth. His life is full of light.
Just to sit silently by the side of a master is enough because the presence of a master is infectious, the presence of the master is overwhelming. His silence starts reaching your very heart. His presence becomes a magnetic pull on you: it pulls you out of the mud of the past and the future. It brings you into the present.
The Upanishad is a communion, not a communication. A communication is head-to-head and a communion is heart-to-heart. This is one of the greatest secrets of spiritual life, and nowhere else, at no other time, has it been understood as deeply as in the days of the Upanishads.
The Upanishads were born nearabout five thousand years ago. A secret communion, a transmission beyond the scriptures, a communion beyond the words. This is what the upanishad is: you sitting silently, not just listening to my words but listening to my presence too. The words are only excuses to hang the silence upon. The silence is the real content, the word is only a container. If you become too interested in the word you miss the spirit.
So don’t be too interested in the word. Listen to the heartbeat of the word. When a master speaks, those words are coming from his innermost core. They are full of his color, of his light. They carry some of the perfume of his being. If you are open and vulnerable, receptive, welcoming, they will penetrate into your heart and a process is triggered.
What Carl Gustav Jung calls synchronicity, explains exactly what happens between a master and a disciple. It is not the same as what happens between a teacher and a student. Between a teacher and a student there is a communication – information is transferred by the teacher to the student, but there is no transformation, there is only information. The teacher himself is not transformed, he himself has not arrived. He is repeating words from other teachers, he may be even repeating words from other masters, but he has not known himself, his words are borrowed. He may be very scholarly, he may be very well informed, but that is not the real thing. Information is not the real thing – transformation. And unless one is transformed, he cannot trigger the process of transformation in others.
Carl Gustav Jung calls this synchronicity. The master cannot cause your enlightenment; it is not a scientific process, it is far more poetic. It is not a law like the law of cause and effect; it is far more liquid, far looser, far more flexible. The master cannot cause the enlightenment to happen in you, but he can trigger the process, and that too only if you allow, not against your will. Nothing can be done to you unless you are totally receptive. This can happen only in a love affair.
Between the teacher and the student there is business, between the master and the disciple there is a love affair. The disciple is surrendered, that is the meaning of sitting down. He is surrendered, he has put his ego aside. He is simply open, in tremendous trust. Of course, doubt will hinder the process.
Doubt is perfectly good when you are collecting information. The more you doubt, the more information you will be able to collect because each doubt will create questions in you and questions are needed to find answers. But each answer will be doubted again in its own turn, creating more questions, and so on and so forth.
But with a master doubt is a hindrance. It is not about asking a question, it is a quest of the soul, it is inquiry of the heart; it is not intellectual curiosity. It is not curiosity, it is far more important – it is a question of life and death.
When one is tired of all questions and all answers, when one is fed up with all philosophy, only then one comes to a master. When one has accumulated much information and still remains ignorant, and all that information does not create any light within his soul, then he comes to a master, to sit by his side. There are no longer any questions. He now knows one thing, that all questions are futile. He has tried and he has seen the whole futility of it. Now he sits in silence, open, available, receptive, like a womb.
The disciple becomes feminine, and only in those feminine moments the master, without any effort on his part, starts over-flooding the disciple. It happens naturally. The disciple is not doing anything, the master is not doing anything – it is not a question of doing at all. The master is being himself and the disciple is open.
When your nose is not blocked by a cold and you pass by the side of a flower, suddenly the fragrance is smelled. The flower is not doing anything in particular, it is natural for the flower to release its fragrance. If you are open to receive it you will receive it.
The word upanishad means coming to a master, and one comes to a master only when one is tired of teachers, tired of teachings, tired of dogmas, creeds, philosophies, theologies, religions. Then one comes to a master.
The way to come to a master is surrender. Not that your being is surrendered – only the ego, the false idea that you are somebody, somebody special. The moment you put the idea of the ego aside the doors are open for the wind, for the rain, for the sun, and the master’s presence will start entering you, creating a new dance in your life, giving you a new sense of poetry, mystery, music.
It is synchronicity. The master is beating in a certain rhythm, he is dancing on a certain plane. If you are ready, the same dance starts happening in you – in the beginning only a little bit, but that’s enough, that little bit is enough. In the beginning only dewdrops, but soon they become oceanic.
Once you have tasted the joy of being open you cannot be closed again. First you may open only a window or a door, and then you open all your windows and all the doors. And a moment comes in the life of a disciple when not only windows and doors are open, even the walls disappear. He is utterly open, available multidimensionally. This is the meaning of the word upanishad.
The Upanishads are written in Sanskrit, Sanskrit is the oldest language on earth. The very word sanskrit means transformed, adorned, crowned, decorated, refined – but remember the word transformed. The language itself was transformed because so many people attained the ultimate, and because they were using the language, something of their joy penetrated into it, something of their poetry entered the very cells, the very fiber of the language. Even the language became transformed, illuminated. It was bound to happen. Just as it is happening today in the West, languages are becoming more and more scientific, accurate, mathematical, precise. They have to be because science is giving them its color, its shape, its form. If science is growing, then of course the language in which the science will be expressed will have to be scientific.
The same happened five thousand years ago in India with Sanskrit. So many people became enlightened and they were all speaking Sanskrit; their enlightenment entered it with all its music, with all its poetry, with all its celebration. Sanskrit became luminous. Sanskrit is the most poetic and musical language in existence.
A poetic language is just the opposite of a scientific language. In a scientific language every word has to be very precise in meaning, it has to have only one meaning. In a poetic language the word has to be liquid, flowing, dynamic – not static, allowing many meanings, many possibilities. The word has not to be precise at all, the more imprecise it is the better because then it will be able to express all kinds of nuances.
Hence, the Sanskrit sutras can be defined in many ways, can be commented upon in many ways – they allow much playfulness. For example, there are eight hundred roots in Sanskrit and out of those eight hundred roots thousands of words have been derived, just as out of one root a tree grows and many branches and thousands of leaves and hundreds of flowers. Each single root becomes a vast tree with great foliage.
For example, the root ram can mean first, to be calm, second to rest, third to delight in, fourth cause delight to, fifth to make love, sixth to join, seventh to make happy, eighth to be blissful, ninth to play, tenth to be peaceful, eleventh to stand still, twelfth to stop, to come to a full stop; and thirteenth God, divine, the absolute. And these are only a few of the meanings of the root. Sometimes the meanings are related to each other, sometimes not, sometimes even they are contradictory to each other. Hence, the language has a multidimensional quality to it. You can play with those words and through that play you can express the inexpressible, the inexpressible can be hinted.
The Sanskrit language is called devavani – the divine language. It certainly is divine in the sense that it is the most poetic and the most musical language. Each word has a music around it, a certain aroma.
How did it happen? It happened because so many people used it who were full of inner harmony. Of course those words became luminous. They were used by people who were enlightened, something of their light filtered to the words, reached the words; something of their silence entered the very grammar, the very language they were using.
The script in which Sanskrit is written is called devanagari. Devanagari means dwelling-place of the gods, and so certainly it is. Each word has become divine because it has been used by people who have known God or godliness.
This Upanishad we are entering today is the smallest, it can be written on a postcard, and yet it is the greatest document in existence. There is no document of such luminosity, of such profoundness anywhere in the whole history of humanity. The name of the Upanishad is the Isa Upanishad.
The world of the Upanishads is very close to my approach. In fact, what I am doing here is giving a rebirth to the spirit of the Upanishads. It has disappeared even from India, and it has not been on the scene for at least three thousand years. There is a gap of three thousand years, and in these three thousand years India has destroyed its own achievement.
The first thing is that the Upanishads are not antilife, they are not for renouncing life. Their approach is whole, life has to be lived in its totality. They don’t teach escapism. They want you to live in the world, but in such a way that you remain above the world, in a certain sense transcendental to the world, living in the world and yet not being of it. But they don’t teach you that life has to be renounced, that you have to escape from life, that life is ugly or life is sin. They rejoice in life. It is a gift of God, it is the manifest form of God.
This fundamental has to be remembered. The Upanishads say that the world is the manifest form of God and that God is the unmanifest form of the world, and every manifest phenomenon has an unmanifest phenomenon inside it.
When you see a flower, the flower is only the manifest form of something inside it, its essence, which is unmanifest, which is its soul, its very being. You cannot catch hold of it, you cannot find it by dissecting the flower. For that you need a poetic approach, not the scientific approach. The scientific approach analyzes, the poetic perspective is totally different. Science will never find any beauty in the flower because beauty belongs to the unmanifest form. Science will dissect the manifest form and will find all kinds of substances the flower is made of, but will miss its soul.
Each and everything has both, the body and the soul. The body is the world and the soul is God, but the body is not against the soul, the world is not against the God. The world manifests God, expresses God. God is silence and the world is the song of that silence. And the same is true about you. Every person has both the manifest, the bodymind structure, and the unmanifest, your consciousness.
Religion consists in discovering the unmanifest in the manifest. It is not a question of escaping anywhere, it is exploring your innermost depths. It is exploring the silent center, the center of the cyclone. And it is always there, any moment you can find it. It is not something that has to be found somewhere else, in the Himalayas or in a monastery. It is within you. You can discover it in the Himalayas, you can discover it in the marketplace.
The Upanishads say that to choose between the absolute and the relative is wrong. Any choice will make you partial, you will not be whole. And without the whole there is no bliss, without the whole there is no holiness, without the whole you are always going to be a little bit lopsided, insane. When you are whole you are healthy because you are total.
The relative means the world, the changing, phenomenal world; and the absolute means the unchanging center of the changing world. Find the unchanging in the changing. And it is there so there is no question, you just have to know the technique of discovering it. That technique is meditation.
Meditation simply means becoming attuned to the unmanifest. The body is there, you can see it; the mind is there, you can see it too. If you close your eyes you will see the mind with all its activity, with all its working. Thoughts are passing, desires are arising, memories surfacing, and the whole activity of the mind will be there; you can watch it.
One thing is certain, the watcher is not the mind. The one who is conscious of the activities of the mind is not part of the mind. The watcher is separate. The witness is separate. To become aware of this witness is to have found the essential, the central, the absolute, the unchanging.
The body changes: once you were a child, then a young man or a young woman, then old age… One day you were in the mother’s womb, then you were born, then one day again you die and disappear into the womb of existence. The body goes on changing, continuously changing.
The mind goes on changing. In the morning you are happy, in the afternoon you are angry, in the evening you are sad. Moods, emotions, feelings go on changing, thoughts go on changing. The wheel goes on moving around you. This is the cyclone, the phenomenal world is the cyclone. It is never the same, not even for two consecutive moments.
But something is always the same, always, never changes – it is the witness. To find that witness is to find God.
Hence, the Upanishads don’t teach you worship, they teach you meditation. And meditation can be done anywhere because the question is to know the witness. If you go into a monastery the same method will have to be applied there, if you go into the mountains the same method has to be applied there. You can be in the home, in the family, in the marketplace – the same method.
In fact, in the world it is easier to see the changing. When you go to the desert it will be more difficult to see the changing because in the desert almost nothing seems to change, or the change is so subtle that it is not visible. But in the marketplace, sitting by the side of a road, you can see the change continuously, the traffic on the road changing; it is never the same.
Living in the monastery is living in a static world, in a dormant world. It is living like a frog in a pond, in a well, enclosed. To live in the ocean will make you more aware of the changes.
It is good to be in the world – that is the message of the Upanishads. The Upanishadic seers were not ascetic. Of course they renounced many things, but the renunciation came not through effort, it came through understanding, it came through meditation. They renounced the ego because they saw that it is just a manufactured entity by the mind. It has no reality, no substance in it; it is pure shadow, and to waste your life with it is stupid. To say that they renounced is not right, it will be better to say that because they became so aware, it withered away of its own accord.
They became nonpossessive. It is not that they did not possess things, but they became nonpossessive. They used things. They were not beggars. They lived joyously, enjoying everything that was available to them, but they were not possessive, they were not clingers. That is true renunciation, living in the world and yet remaining absolutely nonpossessive. They loved, but they were not jealous. They loved totally but without any ego trip, without any idea to dominate the other.
This is what I am trying to do here, and there are fools in India who think I am against Indian culture. Of course I am against what has happened in these three thousand years – that is not true culture, that is a deviation, that is ugly. That has made India poor, that has kept India a slave for twenty-two centuries. That has made India so starved, unhealthy, unhygienic, for the simple reason if you teach people that life is not good to live – it is only worth renouncing, it has no value, the only value it has is to renounce it, the only virtue is to be antilife – naturally life is going to suffer.
But this is not the message of the Upanishads, and the Upanishads are the very soul of this country, and not only of this country but of all the people who have been religious anywhere. They will find in the Upanishads their very heart. They will rejoice in the Upanishads because the Upanishads teach wholeness.
The relative has to be lived as the relative, knowing that it is relative, knowing that it is changing, and remembering continuously the unchanging. Abide in the unchanging and go on living in the changing. Remain centered in the unchanging, but allow the changing, beautiful world to move around you with all its seasons, with all its colors, with all its beauty, splendor. Enjoy that too because it is the manifest form of God. This is a very holistic approach.
The first sutra:
Om
purnam adah
purnam idam
purnat purnam udachyate
purnasya purnam adaya purnam evavashishyate

Om
That is the whole.
That means the ultimate, the absolute, the hidden aspect of reality, the invisible, the unmanifest. You can call it God, truth, nirvana, Tao, dhamma, Logos. That is the whole.
This is the whole, too. And by this is meant the phenomenal world, the manifest world, the world that surrounds you. That means your center, this means your circumference. And both are whole, in fact both are one whole.
From wholeness emerges wholeness.
From that emerges this, and out of wholeness only wholeness can be born. You cannot dissect wholeness. You cannot divide wholeness. Out of wholeness only wholeness is born, so both are whole.
Wholeness coming from wholeness,
wholeness still remains.
Although the wholeness comes from the whole it does not mean that the whole, the original whole, starts losing something. It loses nothing, it still remains the whole. This is a tremendously important statement. It will be good to try to understand it through your experience.
You love somebody, that does not mean that because you have given some love to somebody your love is less than it was before. It remains the same, it is not less because you have given, on the contrary, it may be even more. It is not ordinary economics. In the ordinary economics if you give something, of course you will have less. If you have ten rupees with you and you give five to somebody you cannot still have ten rupees, and certainly you cannot have fifteen rupees; you will have only five rupees left. This is the ordinary economics, the economics of the outside world.
The inner world is totally different. You give love, and you still have the same love or maybe even more because by giving, your love starts flowing. It may have been dormant, stagnant; by sharing it starts flowing. It is like you draw water from a well, the moment you draw water from a well, more water starts coming to the well from the hidden springs, to fill the space. If you don’t draw the water from the well the water will become dirty, it may even become poisonous. And the springs will not be used, they will become blocked. If you go on drawing water every day, more and more water will be flowing into the well and the springs will become bigger because they will be used more.
But people live in the outside economics even in their inner life. The wife becomes very angry if she finds her husband being friendly with another woman. The husband becomes aggressive, jealous if he finds that his wife was having a good time with somebody else, just enjoying, laughing. This is sheer stupidity. It is not understanding the inner world and the inner meta-economics. He is still thinking in terms of money – that if his wife has laughed with somebody else that means she will not be able to laugh with him anymore, so much laughter is lost. Now he is a loser, and of course that creates anger.
In fact, if the wife does not laugh with many people, does not enjoy friendship, is not loving to many people, her love sources will die, she will not be able to love her husband either. She will forget how to love, her springs will dry up.
That’s why you see husbands and wives looking so sad and bored with each other, it is bound to happen. They are going against a natural inner law, you have more the more you give. Giving does not destroy anything in you, in fact it is creative. The person who loves many people will be able to love his wife or her husband more totally.
But humanity has not yet understood this simple phenomenon. We are still behaving in a very childish and stupid way.
It is as if your beloved asks you, “You can breathe only when I am there and when I am not there, stop breathing because so much breath will be lost, so much life will be lost. And when you come home and you have been breathing in every place, everywhere, you will be almost dead. So when I am not with you, stop breathing!” And the husband also insists, “When I am not at home stop breathing, so that when we are together great breathing happens!” But both will die.
That’s how we have killed love in the world, we have killed everything valuable because our whole logic is stupid. It is good that the husband goes for a morning walk and breathes in the fresh air, jogs and runs on the seabeach, and enjoys the sun. And the wife also goes and enjoys the flowers and the trees and the grass. When they come together they will be able to be more alive with each other, more loving to each other. They will be at their peak, they will be full of life juices to share. But this has not happened yet.
My sannyasins have to remember it: jealousy kills love, possessiveness kills love. Be non-jealous if you want great love to happen, if you want your life to grow multidimensionally it needs freedom. You need freedom and the person you love needs freedom. Only in freedom is there expansion, growth.
The word that the Upanishads use for the absolute is brahman, it comes from a Sanskrit root bri. Bri means to grow, to expand. Hence for the universe the Sanskrit word is brahman.
It is only in this century that Albert Einstein discovered the idea, the hypothesis that the universe is expanding. Five thousand years before Albert Einstein the Upanishads were saying the same thing, that the universe is continuously growing and expanding. The name they gave to the universe, brahman, means that which goes on expanding, which is continuously growing. There is no end to that growth, no limit to that growth.
A sannyasin, a meditator, has to live his life in such a way that everything goes on growing, expanding, without any limit. Your love, your joy, your silence, your life – everything should be allowed to grow. And it can happen only if you allow the same in others.
But what we have been doing for thousands of years is just the opposite: we encroach on each other’s territory, we destroy everybody’s space in the name of love, in the name of friendship. We use beautiful words to hide ugly realities.
If you really love a person you will allow all the space possible to the person, you will never encroach on his or her freedom. That is the only indication of your love, not those stupid love letters that you write. Any fool can do that – a computer can do far better than you do! A computer can write love letters, there is no problem in it. Your love can be proved only by one thing: how much freedom you are giving to the other – even the freedom to love others, that is the only indication of your love.
And the miracle is, the more we allow each other to love as many people as possible, you will find the person infinitely loving toward you because love is not money, love is not a commodity. It is an inner energy, which grows by sharing, which dies by not sharing.
Every Upanishad begins with a seed mantra. The seed mantra means it contains the whole Upanishad. If you can understand the seed mantra you have understood the whole Upanishad. The whole Upanishad is just the tree that grows out of the seed mantra. This is a seed mantra: Om purnam adah purnam idam purnat purnam udachyate purnasya purnam adaya purnam evavashishyate.
The whole Upanishad is contained in this small sutra. What follows is just a growth out of this seed. This is the unmanifest part of it, then the whole Upanishad is the manifest part of it.
Each seed mantra is preceded by the mystic sound om, that contains even the seed mantra. If you understand om you have understood everything. The Upanishads are written in such a beautiful way: first Om… If you can understand that, there is no need to go ahead. Om means nothing; it is not a word, hence it is not written alphabetically, it is a symbol.
It contains three sounds: A, U, M. These are the basic sounds: A, U, M; all other sounds come out of these three sounds. This is the basic trinity of sounds, then the whole music of life grows out of this.
Om means exactly what Zen people call “the sound of one hand clapping.” Om is the innermost music of your being. When all the thoughts and desires and memories have gone, have disappeared, and the mind is absolutely quiet and silent, there is no noise inside, you start hearing a tremendously beautiful music which does not consist of any meaning. It is pure music without any meaning, gives you great joy, fills you with celebration, makes you dance. You would like to shout, “Alleluia!” But the music itself has no meaning, it is pure music, not polluted by any meaning.
Om represents that inner music, that inner harmony, that inner humming sound which happens when your body, your mind, your soul are functioning together in deep accord, when the visible and the invisible, the manifest and the unmanifest are dancing together. When they are like two lovers in a deep love embrace, merging, melting into each other, the manifest making love to the unmanifest, the unmanifest making love to the manifest, when the manifest and the unmanifest are no longer two but have become one.
This is represented in the Upanishads by the number one hundred. The number one hundred is used to symbolize the ultimate state of oneness. The two zeros in the number one hundred represent this and that, the manifest and the unmanifest, the phenomenal and the nomenal – two zeros. Both are whole, and when both these wholes become one, the number one in one hundred represents that oneness.
One hundred is a symbolic number, it has a message. The two – the body and the soul, the world and God, the changing and the unchanging, the time and the timelessness, the matter and consciousness, are represented by the two zeros. When those two zeros become one, when they are not antagonistic to each other – as in these three thousand years the so-called religious people have done… They have destroyed this beautiful symbol, they have put those two zeros against each other. They have created a life-negativity, instead of affirming life they have condemned it as sin. When these two zeros merge in a love affair, in a deep lovers’ embrace into each other, then oneness is born; that is represented by number one in one hundred.
A full material existence with a full spiritual life: that is wholeness. And that’s my message to you. Be a spiritual materialist – or a materialist spiritualist – because to me they are not separate. The inner aspect is spiritual, the outer aspect is material.
The religions have divided humanity into materialists and spiritualists. Now Soviet Russia, China and other communist countries think they are materialist. They are communist – they deny God, they deny consciousness, they deny the soul, they deny the unmanifest, they believe only in matter. The word matter means that which can be measured; the matter comes from meter – that which can be measured. They don’t believe in the immeasurable. But the immeasurable is there: whether you believe in it or not does not matter. Your belief or disbelief makes no difference to reality. The immeasurable is there, and not only the mystics are saying it is so – now even the physicists are saying so, that the immeasurable is there.
Existence is immeasurable, it is so vast it cannot be measured. And the vastness is also expanding, every day becoming bigger and bigger. It is already infinite, and it goes on becoming more infinite. It is already perfect, and it goes on becoming more and more perfect – from one perfection to another perfection. It is never imperfect, so it is not a question of from imperfection to perfection. It is always perfect, it is always infinite, but it goes on expanding.
This is the paradox of modern physics. This has been a paradox to all the mystics, but they were not worried by it. That’s why they are called mystics; they accept the paradox, they enjoy in the paradox. They love the paradoxical because they know truth can only be paradoxical. But modern physics is very much puzzled because physics is rooted in logic and logic cannot accept paradox. It has to be either this or that; it is always either–or.
Mysticism is never either–or, and if it is either–or then it is not mysticism. Mysticism is both–and!
All religious, so-called religious people are against me: Christians, Mohammedans, Hindus, Jains, Buddhists, for the simple reason that I am teaching wholeness. I am teaching my sannyasins to be spiritual materialists – because both are! What can we do? It is not a question of our choice, it is already the case. Matter is there and the consciousness is there. Logicians are always choosing.
The so-called spiritualists of the world go on trying to prove that the world is illusory so that they can prove that only spirit exists, the world does not exist – it is maya, it is illusory, it is untrue, it is made of the same stuff that dreams are made of. And the materialist goes on doing the same from the other polarity. He says there is no consciousness, consciousness is an epiphenomenon. Karl Marx says that, “Consciousness is a byproduct of matter and nothing more, it has no substance of its own. Matter is real and consciousness is only a shadow.” It is the same logic.
Berkeley says, “Consciousness is real and matter is only a shadow, a thought, nothing else but a dream.” But their logic is the same, both are afraid of accepting both, both are choosing one. They live in the world of either–or.
But the true mystic, the Upanishadic mystic, accepts both; he does not even call them two – they are one appearing as two. These two are aspects of one reality: the inner and the outer, the material and the spiritual.
So to me there is no problem; be scientific and religious, be materialistic and spiritualistic. Live in the world and live joyously, but also remain centered in your consciousness. This is bringing the Upanishads back. It is a resurrection.
At the heart of this phenomenal world,
within all its changing forms,
dwells the unchanging Lord.
Everywhere God is present, all that is needed is the eyes to see. Then you will see him in the rocks and in the stars and in the birds and in the animals and in the people around you. But the first experience has to happen within you, only then will you be able to see him everywhere else.
So, go beyond the changing,
and, enjoying the inner,
cease to take for yourself what to others are riches.
The unchanging is God and the changing is the world. …go beyond the changing… Not against the changing, remember – beyond. Beyond is not against. Beyond means live in it, but live in such a way that you remain above it, like a lotus flower. It grows in the lake but goes beyond the lake. It lives in water, but the water cannot touch its velvety leaves. Even in the morning when dewdrops gather on the leaves or petals of the lotus they remain separate. The dewdrops are there on the leaves and you can see them, so beautiful in the morning sun, like pearls, but they are separate. The leaf remains absolutely dry, the dewdrops cannot make it wet.
That’s the way of a sannyasin, that’s the way of the Upanishads: living in the world and yet not being of it.
…go beyond the changing, and, enjoy the inner… Don’t enforce – enjoy the inner, and then you can understand my approach very easily. It is not a question of forcing. Meditation should not be enforced, you should not start a kind of regimentation, a violent discipline. You are not a soldier, you are a sannyasin!
A sannyasin simply enjoys the inner, he enjoys the outer also. He enjoys. He enjoys the outer and on the same wave of enjoyment he enters the inner – it is the same wave. It is like breathing: the breath comes in and the breath goes out. Do you think these are two separate breaths? It is the same breath that goes out and comes in and goes out and comes in; it is the same breath, it is the same process. The same breath comes in and goes out.
Enjoy the outer, ride on enjoyment, and enter the inner also with the same joy, with the same dance. Don’t create a division – there is none. All divisions are manufactured by the priests, the hypocrites, the moralists. They go on creating demarcations: “This is outer and this is inner.” There is no line that can demark what is outer and what is inner; they are part of one process, one whole.
Just as you come out of your house – when it is too cold in the morning, you come out of the house to sit in the sun, to take a sunbath. And when it becomes too hot you get up and go in. There is no question of enforcing; just a little awareness that now it is too hot, so you move in, into the shade to the coolness of the house. And when it is too cold inside, just a little awareness and you come out.
Enjoy the outer and the inner in the same way, and go on moving, riding the same wave of enjoyment. And don’t create any distinction – it is the same wave, same reality.
So, go beyond the changing, and, enjoying the inner… Don’t make it something very serious. Don’t make a long face, that you are meditating because you are a sannyasin. Look at the pictures of your saints – such long faces that to live with these saints will be a hell! I don’t think these saints can ever enter heaven, or, wherever they will go they will create their hell. The hell is in their seriousness.

Once Buddha was asked, “What do you say happens when an enlightened person dies? Does he go to heaven?”
Buddha said, “Don’t ask nonsense questions! Wherever the enlightened person is, there is heaven. Wherever he is, it does not matter where – wherever he is. If he goes to hell, hell will be transformed. His presence carries its heaven around himself.”

Heaven hangs around the buddha, around the awakened person. You cannot send an enlightened person to hell – impossible. And you cannot send your so-called saints to heaven – impossible. Hell is so ingrained in their beings, wherever they are they will create boredom for themselves and for others.
Saints are not good company, even sinners are far better. I have lived with both, and, believe me, sinners are far better company than saints. Saints are utterly boring. Saints are very juicy only if they are saints in the sense of the Upanishads, in the sense I call my sannyasins.
My sannyasins are saints, but not in the ordinary sense of being a Hindu saint or a Jain saint or a Christian saint. The Christian saint seems to be the worst – so boring that I can believe Friedrich Nietzsche saying that God is dead, he must have committed suicide! Surrounded by all these saints, what can he do, what else can he do? He must have committed suicide, feeling utterly bored. And this company is going to be there for eternity now. You cannot escape.
The Upanishads are full of joy, full of flowers and fragrance. …enjoying the inner – not enforcing it – cease to take for yourself what to others are riches.
And the Isa Upanishad is not saying to renounce the world. It says: …cease to take for yourself…
Don’t possess, don’t become owners of persons or things, just use them as a gift of the universe. And when they are available, use them; when they are not available, enjoy the freedom. When you have something, enjoy it. When you don’t have it, enjoy not having it – that too has its own beauty.
If you have a palace to live in, enjoy! If you don’t have, then enjoy a hut and the hut becomes a palace. It is the enjoyment that makes the difference. Then live under a tree and enjoy it. Don’t miss the tree and the flowers and the freedom and the birds and the air and the sun. And when you are in a palace don’t miss it – enjoy the marble and the chandeliers.
Go on enjoying wherever you are, and don’t possess anything. Nothing belongs to us. We come empty handed in the world and we go empty handed. The world is a gift, so enjoy while it is there. And remember, the universe always gives you that which you need.

A Sufi mystic used to say every day in his prayers, “Thank you, God, for all that you go on doing for me. How can I repay? I feel so grateful.”
Once it happened that he was traveling and for three days they were refused shelter because they were thought to be heretics, they were thought to be anti-religious, rebellious. They were not given food, not even water, and no shelter. For three days, hungry, thirsty…
And the third day when he was praying, again he was saying to God, “Thank you! How I can repay you? I feel so grateful.”
Now it was too much, his disciples said, “It is time to say something!” They said, “Wait – just a moment! For what are you thanking? For three days we have been hungry, thirsty, no shelter, in the desert, at the mercy of wild animals. For what are you being thankful?”
The Sufi laughed and he said, “You don’t understand – this is what I must have needed for these three days. God always gives to me whatsoever I need. This must have been my need, otherwise he would not have given it to me. I am thankful for it. He always takes care. He does not bother what I desire, he always gives what he feels is right. I am thanking him: three days fasting, three days no shelter, for three days the open sky with stars in the desert, sleeping in the desert, and no wild animal has attacked us. And why are you looking so sad? It must have been our real need.”

This is trust, and this is a joyful attitude. This is real sannyas.
Continuing to act in the world,
one may aspire to be one hundred.
Continue to act in the world, and now remember: …one may aspire to be one hundred. It does not mean only a long life. Of course, it also means that because the Upanishadic seers were not against life; they wanted to live long and live joyously, so it was perfectly good – that meaning is perfectly right.
Aspire to live long and aspire to live deep, and aspire to live intensely and passionately – perfectly right – but don’t forget the symbol of one hundred. That is its true meaning, the higher meaning, the invisible meaning.
…one may aspire to be one hundred. Even living and acting in the world you can become one. Those two zeros of this world and that, those two zeros of the body and the soul, those two zeros of the changing and the unchanging, can meet and merge into one even while you are acting in the world, so there is no need to renounce.
Thus, and only thus, can a man be free
from the binding influence of action.
Not by renouncing action but by acting in such awareness, in such deep meditativeness, one becomes free of action and its binding effects.
Unillumined indeed are those worlds clouded
by the blinding darkness of ignorance.
The Upanishads call people ignorant. If they are living in the half, they are ignorant. The materialist is ignorant, the spiritualist is ignorant because both are unaware of the whole. Only the one who knows the whole, knows.
Into this death sink all those who slay the Self.
And dividing your being in two is like slaying your very being, murdering yourself, killing yourself. Don’t cripple yourself, don’t paralyze yourself. Accept your totality and live it joyously.
Om
purnam adah
purnam idam
purnat purnam udachyate
purnasya purnam adaya purnam evavashishyate

Om
That is the whole.
This is the whole.
From wholeness emerges wholeness.
Wholeness coming from wholeness,
wholeness still remains.
Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
What is God?
God is not a person. That is one of the greatest misunderstandings, and it has prevailed so long that it has become almost a fact. If even a lie is repeated continuously for centuries, it is bound to appear as if it is a truth.
God is a presence, not a person. Hence all worshipping is sheer stupidity. Prayerfulness is needed, not prayer. There is nobody to pray to, there is no possibility of any dialogue between you and God. Dialogue is possible only between two persons, and God is not a person but a presence – like beauty, like joy.
God simply means godliness. It is because of this fact that Buddha denied the existence of God. He wanted to emphasize that God is a quality, an experience, like love. You cannot talk to love, you can live it. You need not create temples of love, you need not make statues of love, and bowing down to those statues will just be nonsense. And that’s what has been happening in the churches, in the temples, in the mosques.
Man has lived under this impression of God as a person and two calamities have happened through it. One is the so-called religious man, who thinks God is somewhere above in the sky and you have to praise him, to persuade him to confer favors on you, to help you to fulfill your desires, to make your ambitions succeed, to give you the wealth of this world and of the other world. This is a sheer wastage of time and energy.
On the opposite pole the people who saw the stupidity of it all became atheists, they started denying the existence of God. They were right in a sense, but they were also wrong. They started denying not only the personality of God, they started to deny even the experience of godliness.
The theist is wrong, the atheist is wrong, and man needs a new vision so that he can be freed from both the prisons.
Godliness is the ultimate experience of silence, of beauty, of bliss, a state of inner celebration. Once you start looking at God as godliness there will be a radical change in your approach. Then prayer is no longer valid, meditation becomes valid.
Martin Buber says prayer is a dialogue between you and God, then there is an “I-thou” relationship, the duality persists. Buddha is far closer to the truth: you simply drop all chattering of the mind, you slip out of the mind like a snake slipping out of the old skin. You become profoundly silent. There is no question of any dialogue, no question of any monologue either. Words have disappeared from your consciousness. There is no desire for which favors have to be asked, no ambition to be fulfilled. One is now and here. In that tranquility, in that calmness, you become aware of a luminous quality of existence. Then the trees and the mountains and the rivers and the people are all surrounded with a subtle aura. They are all radiating life, and it is one life in different forms – the flowering of one existence in millions of forms, in millions of flowers.
This experience is godliness. And it is everybody’s birthright because whether you know it or not, you are already part of it. The only possibility is you may not recognize it or you may recognize it.
The difference between the enlightened person and the unenlightened person is not of quality – they are both absolutely alike. There is only one small difference, the enlightened person is aware. He recognizes the ultimate pervading the whole, permeating the whole, vibrating, pulsating. He recognizes the heartbeat of the universe. He recognizes that the universe is not dead, it is alive: this aliveness is God.
The unenlightened person is asleep, asleep and full of dreams. Those dreams function as a barrier, they don’t allow him to see the truth of his own reality. And of course, when you are not even aware of your own reality, how can you be aware of the reality of others? The first experience has to happen within you. Once you have seen the light within, you will be able to see it everywhere.
God has to be freed from all concepts of personality. Personality is a prison. God has to be freed from any particular form, only then he can have all the forms. He has to be freed from any particular name so that all names become his.
Then a person lives in prayer – he does not pray, he does not go to the temple, to the church. Wherever he sits he is prayerful, whatsoever he is doing is prayerful, and in that prayerfulness he creates his temple. He is always moving with his temple surrounding him. Wherever he sits the place becomes sacred, whatsoever he touches becomes gold. If he is silent then his silence is golden, if he speaks then his song is golden. If he is alone his aloneness is divine, if he relates then his relating is divine.
The basic, the most fundamental thing is to be aware of your own innermost core because that is the secret of the whole existence. That’s where the Upanishads are tremendously important. They don’t talk about a God, they talk about godliness. They don’t bother about prayer, their whole emphasis is on meditation.
Meditation has two parts: the beginning and the end. The beginning is called dhyana and the end is called samadhi. Dhyana is the seed. Samadhi is the flowering. Dhyana means becoming aware of all the workings of your mind, all the layers of your mind: your memories, your desires, your thoughts, dreams; becoming aware of all that goes on inside you.
Dhyana is awareness, and samadhi is when the awareness has become so deep, so profound, so total that it is like a fire and it consumes the whole mind and all its functionings. It consumes thoughts, desires, ambitions, hopes, dreams. It consumes the whole stuff the mind is full of.
Samadhi is the state when awareness is there, but there is nothing to be aware of inside you; the witness is there, but there is nothing to be witnessed.
Begin with dhyana, with meditation, and end in samadhi, in ecstasy, and you will know what God is. It is not a hypothesis, it is an experience. You have to live it – that is the only way to know it.

The second question:
Osho,
Your discourse on the Isa Upanishad was so beautiful. I have heard it said that the Upanishads are commentaries on or extensions of the Vedas. Is this true? I bow to you.
The Upanishads are not commentaries on the Vedas, neither are they extensions of the Vedas. Of course, Hindus go on insisting that they are commentaries or extensions of the Vedas, but that is a falsehood perpetuated by the priesthood for their own reasons.
In fact, the Upanishads are rebellions against the Vedas. Another name for the Upanishads is Vedanta. The priests have been saying that Vedanta means the culmination of the Vedas; the word can be interpreted that way, but in fact it means the end of the Vedas and the beginning of something absolutely new. The Vedas are very ordinary compared to the Upanishads.
The Upanishads say that there are two kinds of knowledge: the lower and the higher. The lower knowledge is the realm of the priesthood, the scholars, the pundits; and the higher knowledge is the world of the buddhas, of the awakened ones. The priest is a businessman, his whole effort is to exploit people in the name of religion. He oppresses people, dominates people, and of course he goes on saying, “It is for your own sake.” He makes people afraid of hell and greedy for heavenly joys. This is a psychological trick. He knows people are afraid, he knows people are greedy, so these are the two things that he goes on manipulating: fear and greed. And this is done by all the priests of all the religions in all the traditions all over the world.
The Upanishads are rebellions against the priesthood. The Upanishads are not at all commentaries on the Vedas – the Vedas are very mundane, ordinary. Yes, once in a while you can find a sutra in the Vedas which is beautiful, but that is only one percent at the most. Ninety-nine percent is just rubbish, while the Upanishads are one hundred percent pure gold – they are statements of those who have known.
The Vedas are full of prayers asking for worldly things: better crops, better cows, more money, better health, fame, power, prestige. Not only that, the Vedas are continuously praying, “Destroy our enemies, destroy those who oppose us.” They are full of jealousy, anger, violence. They have nothing to do with the Upanishads.
The Upanishads are not commentaries and they are not the culmination of the Vedas either. The Upanishads are a totally new beginning. The very word upanishad is of immense importance. The word upanishad is derived from the Sanskrit root shad. Shad has many meanings and all are significant. The first meaning is, “to sit.”
The Zen people say:
Sitting silently, doing nothing,
The spring comes and the grass grows by itself.
That is the meaning of shad, just sitting silently in deep meditation, not only sitting physically but sitting deep down psychologically too. You can sit physically in a yoga posture, but the mind goes on running, chasing; then it is not true sitting. Yes, physically you look still, but psychologically you are running in all the directions.
Shad means both sitting physically and psychologically because body and mind are not two things, not two separate entities. Body and mind is one reality. We should not use the phrase “body and mind,” we should make one word, bodymind. The body is the outer shell of the mind and the mind is the inner part of the body. Unless both are in a sitting posture, not running anywhere – into the past, into the future – not running anywhere, just being in the present, now and here… That is the meaning of shad, it is the very meaning of meditation.
It also means to settle. You are always in a chaos, in a state of turmoil, unsettled, always hesitating, confused, not knowing what to do, what not to do. There is no clarity inside; so many clouds, so much smoke surrounds you. When all these clouds have disappeared, when all this chaos has disappeared, when there is no confusion at all, it is called settling.
When one is settled absolutely, clarity arises – a new perspective. One starts seeing what the case is. The eyes are no longer covered by any smoke, for the first time you have eyes to see that which is.
The third meaning of shad is to approach. You are confused, you are living in darkness, you don’t know who you are, you don’t know the meaning of your life, of your existence. You have to approach somebody who has arrived home, who has found the way. You have to approach a Buddha, an enlightened master – a Lao Tzu, a Zarathustra, a Jesus, a Mohammed. You have to approach somebody who is afire with godliness, aflame, who is radiating godliness, in whose presence you feel bathed, refreshed, in whose presence something starts falling from your heart – the whole burden, anguish, anxiety – and something starts welling up within you: a new joy, a new insight. Hence, the meaning to approach.
Upa-ni-shad is made of three words. Shad is to sit, to settle, to approach – to approach a master, to sit by his side in a settled, silent state. And from the prefix upa which means near, close, in tune with, in harmony, in communion. When you are settled, sitting silently by the side of the master, doing nothing, running nowhere, then a harmony arises between you and the master, a closeness, an intimacy, a nearness, a possibility of communion, the meeting of the heart with the heart, the meeting of the being with the being, a merging, a communion. And ni meaning down, surrendered, in a state of prayer, in a state of egolessness.
This is the whole meaning of the word upanishad: sitting in a settled state, unconfused, clear, approaching the master in egolessness, surrendered, in deep prayerfulness, openness, vulnerability, so that a communion becomes possible.
This is upanishad – what is happening right now between you and me. This sitting silently, in a deep, loving, prayerful mood, listening to me not through the intellect but through the heart, drinking, not only listening – this communion is upanishad. We are living upanishad, and that is the only way to understand what the Upanishads are. It has to become a living experience for you.
The Vedas consist of all kinds of knowledge from those days. They are a kind of Encyclopedia Britannica, of course very primitive, at least ten thousand years old – at least. It is possible they are far older. Scholars are not decided, there is great controversy about the time when the Vedas were composed. The possibility is they were not composed at one period, they were composed at different periods. There are people who say they are at least ninety thousand years old, so from ninety thousand years to ten thousand years, a long stretch of time.
The Vedas are called samhita. Samhita means a compilation, an encyclopedia. They contain all kinds of things, all kinds of information from those days. The Upanishads are pure religiousness, nothing else. Each single word is a finger pointing to the moon. They are not compilations of all kinds of knowledge, their whole insistence is for immediate experience of that which is. The emphasis is on direct experience, not borrowed – not from scriptures, not from others. It has to be your own truth, only then does it liberate.
Jesus says, “Truth liberates.” Certainly truth liberates, but it has to be your own. If it is somebody else’s, then rather than liberating, it imprisons. Christians are imprisoned, Jesus is liberated. Hindus are imprisoned, Krishna is liberated. Buddhists are imprisoned, Buddha is liberated. Liberation comes by experiencing the truth on your own, it has not to be just an accumulation of information, it has to be an inner transformation.
The emphasis of the Upanishads is on an immediate and direct experience of godliness. And why borrow when it is possible to drink directly from the source? But information seems to be cheap. Transformation seems to be arduous. Transformation means you will have to go through a great inner revolution; information requires no revolution in you, no radical change in you. Information is simply an addition; whatsoever you are, you remain the same, but you become more and more knowledgeable.
Knowledgeability is not wisdom; knowledgeability is, on the contrary, a hindrance to wisdom. The more knowledgeable you become, the less is the possibility of attaining your own experience because knowledge deceives – it deceives others, it deceives you. It goes on giving you the sense as if you know, but that as if has not to be forgotten. That as if can easily be forgotten and one can be deceived.
Remember one very significant saying in the Upanishads: Those who are ignorant, they are bound to be lost in darkness; and those who are knowledgeable, they are bound to be lost in a far more and far bigger darkness than the ignorant ones.
The ignorant person is at least sincere: he knows that he does not know, at least this much truth is there. But the knowledgeable person covers up his wounds, his ignorance, his black holes. He covers them with scriptures and he starts pretending that he knows. He is harming others, but that is secondary – far more significant is that he is harming himself. He will be lost in a far deeper darkness.
That’s why it is very difficult for pundits, scholars, the so-called learned people, to become enlightened; it is a miracle if it happens at all. Sinners are more easily ready to go through the transformation because they have nothing to lose – except their chains, except their ignorance. But the knowledgeable person is afraid to lose his knowledge, that is his treasure. He clings to it, he protects it in every possible way. He finds rationalizations, excuses why the knowledge has to be protected. But, in fact, by protecting his knowledge he is simply protecting his ignorance. Hidden behind knowledge is his ignorance. The knowledge is just a mask that covers his original face. You cannot see his original face, he himself cannot see it. He is wearing a mask, and looking in the mirror he thinks, “This is my original face.”
It is very difficult for the knowledgeable to drop his knowledge and to become ignorant again. Unless he gathers enough courage to become ignorant again, to become like a child again – innocent, not knowing anything, what Dionysius calls agnosia, moving into a state of not knowing…
It is certainly very arduous for the knowledgeable person – his whole life he has been accumulating knowledge. He has wasted his whole life, he has invested his whole life in knowledge. How can he drop it? So he protects it, he fights for it.
And this is the most amazing thing in the world: the prisoner is fighting so that you cannot take him out of the prison. Of course he is very clever and very cunning, so he can play with words and he can quote scriptures, but all his quotations are parrotlike; he has no understanding.
The Upanishads emphasize direct experiencing. The Vedas belong to the priests, to the scholars, to the brahmins, who are the oldest priests in the world. And of course, because they are the oldest they are the most cunning in the whole world. No other religion can defeat the Hindu priest, obviously: he has lived for so long, he has become very clever in exploiting, he has become very cunning in rationalizing, in protecting.
The Upanishads are a totally different dimension. Of course they don’t speak the language of rebellion, they are very soft, but the rebellion is there. Because the Upanishads could not create the revolution, Buddha had to speak in a harsher tone.
Buddha speaks the same truth as the Upanishads, but his way has changed. Seeing that the Upanishads have failed to have any impact – because the priests also started managing the Upanishads and they started saying that the Upanishads are nothing but commentaries on the Vedas – Buddha had to be more alert. He was not as soft as the Upanishads. Of course his message is the same, but two, three thousand years had passed since the Upanishads were composed and one thing Buddha had become absolutely clear about: that you have to be very harsh, very hard. He has sharpened his sword.
Twenty-five centuries have again passed, the same period. The Upanishads and Buddha are divided by twenty-five centuries, between me and Buddha again twenty-five centuries have passed. I have to sharpen my sword even more because Buddha has also failed.
The ignorance of man is so deep and the priests are so cunning that one has to be really hard. If one has compassion one has to be cruel, only then this whole stupidity that exists in the name of religion can be destroyed and man can be freed. Man needs freedom from all cages, from all fetters.

The third question:
Osho,
Would you please say something about sincerity?
Man can live in two ways: either he can live according to the dictates of others – the puritans, the moralists – or he can live according to his own light. It is easy to follow others, it is convenient and comfortable because when you follow others they feel very good and happy with you.
Your parents will be happy if you follow their ideas, although their ideas are absolutely worthless because their ideas have not made their lives illumined, and it is so apparent. They have lived in misery. Still they want to impose their ideas on the children. They cannot see a simple fact: that their life has been a failure, that their life has not been creative, that their life has never tasted of bliss, that they have not been able to discover truth. They have not known the splendor of existence, they have no idea what it is all about. Still their egos insist that the children should be obedient, they should follow their dictates.
Hindu parents will force the child to become a Hindu, and they will not even think for a single moment what has happened to them. They have followed those same ideas their whole life and their life is empty, nothing has flowered. But they enjoy the idea that their children are obedient and they are following them. They have lived in misery, in hell, and their children will live in misery and hell, but they think they love their children. With all good intentions they destroy the future of their children.
The politicians try in every possible way that the society should live according to their ideas, and of course they pretend to others and to themselves that they are doing public service. All that they are doing is destroying people’s freedom. They are trying to enforce certain superstitions that were enforced on them by their parents, by their leaders, by their priests.
The politicians, the priests, the pedagogues, they are all trying to create a false humanity, they are creating insincere human beings. They may not have intended to do so, but that’s what has happened. A tree is to be judged by fruits, it does not matter what was the intention of the gardener. If he was sowing seeds of weeds and hoping, intending, desiring that roses will come out just because of his good intentions, roses are not going to come out of the weeds. He has destroyed the whole field. To impose a certain structure of character on anybody is to make him insincere, is to make him a hypocrite.
Sincerity means to live according to your own light. Hence the first requirement of being sincere is to be meditative. The first thing is not to be moral, is not to be good, is not to be virtuous – the most important thing is to be meditative so that you can find a little light within yourself and then start living according to that light. As you live it grows and it gives you a deep integrity because it comes from your own innermost being, there is no division.
When somebody says to you, “Do this, this should be done,” naturally it creates a division in you. You don’t want to do it, you wanted to do something else, but the parents, the politicians, the priests, those who are in power, want you to follow a certain route. You never wanted to follow it so you will follow it unwillingly. Your heart will not be in it, you will not be committed to it, you will not have any involvement with it. You will go through it like a slave. It is not your choice, it is not out of your freedom.
The first disciples of Jesus had chosen him, it was their choice and they had chosen a very risky path – to be with Jesus was dangerous. It has always been so. To be with anybody who gives you freedom is dangerous because he will make you so independent that you will continuously be in a fight with the society, with the establishment, with the vested interests. You will be in a constant struggle your whole life. Of course that struggle is worth it and it is not a curse, it is a blessing because only through that struggle you grow, you expand. Your consciousness becomes more and more clear, it becomes a peak. You have to pay for it – it is not cheap, hence the risk.
The few people who followed Jesus were taking a dangerous path. They could have been crucified, and they were tortured in many ways. But today to be a Christian has no risk, hence it is bogus.
The people who followed Buddha were living dangerously, and to live dangerously is the only way to live. But they were sincere people, they followed their own inner voice against the whole society, against the whole tradition, convention. They followed a rebel and became rebels in their own right. Buddhists were burned alive just as early Christians were burned alive, thrown to the lions and to the wild animals, tortured in every possible way. But still they attained the ultimate experience of godliness – they paid for it. But to be a Buddhist now is very convenient – there is no problem about it, anybody can be a Buddhist. And the same is true about all religions.
Right now to be with me is dangerous. You will continuously be in trouble, wherever you will go you will be opposed. You will be opposed by the Christians, by the Hindus, by the Mohammedans, by the Jains, by the Buddhists. You will be tortured, you will be condemned, you will not be accepted anywhere, but you will become sincere, you will have some authenticity. And you will suffer all these tortures joyfully because you have chosen them.
Even to choose hell is beautiful, rather than to be forced to live in heaven. If you are forced to live in heaven it is hell, and if you choose hell it is heaven because it is your own choice. It brings your life to its highest peak.
Sincerity means not living a double life – and almost everybody is living a double life: he says one thing, he thinks something else. He never says that which he thinks, he says that which is convenient and comfortable, he says that which will be approved, accepted, he says that which is expected by others. Now, what he says and what he thinks become two different worlds. He says one thing, he goes on doing something else, and then naturally he has to hide it. He cannot expose himself because then the contradiction will be found, then he will be in trouble. He talks about beautiful things and lives an ugly life.
This is what, up to now, humanity has done to itself. It has been a very nightmarish past.
The new man is an absolute necessity now because the old is utterly rotten. The old is continuously in conflict within himself, he is fighting with himself. Whatsoever he does he feels miserable. If he follows his own inner voice he feels he is going against the society, against the powerful people, against the establishment. And that establishment has created a conscience in you; that conscience is a very tricky procedure, a strategy. It is the policeman inside you, implanted by the society, who goes on condemning you: “This is wrong, this is not right. You should not do that, you should feel guilty for it – you are being immoral.”
If you follow your voice, your conscience is at daggers with you; it will not give you any rest, it will torture you, it will make you miserable. And you will become afraid – afraid that somebody may find out. And it is very difficult to hide because life means relationships – somebody is bound to know, somebody is bound to discover. You are not alone.
That’s why the cowards escaped to the monasteries, to the Himalayan caves, just for the single reason that there they will not be found out at all. But what kind of life can you live in a cave? You have already committed suicide. To be in a cave is to be in a grave – and alive! If you are dead and in a grave, that seems right – where else can you be? But alive and in a grave – it is real hell!
In the monasteries people are living a miserable life, that’s why they have such long faces – not that they are religious. Those long faces are the simple outcome of a cowardly life. If you are in the world living with people you cannot hide for long, you can deceive a few people for the time being, but not forever. And how can you deceive yourself? Even if you are not found out by others, you know that you are living a double life – and the guilt…
Everybody is guilty. The priests want you to be guilty because the more guilty you are, the more you are in the hands of the priests. You have to go to them to get rid of your guilt. You have to go to the Ganges to take a bath, you have to go to Mecca, to Kaaba, so that you can get rid of your guilt. You have to go to the Catholic priest to confess so that you can get rid of the guilt. You have to fast and do other kinds of penances and other kinds of austerities so that you can punish yourself. These are all punishments. But how can you be happy? How you can be cheerful and blissful? How can you rejoice in a life where you are constantly feeling guilty and punishing yourself, condemning yourself?
If you choose not to follow your inner voice and follow the dictates of others – they call it morality, etiquette, civilization, culture – then too that inner voice will start nagging you, it will continuously nag you. It will say you are being untrue to your nature. And if you feel that you are being untrue to your nature then your morality cannot be a rejoicing, it will only be an empty gesture.
This is what has happened to man: man has become schizophrenic.
My effort here is to help you to become one. That’s why I don’t teach any morality, any character. All that I teach is meditation so that you can hear your inner voice more clearly and follow it, whatsoever the cost. Because if you follow your inner voice without feeling guilty, immense is going to be your reward, and looking backward you will find that the cost was nothing. It looked very big in the beginning, but when you have arrived at the point where sincerity becomes natural, spontaneous, when there is no longer any division, no longer any split in you, then you will see a celebration is happening and the cost that you have paid is nothing compared to it.
You ask me: “Would you please say something about sincerity?”
Sincerity is the fragrance of meditation.

The fourth question:
Osho,
At this moment the Christian Broadcasting Company, NCRV, in Holland, has started a series of eight programs on spiritual movements entitled: Not to Be Believed. The producer-minister, Sipke van der Land, who has been here with his crew to film you and life at the ashram, called the first program: Bhagwan, Sex Guru from Pune. At the end of the film he comments, “Bhagwan never looks at you, he looks over us. What kind of mastership is this, in which someone pulls people toward him without paying any attention to them? Jesus humiliated himself to be equal with us as a servant, but not Bhagwan. Bhagwan raises himself above humanity – haughty, a strange ruler.”
Could you please comment on this?
The Christian, the Hindu, the Mohammedan, they cannot understand me – they are determined not to understand me. It is against their vested interests. They are afraid of me and they will try in every possible way to confuse people.
Because it is a Christian broadcasting company they must have come with prejudiced ideas, they must have come with a closed mind. They had already come with conclusions, hence whatsoever they say only shows something about them, nothing about me. And remember, their title is right: Not to Be Believed!
They have received many letters – I have received many letters too – and there have been many comments in the newspapers in Holland. Almost all the newspapers have commented that their whole program about me does not give any indication about the title, Bhagwan, Sex Guru from Pune. Their whole program has nothing to do with the title. People are meditating, people are sitting silently listening to me, people are working. It has no relationship at all with the program. What they have tried to project with what they have filmed is totally irrelevant. But they were not even aware, it seems, that the title has no relevance with the program – it has nothing to do with sex.
And what has this director replied? – because the newspapers asked the director, “Why have you given such a title, which has no reference to the program at all? It shows a prejudiced mind.” So he has answered, “That was our very purpose, that’s the very purpose of a Christian broadcasting company, to expose everything that is not Christian.” They are not concerned with truth – as if truth is Christian! Truth is neither Hindu nor Christian nor Mohammedan.
He should be reminded that Jesus was not a Christian himself. Christianity never existed in those days. Jesus was born a Jew, lived a Jew, died a Jew. I may be a little bit of Christian – in fact, more Christian than Jesus! – but Jesus cannot be Christian at all. First they should condemn Jesus – why he was not Christian. That will serve their purpose more accurately.
They should make a film about Jesus. Jesus was traveling with a prostitute, Mary Magdalene – he must have been a sex guru! He was always in the company of gamblers, drunkards, prostitutes, which this director would not approve of. Jesus himself was a drunkard. He should make a film on Jesus.
There are rumors that Jesus was a homosexual. I don’t know how far they are true, but there is a possibility because he was constantly traveling with those twelve boys! And religious people are known, very well-known, to be homosexuals. Homosexuality is a religious phenomenon. When you keep men separate from women and women separate from men, homosexuality is a natural byproduct.
He has also said in one interview to a newspaper, that “Bhagwan’s sannyasins say, ‘We feel immense energy, we feel the presence of Bhagwan transforming us.’” And he says, “I lived there for a few days, I didn’t feel anything.”
When Jesus was crucified there were at least one hundred thousand people present. Did they feel anything? If they had felt anything Jesus would have been saved. Those one hundred thousand people could have easily saved him because there were only a few policemen, they could have been destroyed, killed by the masses. But nobody could feel any energy, nobody could see any godliness in Jesus. In fact, people were mocking and laughing at him.
They were waiting for him to show some miracle and they were shouting, “You have been showing miracles, we have heard. We have heard that you used to walk on water, we have heard that you have given sight to the blind people, we have heard that you have cured incurable diseases, we have even heard that you raised Lazarus from death, you revived him – now show us a miracle!”
And these people came back home very frustrated because no miracle happened. Jesus died like any ordinary man. And remember, these were simple people – not journalists!
This director from NCRV, if he had been present there, would have become very frustrated because he would have gone there with the whole crew to film some miracle, and it was not happening.
Do you think Hindus felt the energy of Buddha? Do you think Jains felt the energy of Buddha or Buddhists felt the energy of Mahavira? Mahavira and Buddha were contemporaries, lived in the same part of the country, Bihar, moved in the same villages and towns continuously for forty years, many times stayed in the same village and once at least stayed in one house – half was occupied by Buddha and half by Mahavira – and still their disciples were not able to feel the energy of the other. What was happening? Could not the Jews feel the energy of Jesus?
It is a simple phenomenon to be understood. To feel the energy you have to be in a certain state. It is like – he will understand this better – it is like carrying a radio set with you, but if you don’t turn it on, no music will flow through it. Even if you turn it on and you don’t fix the needle at a certain point, it will not receive. One needs openness, and the needle has to be at a certain point, a deep harmony is needed. Whether it is with Jesus or Buddha or Mahavira does not matter; whomsoever you are attuned with, you will feel the energy.
But he is like a man who stands before the sunrise with closed eyes and he says, “There is no sun because I cannot see it. And the people who are saying that there is, are all false – not to be believed – because I cannot see it, and I have been standing here for hours.”
You have to open your eyes to see the sun. And the sun is a gross phenomenon; the energy of a master is a very subtle phenomenon – unless you are in deep love you will not feel it.
And he says, “Bhagwan never looks at you.” In a way he is correct. I never look at you because you are two: the false and the real. I am not concerned with the false. I don’t look at your mask. I don’t look at the accidental in you, I look to the essential, I look to the very core of your being. I am not concerned with your masks and your personality, my whole concern is with the center of your being.
Why should I look at you? He must have felt it because I remember perfectly, I never looked at him because there was nothing to look at, just an empty man, a container without any content. Why should I waste my time looking at such people? It is only out of compassion that they are allowed, and this too is not going to happen very much any more. In the new commune I am going to prevent all these people coming in.
I certainly look, but my ways of looking are my ways, I look behind the mask because that is where my work is.
He says, “…he looks over us.” That is true because I look at the transcendental self in you and that is something over you, above you, surpassing you. You are far more than your body, far more than your mind, and I look to that far more. That is the real thing and that has to be brought into your focus. I am not a psychoanalyst – I am not concerned with the superficial but with that which surpasses you. I am concerned with your beyond.
And he says, “What kind of mastership is this in which someone pulls people toward him without paying any attention to them?” The ego needs attention, the ego feeds on attention, the ego wants that attention should be paid to it; it is constantly hankering for attention. While he was here he must have been hankering for attention.
It has been one of the problems here. Whenever people come here – journalists of all kinds – their whole effort is that the commune should pay great attention to them. They want a private interview with me, they want to ask me questions directly. I am not a politician. Of course, if they go to the president or the prime minister of any country they will give them great attention. I am not interested at all in what they write, in what they show on the television. I am not concerned at all with whether they write negatively or positively, whether they make a film supporting me or condemning me. It is all the same to me.
I exist here for my sannyasins, my whole energy is for them. It is not to be wasted on stupid people. So he must have felt that no attention is being paid to him – and I deliberately never pay any attention to such people. They come with closed minds, they come with great egos – and we are not here to nourish their egos. In the new commune they will be debarred, that will be the only attention we will pay to them.
And he says, “Jesus humiliated himself to be equal with us…” What I am going to say has nothing to do with Jesus; it has something to do with what this man, the director of NCRV, is saying. So remember it.
He says, “Jesus humiliated himself to be equal with us…” That simply means he knew that he was not equal with you. “He humiliated himself to be equal with us.” He was not – I am, so why should I humiliate myself? For what? I am simply equal, there is no need to humiliate.
“He humiliated himself to be equal with us as a servant…” I am neither a master nor a servant; I don’t possess you, I don’t own you. If Jesus tried to be a servant to you, that means somewhere deep down he must have been self-conscious that he possesses you, that he owns you – otherwise why? You are not a servant to me, why should I be a servant to you? We are all friends here. There is no need to be a servant or to be humiliating oneself.
Do you think this is true? Jesus called himself the only begotten son of God – the only. How can he be equal to you? You are born out of sin, he was born out of a virgin mother. I am not born out of a virgin mother! My mother is here, you can ask her. And I am not the only begotten son of God because there is no God at all, so there is no question of my being the only begotten son of God. This is all sheer bullshit!
The Christian God must be homosexual because the whole trinity consists of three men – no women at all. On the earth Jesus is born out of a virgin mother. That is nonsense, absurdity – illogical, unscientific. Secondly, he is the only begotten son of God. God must have carried him in his womb because he is not a woman, and there is no woman in the Christian trinity – unless the Holy Ghost functions in double ways.
This is not right about Jesus. He violently dragged the money changers out of the temple, that is not the way of a humble man. With a whip in his hand he chased them out of the temple. I have not done anything like that. I never enter a temple – I never think any temple is worth entering. And this whip – is this the way of a humble man? And driving the money changers out of the temple!
Jesus cursed a fig tree because they were hungry. Jesus and his disciples were hungry and the fig tree was without figs. He became very angry, he cursed the fig tree. The fig tree died immediately! This is how a humble man behaves? Then why was he crucified if he was so humble?
And doing all those so-called miracles – walking on the water, raising the dead – is this the way of a humble man? Those are all strategies to prove superiority, all those miracles.
This man, the director of NCRV, is talking sheer nonsense. He knows nothing about Jesus, he knows nothing about me!
And he says, “…but not Bhagwan. Bhagwan raises himself above humanity – haughty! A strange ruler.” I have never ruled anybody. I never come out of my room to rule anybody. What kind of ruling has he seen here? I never order anybody, I don’t give any commandments to anybody. I have never said that I am above humanity. What I am saying is that everybody is above humanity. Humanity is only a bridge, not a place to live but something to be surpassed.
And Bhagwan, the word bhagwan, creates misunderstanding in Christian minds because they immediately translate it as God. Bhagwan simply means the Blessed One, and I am certainly a Blessed One – I cannot deny it. Just to be humble have I to falsify, start lying about myself? I am blissful, I am the Blessed One – and you can be blissful and you can also be the Blessed One. What has happened to me can happen to you because this is your birthright too.
But he had come with a particular idea. In a way it is good that people are becoming so afraid of me. It is good, it shows that the impact is making them tremble. Holland is becoming one of my most important orange countries. Christians are becoming afraid – it is good. Make them as afraid as possible. Make everybody afraid of you. Let them all tremble before they collapse. It is good.
Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
Is this a new phase of your work – two complete discourses without a single joke?
Thank you for reminding me. I had forgotten all about jokes! Here are two jokes for the two discourses:

A young man was driving home from work one night in the pouring rain when he noticed an attractive woman, standing on the footpath, soaking wet. He stopped and offered her a ride home. When they arrived at her apartment, she invited him in for a drink.
After a few drinks, one thing led to another and very soon they were in her bedroom making love. Suddenly he realized that it was quite late and his wife would be furious with him.
Before leaving he asked the young woman for a piece of chalk. He placed it behind his ear and then proceeded to drive home.
At home his wife screamed at him “Where have you been?”
“You will never believe this, darling,” the man replied. “I was driving home from work this evening in the pouring rain and I stopped to pick up a woman who was standing on the footpath. I drove her home, she invited me in, we had a drink, and I have spent the last two hours making love!”
“Don’t bullshit me!” the wife snarled. “You have been down at the pool hall again with the boys. I can see the chalk behind your ear!”

And the second:

A jealous husband hired the very best detective in town to spy on his wife. The detective reported back after a few days, his arm in a plaster cast.
“What happened?” the husband asked eagerly.
The detective began: “At two o’clock, Saturday afternoon, I saw your wife walking hand in hand with another man.”
“Where did they go?” the husband demanded.
“They checked into a hotel and were given a room on the second floor.”
“And then?” the husband urged.
“Then I climbed up a tree and sat on a branch watching them through the open window. They sat on the edge of the bed, kissing and hugging. Then he took off his clothes…”
“And then, what happened then?” the enraged husband blasted.
“Well, then she took off her clothes…” the detective continued warily.
“Tell me, tell me what happened next!” yelled the husband in a rage.
“Well, sir, you see, at that moment the branch I was sitting on broke. I fell to the ground and could see no more!”

You get…? You missed it! Think it over later on!

The second question:
Osho,
Could you please tell me your opinion about J. Krishnamurti, who is saying that you won't be free and therefore not happy as long as you follow any tradition, religion or master?
Gautam the Buddha has divided the enlightened persons into two categories. The first category he calls the arhats and the second bodhisattvas. The arhat and the bodhisattva are both enlightened; there is no difference between their experience, but the arhat is not a master and the bodhisattva is a master. The arhat has attained the same truth but he is incapable of teaching it because teaching is a totally different art.
For example, you can see a beautiful sunset, you can experience the beauty of it as deeply, as profoundly as any Vincent van Gogh, but that does not mean you will be able to paint it. To paint it is a totally different art. Experiencing is one thing, helping others to experience it is not the same.
There have been many arhats but very few bodhisattvas. The bodhisattva is both enlightened and skillful at teaching what has happened to him. It is the greatest art in the world. No other art can be compared with it because to say the unsayable, to help people come out of their sleep, to find and invent devices to bring what has happened to him to those who are thirsty for it and help them to get it, is a rare gift.
Krishnamurti is an arhat, he is not a bodhisattva. His enlightenment is as great as anybody else’s enlightenment; he is a Buddha, a Jesus, a Lao Tzu. In enlightenment there are no degrees, either one is enlightened or one is not. Once a person is enlightened he has the same flavor, the same fragrance as anyone who has ever become enlightened or will ever become enlightened. But to relate the experience, to communicate the experience is not possible for all.

Once Buddha was asked, “How many people have become enlightened amongst your disciples?”
He replied, “Many.” He pointed: “Look!” Manjushree was sitting by his side and Sariputra and Moggalayan and Mahakashyap. He said, “These four people are present here right now – they have become enlightened.”
The inquirer asked, “If they have become enlightened why are they not as famous as you are? Why does nobody know about them? Why don’t they have thousands of followers?”
Buddha said, “They have become enlightened but they are not masters. They are arhats, they are not bodhisattvas.”

The arhat knows it but cannot make it known to the others, the bodhisattva knows it and can make it known to the others. Krishnamurti is an arhat. Because of this he cannot understand the beautiful world of a master and his disciples.
You ask me, Wolfgang, “Could you please tell me your opinion about J. Krishnamurti, who is saying that you won’t be free and therefore not happy as long as you follow any tradition, religion or master?”
He is right. If you follow a tradition, religion or master – remember the word follow – you will not be free and you will not be blissful, you will not know the ultimate truth of life: by following nobody knows it. What can you do by following a tradition? You will become an imitator. A tradition means something of the past, and enlightenment has to happen right now. A tradition may be very ancient – the more ancient it is, the more dead.
A tradition is nothing but footprints of the enlightened people on the sands of time, but those footprints are not enlightened. You can follow those footprints very religiously and they will not lead you anywhere because each person is unique. If you remember the uniqueness of the person then no following is going to help you because there cannot be a fixed routine.
That’s the difference between science and religion: science depends on tradition. Without a Newton, without an Edison, there is no possibility for Albert Einstein to have existed at all. He needs a certain tradition; only on that tradition, on the shoulders of the past giants in the world of science, he can stand. Of course when you stand on the shoulders of somebody you can look a little farther than the person on whose shoulders you are standing, but that person is needed there.
Science is a tradition, but religion is not a tradition; it is an individual experience, utterly individual. Once something is known in the world of science it need not be discovered again, it will be foolish to discover it again. You need not discover the theory of gravitation – Newton has done it. You need not go and sit in a garden and watch an apple fall and then conclude that there must be some force in the earth that pulls it downward, it will simply be foolish. Newton has done it, now it is part of human tradition. It can be taught to any person who has a little bit of intelligence, even schoolchildren know about it.
But in religion you have to discover again and again. No discovery becomes a heritage in religion. Buddha discovered, but that does not mean you can simply follow Buddha. Buddha was unique, you are unique in your own right, so how Buddha has entered truth is not going to help you. You are a different kind of house, the doors may be in different directions. If you simply follow Buddha blindly, that very following will be misleading.
Traditions cannot be followed. You can understand them and understanding can be of immense help, but following and understanding are totally different things.
So Krishnamurti is right when he is against following, but when he starts saying that you need not even understand, then he is wrong. Then he is speaking the language of an arhat and he is unaware of the world of the bodhisattva. Understanding is possible – you can understand Buddha.
What is he doing for forty years? What efforts has he been making for forty years? How did Wolfgang come to know Krishnamurti’s ideas? He is trying to explain, he is trying with great effort to make you understand. You cannot follow Krishnamurti, but you can certainly understand his vision, his perspective, and that will be an enrichment. It will not bring you enlightenment, but it can be used as a stepping stone.
Krishnamurti says he is fortunate that he has not read any religious scriptures. That is not right. In the first place it is not factual – he has been taught all the ancient scriptures when he was young, not only of one tradition but of all the traditions because he was brought up by theologists, Theosophists – great synthesizers of all the paths and all the religions and all the traditions. Theosophy was one of the greatest efforts ever made to bring all the traditions closer to each other: Hinduism, Mohammedanism, Christianity, Judaism, Jainism, Buddhism, Taoism. Theosophy was trying to find out the essential core of them all, and Krishnamurti was taught in every possible way all that is great. He may have forgotten about it, and I know that he must have forgotten because he will not lie, he will not say anything deliberately untrue. But he lived in a kind of hypnosis for twenty-five years.
He was taken possession of by the Theosophists when he was only nine years of age, and then he was brought up in a very special way. Many secret methods have been tried upon him: he has been taught while he was sleeping, he has been taught while he was in deep hypnosis, so he does not remember it at all.
Only recently Russian psychologists were trying to find ways to teach children while they are asleep because if we can teach children while they are asleep, much time can be saved. And one thing more, when a child is asleep he can be taught more easily because there is no distraction. His unconscious can be taught directly, which is easier. When we teach a child through his consciousness it is difficult because ultimately the teaching has to reach the unconscious, only then it becomes yours. And to reach the unconscious through the conscious takes a long time, a lot of repetition. You have to go on repeating again and again and again, then only slowly, slowly it settles to the bottom of the conscious, and from that bottom slowly it penetrates the unconscious.
But in deep sleep, or more precisely in hypnosis – hypnosis means sleep, deliberately created sleep – you can teach directly to the unconscious, the conscious can be bypassed, and something can be put into the unconscious. The conscious will not know anything about it.
Krishnamurti was taught all the great scriptures in a deep hypnosis, he has completely forgotten. Not only that, he has even been manipulated to write while he was in hypnosis. His first book, At the Feet of the Master, was written under hypnosis. Hence he simply shrugs his shoulders when you ask about that first book, which is really a rare document of immense value. But he simply says, “I don’t know anything about it, how it happened. I can’t say that I have written it.”
Krishnamurti has been experimented upon by Theosophists in many subtle ways, so he is not aware that he has been acquainted with all the great scriptures and all the great documents, and what he goes on saying has reflections of all those teachings. They are there, but in a very subtle form. He cannot quote the scriptures, but what he says is the very essence of the scriptures.
A tradition has to be understood, and if you can understand many traditions, of course it will enrich you. It will not make you enlightened, but it will help you toward the goal, it will push you toward the goal. Don’t be a follower of any tradition – don’t be a Christian or a Hindu or a Mohammedan. But it will be unfortunate if you remain unaware of the beautiful words of Jesus, it will be a sheer misfortune if you don’t know the great poetry of the Upanishads.
It will be as if a person has not heard any great music: Beethoven, Bach, Mozart, Wagner. If one has not heard, something will be missing in him. It will be a misfortune if you have not read Shakespeare, Milton, Dostoevsky, Kalidas, Bhavbhuti, Rabindranath, Kahlil Gibran. If you have not been acquainted with Tolstoy, Chekhov, Maxim Gorky, something in you will remain missing. The same is true if you have not read Lao Tzu, Chuang Tzu, Lieh Tzu, Gautam Buddha, Bodhidharma, Basho, Lin Chi, Socrates, Pythagoras, Heraclitus. These are very different, unique perspectives, but they will all help you to become wider.
So I will not say that traditions are useless, I will say they become dangerous if you follow them blindly. Try to understand, imbibe the spirit. Forget the letter, just drink of the spirit. It is certainly dangerous to belong to a religion because that means you are encaged, imprisoned into a certain creed, dogma. You lose your freedom, you lose your inquiry, your exploration.
It is dangerous to live surrounded by a small philosophy. You will be a frog in the well, you will not know about the ocean. But to understand is a totally different phenomenon. The very effort to understand all the religions of the world will make you free of creeds and dogmas.
That’s what’s happening here. I am talking about all the religions for the simple reason that you don’t become addicted to one standpoint. Life is multidimensional. Certainly Moses has contributed something to it, which nobody else has done. Unless you understand Moses you will miss that perspective, that dimension, you will be that much poorer.
The people who listen to Krishnamurti, they start following him. There are Krishnamurtiites who have been listening to him for forty years or even fifty years. I have come across old people of the same age as Krishnamurti who have listened to him for fifty years, since 1930, and they have reached nowhere. All that they have learned is a kind of negativeness: “This is wrong, that is wrong.” But what is right? About that there seems to be not even a glimpse in their being.
Don’t become part of a religion, but visit, be a guest to all the religions. In the temple there is a beauty, in the mosque also, a different kind of beauty, in the church again a different experience. And this is our whole heritage, the whole humanity’s past belongs to you. Why choose?
The follower chooses. He insists on being a Christian; he will avoid the Upanishads, he will avoid the Dhammapada, he will not bother about the Koran. He is unnecessarily crippling himself, paralyzing himself.
I also say don’t follow, but I will not agree with the statement: “Don’t try to understand.” Trying to understand is not following; your understanding becomes clearer, more sharpened.
Krishnamurti goes on reading detective novels. Is he following those detective novels? Is he trying to become a detective? If he can read detective novels, what is wrong in reading the Upanishads? And detective novels are just ordinary, juvenile, childish. The Upanishads are the Himalayan peaks of human consciousness. Don’t follow them – there is no need to follow anybody.
My sannyasins are not my followers, they are just my companions. The word satsang, the word upanishad, means the company of a master. The disciple is a companion, a fellow traveler, and of course if you are traveling with somebody who knows the territory, who has explored the territory, your journey will become easier, your journey will become richer, your journey will have less unnecessary hazards, you will be able to reach the goal sooner than alone.
Traditions become dangerous only when you cling to them, then certainly there is danger. Traditions are group efforts to keep the unexpected from happening. If you become a part, then it is dangerous because then the tradition becomes a hindrance to you for exploring. The tradition insists on belief – believe in it and believe without inquiry. That’s what people are doing, what Christians and Hindus and Mohammedans are doing – believing in something they have never inquired into. And to believe in something without inquiring is very disrespectful toward truth and toward your own self. No, belief is not going to help – only knowing can free you.
And he says the same about a master. It is true about ninety-nine percent of so-called masters, but it is not true about the one, the real one. He is ninety-nine percent right because wherever there are real coins there are bound to be false coins too. A tradition is dead; a religion is a philosophy, a belief, a dogma. If you believe in it, it appears significant, its arguments appear to be very great. The moment you stand by the side and look with a detached view, you can see the foolishness, the stupidity. You can see that there are assumptions which have not been proved, not been established.

One morning a great philosopher was seen walking down the street touching every pole that he passed. Someone asked him, “Hey, professor, why are you touching all those poles?”
The philosopher grinned and said, “And why are you not touching all those poles?”

It is difficult to answer why you are not touching!
The philosophers have their own arguments, you may not be able to argue against them. They may silence you; they may bring great proofs, logical arguments, rationalizations. They may silence you, but that is not going to help.

After giving a speech at Columbia University, the noted philosopher, Bertrand Russell, was answering questions from the audience. One student’s critical question brought him to a full stop. For a whole minute he said nothing, his hand over his chin. Then he peered at the student and rephrased the question, making it more precise. He asked the student, “Would you say that this is still your question?”
The student answered delightfully, “Yes.”
Again Lord Russell thought, this time even longer, and twice seemed about to speak. Then he said, “That’s a very good question, young man. I don’t believe I can answer it.”

But there are very few philosophers like Bertrand Russell who will accept that they can’t answer. They will invent answers, they will go on and on creating proofs, inventing proofs. For every kind of nonsense you can find proofs, you can argue.
Religions are all based on theologies, and the very word theology is a contradiction in terms. Theo means God, logy means logic – logic about God. In fact, there is no logic about God; there is love but no logic. You can approach the phenomenon God or godliness through the heart, through love, but not through logic.
By following a tradition or religion, what are you doing? Your approach is bound to be through the head. Following is always from the head: you are convinced logically, hence you follow, but it is not a love affair.
A love affair is possible only when you find a living master. You cannot fall in love with Jesus now, you cannot fall in love with Buddha now; they are no longer here. Those dewdrops have disappeared into the ocean. You can fall in love only with a living master. Buddha must have been very beautiful, but love can happen only between two living hearts.
Krishnamurti is right about ninety-nine percent of so-called gurus, but one has to take the risk. If you become too cautious you will never be able to find the true one. To find the true one you will have to pass through many untrue ones.

An American seeker reached Everest after a long, arduous journey around the world in search of a master. And finally he found a great, ancient old man sitting silently on top of the Everest.
The American seeker said, “Ah, great guru, I have devoted my entire life to the quest for truth, honesty, love and justice. I have traveled to the four corners of the earth to experience every agony and every passion. Now I come to you to ask, where do I go from here?”
The guru said, “Go back and do it all over again, my son.”
“Thank you, thank you! What can I ever do to repay you?”
And the guru said, “Got any American cigarettes on you?”

He is right about ninety-nine percent of gurus, but he is wrong about one percent, and that one percent is really what matters. He is wrong about Buddha, he is wrong about Lao Tzu, he is wrong about Jesus.
But to find a living master one has to search, and in fact, all those false gurus help you in a way because experiencing them you become aware of that which is false. And to know the false as false is the beginning of knowing the true as the true, the real as the real. If you are absolutely clear about the false, suddenly you become clear about what is real, what is authentic. So even the false gurus are serving in an indirect way to the real seekers.
A master is one who will not tell you to follow him, but he will certainly tell you to be silently with him. It has nothing to do with following. A real, authentic master does not want to create pseudo replicas, carbon copies, he helps you to discover your original face. He will not impose any structure on you; on the contrary, he will help you to get rid of all imposed structures. He will not condition you, he will only uncondition you and then leave you to yourself. He will not recondition you.
When you move from one false guru to another false guru, then it happens: the new false guru will uncondition you and then recondition you. If you become a Hindu from being a Christian you will be unconditioned first so that you can get rid of your Christianity, and then Hinduism will be imposed on you.
That is what is happening to Hare Krishna people: now they are being conditioned as Hindus. They have lived in one kind of prison called Christianity, now they will be living in another kind of prison called Hinduism. It is the same, it makes no difference, only the prison is different. You get out of one prison and immediately you enter another.
The real master will take you out of one prison and will prevent you from entering another prison. Certainly it is difficult to find a real master, but that does not mean that one should not try to find, that does not mean that it is impossible – difficult of course, but not impossible. And when you have come to a master who simply imparts his love, his being, his presence, who shares his joy, his laughter with you, and there is no desire to condition you, to force you into a certain pattern, then his presence can be of immense catalytic significance, he can be a catalytic agent. In his presence something can start happening in you that may not happen alone for centuries, maybe for lives.
J. Krishnamurti is a beautiful man but one-dimensional, very linear, one line, he follows one track. Hence you will not find any contradictions in him. For fifty years he has been simply repeating the same thing again and again. Unknowingly he has conditioned people. Just by repeating the same thing again and again for fifty years he has hypnotized people. He has created a great difficulty for those people, he is not a master himself, he cannot impart his experience. He is an arhat, not a bodhisattva. And he has prevented those people from going in search of some other living master. He has created a real mess in many people, they would have been in search of a master but he has prevented them. His logic is clear, appealing, very appealing to the egoist, particularly to the so-called intelligentsia, very appealing because the so-called intelligentsia is always afraid of surrender, of dropping the ego – they are egoist people. And when he says, “There is no need to follow, there is no need to go to any master, there is no need of any initiation,” they feel very happy. Their ego is saved but their ego is there.
Now even the ego has the support of Krishnamurti, and all his arguments will be used by the ego. And that’s what has happened to thousands of people who have listened to him. He has not been a blessing because of his linear logic.
In the ancient days people like Krishnamurti used to remain silent. That was the way of the arhat because he knows that he cannot impart, he has no skill, he remains silent. He does not go around the world telling people, “I cannot impart and nobody else can do it either.”
This is the first time an arhat has been trying to teach people, and of course it is a contradiction. The arhat is not supposed to teach, and when an arhat starts teaching he will teach against teaching, and the people who will become interested in him will be egoists.
You can find the very cultured egos around Krishnamurti, and they are there because he has become their rationalization, there is no need to surrender. And the irony is, the amazing fact is that Krishnamurti himself passed through many initiations, he had many masters.
In fact, I had no master and he had many masters, but maybe that’s why he is against masters and I am not against – because I had had no experience of the false. I have never been with any master, I have worked on my own. It took long, many lives, but I have never been initiated by anybody. Maybe that’s why I have a soft corner for the masters.
He has been forced and regimented in every possible way by the Theosophists. They had many secrets available to them and he was initiated into all kinds of ceremonies and into all kinds of secret esoteric mysteries, which are not available to the public. He must have become tired.
One fact has to be remembered always; he was not willingly there, he had been chosen and adopted. He belonged to a very poor brahmin, the son of a very poor brahmin, so poor that he was not even able to educate his children. When Annie Besant and Leadbeater found these two brothers, Krishnamurti and Nityananda, swimming in a river by the side of Adyar, where the headquarters of the Theosophical Movement is, the world headquarters near Madras… Leadbeater had a certain sensibility to find out talents, he discovered many talented people. He had a certain sense to see immediately the possibility, the potential. He immediately told Annie Besant – they had gone for a morning walk and he saw these two children, Nityananda must have been eleven and Krishnamurti was nine. And he said, “These two children are of immense value, they can become world teachers.”
So they searched. They found out they belonged to a very poor man; the mother was dead, the father was just a very poor clerk in an office. It is difficult to educate, to feed the children rightly. When he heard that Annie Besant wanted to adopt them he was very happy, he willingly gave the children to Annie Besant.
And of course, Nityananda and Krishnamurti were both taught like princes or even better than that. They had the most learned tutors, they went through private education in India, in France, in England, in America, all around the world. They were kept away from the public so they didn’t become polluted, they didn’t become contaminated. They were prevented from meeting ordinary people. They were brought up as special people, chosen ones – chosen to be world teachers. Great discipline was imposed on them. Of course it was all unwillingly, they had not chosen the path themselves. There must have been a resistance – naturally, obviously, deep down they must have resisted.
Nityananda died, and my feeling is he died because of too much rigorous discipline – fasting, getting up early, three o’clock in the morning. He became ill, still the discipline continued. They were hard taskmasters, they wanted to make supermen, and of course when you want to make somebody a superman the discipline has to be hard, arduous.
Nityananda died. That too has been a wound in Krishnamurti’s mind, in his heart, that his brother was almost killed by the discipline. Twenty-five years of rigorous training must have created an antagonism, a resistance.
So when the time came for them to be declared – the Theosophists gathered from all over the world and Krishnamurti was to declare himself the new incarnation of Gautam the Buddha, the World Teacher – when he stood on the platform to declare, everybody was shocked, people could not believe because he simply denied. He said, “I am nobody’s master I don’t accept any disciples, I don’t teach any discipline, and I dissolve this whole organization that has been created around me.”
A certain organization was created around him – six thousand members all over the world. The organization was called The Star of the East. He dissolved the organization. He distributed the money back to the donors because it had a lot of money. He shocked everybody. They had worked so long on him and he simply escaped at the last moment.
That wound has remained in him, and he cannot forgive all those masters, their disciplines, their teachings – he cannot forgive, hence he is against. And he himself is an arhat, he cannot be a master. And the whole past of his life is full of resistance.
My experience is totally different, just the opposite. I had nobody to impose anything on me, whatsoever I have done I have done on my own. Hence I don’t see any antagonism in me against masters, against disciplehood.
But certainly about ninety-nine percent I will agree with him: Muktananda, Reverend Moon, Prabhupada, all kinds of stupid people, exploiting – exploiting the great search that has arisen in humanity’s heart.
Man is on a new borderline, he is going to enter a new territory. A new step has to be taken, hence, the great inquiry all around the world about truth, about meditation, about the inward. The outer has failed. Science has proved illusory, all its promises have gone down the drain. And man knows now absolutely that what we have been doing up to now was basically wrong – the journey has to be inward.
Now there are charlatans, people who can exploit this opportunity, but this is understandable, nothing can be done about it. The seeker has to pass through all these exploiters, deceivers, hypocrites, and has to be aware so that one day he can find the true man – the man who can uncondition you and will not recondition you again, who will leave you in absolute freedom to be yourself.
Beware of the false masters – and there are many and of many kinds. They come in all sizes and in all shapes and they can be very attractive because they fulfill your expectations.
The real master will never fulfill your expectations, he has no desire to manipulate you. Fulfilling your expectations means a deep desire to manipulate you. You have to be alert, watchful. If somebody is trying to fulfill your expectations, know perfectly well he himself is not free – he cannot impart freedom to you.
In India, as in other countries and other traditions too, people have expectations, certain expectations. For example, a Christian expects that the enlightened person should be similar to Jesus. Now that is absolutely impossible. Jesus cannot be repeated, need not be repeated. To repeat Jesus you will need the whole context and that context is no longer possible. Jesus existed in a Jewish world, with all the expectations, desires, hopes and promises. Now that world has disappeared, two thousand years have passed. So much water has gone down the Ganges, nothing is the same any more. How can Jesus be repeated?
But the Christian expects a true master to be just like Jesus. No true master can be just like Jesus. Jesus was not like Moses himself – that was the trouble. That’s why Jews were so antagonistic, they were expecting him to be just like Moses. Moses lived in a totally different world; he belonged to the Egyptian context, he grew out of that context, he makes sense only in that reference. Jesus cannot be a Moses, it is impossible. The Jews were expecting him to be a Moses, and because he was not, they killed him.
Now Christians are doing the same: they expect the true master to be a replica of Jesus, an imitation of Jesus. No true master can be a replica; only some fool can imitate, only some mediocre person can be a carbon copy. This is such a deep insult of one’s own being – to copy somebody else – that no man of intelligence can ever do it. But the same is true about other traditions.
The Buddhists are waiting for Buddha to come, and he has to be exactly like the Buddha. The Jains have their expectations and the Hindus have their expectations. The Hindus cannot accept Mahavira as an enlightened master because he is not like Krishna, and the Jains cannot accept Krishna as an enlightened master because he is not like Mahavira. Jains cannot accept Buddha as an enlightened person because he is not like Mahavira, and Buddhists in their own turn cannot accept Mahavira because he is not like Buddha. No tradition can accept the enlightened persons of other traditions because the expectations differ.
For example, Jains think that the enlightened master should be naked. Now Jesus does not fulfill that, Mohammed is not naked, Zarathustra is not naked, Krishna is not naked; on the contrary, Krishna loved beautiful clothes, he loved ornaments.
In those days in India, men used to wear ornaments and that seems to be really logical and natural. If you watch nature you will see it: look at the peacock. The female peacock is unornamental, it is the male peacock that is ornamental. Don’t be misguided, when you see the beautiful peacock with its rainbow colored feathers, remember it is the male, not the female. The female is beautiful just by being female, she needs no ornamentation. It is enough to be female. The poor male needs some other gadgets.
When you listen to the beautiful sound of the cuckoo, remember it is the male, not the female. The female need not have such a beautiful singing voice, just to be female is enough. The female simply sits hidden in a mango grove, and the male goes on pouring his heart, writing love letters!
The whole of nature is proof that the female looks ordinary and the male looks very beautiful. It is strange that man has started behaving in the reverse way. Why do women try to be beautiful, use ornaments and lipstick and false eyelashes and whatnot? It is crazy! Let the man use all these things, he is poor, he needs something. The woman is perfectly beautiful as she is. Just to be feminine has a grace, a beauty, there is no need for any other addition.
In Krishna’s time things were perfectly natural, men used to wear ornaments. If you have seen Krishna’s statues, pictures, you will see he is wearing silk robes, colorful robes, with a crown with a peacock feather on it, and with a flute, trying to do what the male cuckoo goes on doing, and he is standing in a dancing pose.
Now Jains cannot accept him as an enlightened person, this is not the way of being enlightened. He looks like an actor! According to Jain mythology he has gone into seventh hell – seventh is the last. Only the very dangerous people are thrown into the seventh. Even Adolf Hitler will not reach the seventh; he will be somewhere, at the most third, not more than that. Krishna is in the seventh and Krishna will not be freed in this phase of creation.
Jains have cycles: one cycle means one creation; then the whole creation becomes dissolved, disappears into nothingness, and then another creation begins, another cycle. Krishna will be released only when the second cycle begins, not in this cycle. When all these suns and moons and stars and this whole universe dissolves through the black holes, when all is gone and left – nothing is left – then the second cycle starts. Krishna will come back only after the first creation is gone, not before that, it will take eternity. They are very angry at Krishna – what kind of enlightened person he is.
These expectations! Jains cannot believe that Jesus is enlightened because according to them an enlightened person cannot be crucified – impossible. In fact, they have this myth that when Mahavira walks on the road, and he is a naked man without shoes, and you know the Indian roads… And Mahavira walked twenty-five centuries ago, just try to imagine what kind of roads – he must not have been walking – roadless roads!
The story is, when he walked on the road, even if a thorn is there it immediately turns upside-down because the enlightened person is finished with all his karmas, he cannot suffer any pain anymore. Pain is suffered because of your past karmas, you must have committed some sin in the past. He is finished with all the sins, he is completely free from all karmas, so no pain is possible. What to think, what to say about crucifixion?
Jains cannot believe Jesus to be enlightened. According to them, it is not the Jews who are crucifying him, it is not the Roman governor who is crucifying him; it is his past bad deeds, past karmas which are creating this pain for him, this agony for him.
If you just watch all these expectations you will be able to understand that no enlightened person can ever go according to your expectations, he has to live his life authentically. And if he wants to exploit you he will fulfill your expectations. If he wants to exploit the Jains he will go naked, he will fast, and they will be happy – he is a great man. If he wants to fulfill the expectations of Christians he will become a Mother Teresa of Calcutta: serve the poor, the crippled, the ill. If he wants to fulfill the expectations of the Mohammedans he will become an Ayatollah Khomeiniac – take the sword, because that’s what Mohammed did. And remember, Mohammedans believe that it was out of compassion because if somebody is going into hell, even if he can be prevented by a sword, he should be prevented. Anybody who is not a Mohammedan is going to hell, so convert everybody into a Mohammedan; by whatsoever means it has to be done, but it has to be done. So Ayatollah Khomeiniac is the most perfect Mohammedan master right now!
These fools can pretend because they have to look at the crowd, what are their expectations; they can fulfill their expectations. But a true living master is bound to be totally free from your expectations. He cannot adjust with you, if you have to be with him you have to adjust with him.
That’s why egoists find it difficult to be with a master, and they enjoy the company of Krishnamurti – for the simple reason that he is not asking you to dissolve your ego or surrender or to adjust in any way. He is not asking anything of you. He is not giving you any insight, he is simply making clear the standpoint of an arhat. But the arhat has never been helpful to anybody, and he cannot be helpful.
Now there have arisen many new kinds of gurus, they are mushrooming all over the world. There are religious gurus and then there are psychoanalysts and therapists. They are taking their place, they are becoming very important. And of course they understand something about the mechanism of the mind and they can help you a little bit, but they themselves are in a deep mess.

Conversation between two psychiatrists:
“Most of my patients are disturbed. Let me ask you some questions – to give you an example. Which has smooth curves and sometimes is uncontrollable?”
“A baseball pitcher, of course.”
“Next, what wears a skirt and has lips that bring you pleasure?”
“Obviously, a Scotsman playing a bagpipe.”
“You know the answers, but it’s amazing what strange replies I get from my patients!”

These psychoanalysts, now they are the New Age gurus. They know certain tricks about the mind, but they have no idea of the innermost core of your being. You have to be very careful and cautious because there has never been such a tremendous desire for transformation, hence there are bound to be many people who will not miss this opportunity to exploit you.
In that sense Krishnamurti is right, but only about ninety-nine percent. And to me that is nothing to be compared with the remaining one percent. Those ninety-nine percent can be ignored, that one percent should not be forgotten because that is the only hope – a master who can make you free, who does not make you a slave; a master who can make you unconditioned and does not recondition you, a master who does not give you any doctrine, dogma, a creed to believe in, but shares his joy, his celebration with you.

The last question:
Osho,
Please tell a joke which I can laugh at for the rest of my life.
There is no joke like that, it is impossible. It cannot happen in the very nature of things because a joke can be laughed at only when you hear it for the first time. You cannot laugh at it for the rest of your life, unless you are so stupid, so utterly stupid, that each time you hear it you have completely forgotten that you have heard it before. And you will be telling it to yourself because who is going to tell it to you your whole life? I can tell you only once, then you will have to tell it to yourself. Either you have to be utterly stupid or mad!

I have heard about a man who was sitting in a waiting room on a railway station, and the train was late – as Indian trains always are. In India they say the timetable exists so that you can know how late the train is. Otherwise how will you know how late it is? Late it is going to be! And in India they say a ticket is valid for twenty-four hours. It is valid for twenty-four hours because nobody knows when the train will come. If it comes in twenty-four hours, that too is a miracle.
So he was waiting, sitting in his chair, and the other people in the waiting room were getting a little bit puzzled. Finally one person became so curious he could not contain his curiosity. He said, “Sir, I should not interfere, but what is going on?” – because the man was sitting there with closed eyes, his lips were moving. Sometimes he would giggle and sometimes he would frown, sometimes he would laugh loudly and sometimes he would make a gesture with his hands as if he is throwing something away. What was going on?
The man asked, “What are you doing? It is none of our business and we should not interfere, and it is absolutely private what you are doing, but excuse me, if you can enlighten me a little bit?”
The man said, “There is nothing private about it – I am telling jokes to myself!”
The man said, “That’s… That I can understand. Sometimes you giggle and you laugh loudly – you must be having fun. But sometimes you frown and you make such ugly face and you throw something, push away something by your hands.”
He said, “Yes, when I hear a joke that I have heard before!”

He is telling jokes to himself!
Now, one joke for your whole life? It has never happened! You can only laugh at the first time because the whole art, the secret of a joke is the unexpected ending. That is the whole secret – the unexpected turn. The joke first moves in a certain line, and then takes such an unexpected turn that logically you are shocked for a moment. You were moving along with the joke expecting certain things to happen, and then what happens is not the logical thing. Something illogical happens – and it is the illogical that makes the joke beautiful, that makes you burst into laughter.
Logic is not fun, it is a serious thing. When you start hearing a joke, of course your mind starts functioning logically. You start expecting logically that this is going to happen, this is going to happen, and then something comes at the end that you could not have imagined. It is so illogical, so ridiculous. It is so absurd! The shock… The whole energy was going in one direction, mounting up to a climax, and then suddenly everything goes berserk. The whole energy explodes into laughter. It is a certain tension that is released. The logic creates tension and the joke releases it. That is the punch line which does the trick.
But this can happen only once. If you know the punch line, then it is very difficult for you to enjoy it because you will be expecting it. You already know it, now it has become part of your logic. So there cannot be any mounting energy, there cannot be any tension, you will sit relaxed.

A man entering middle age had been bothered for some time by his prick. It had grown very crooked and had sprouted warts and hairs in the most inappropriate places. His condition had worsened over the years and he decided to seek medical advice.
The local doctor examined his tool thoroughly and stated that amputation was the only possibility for a specimen such as his.
The poor fellow went to another doctor for a second opinion. He also gave the thing a very thorough examination, then stated that it had to come off.
Now in a state of panic, the man went to a specialist for a final opinion. The specialist examined the prick at length, leaned back in his armchair for a while in contemplation then said, “No, sir, I think that amputation is unnecessary.” The patient sighed with relief. “Yes,” continued the doctor, “in no time at all, it will fall off by itself!”

Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
My friend who has a PhD in computing, and whose thesis was on artificial intelligence, says that man is a biochemical computer and nothing more. Buddha has said that all things are composite and there is no self, no soul, no spirit, no “I,” which seems to agree with my friend's viewpoint. Could you please help me because I feel that there is something missing from these views, but I can't see it myself.
Man certainly is a biocomputer, but something more too. It can be said that about ninety-nine point nine percent of people are only biocomputers and nothing more. Ordinarily one is only the body and the mind, and both are composites. Unless one moves into meditation one cannot find that which is something more, something transcendental to body and mind.
The psychologists, particularly the behaviorists, have been studying man for half a century, but they study the ordinary man, and of course their thesis is proved by all their studies. The ordinary man, the unconscious man, has nothing more in him than the bodymind composite. The body is the outer side of the mind and the mind the inner side of the body. Both are born and both will die one day.
But there is something more. That something more makes a man awakened, enlightened, a Buddha, a Christ. But a Buddha or a Christ is not available to be studied by Pavlov, Skinner, Delgado and others. Their study is about the unconscious man, and of course when you study the unconscious man you will not find anything transcendental in him. The transcendental exists in the unconscious man only as a potential, as a possibility; it is not yet realized, it is not yet a reality. Hence you cannot study it.
You can study it only in a Buddha, but even then studying is obviously very difficult, very close to the impossible because what you will study in a Buddha will again be his behavior. And if you are determined that there is nothing more, if you have already concluded, then even in his behavior you will see only mechanical reactions, you will not see his spontaneity. To see that spontaneity you have also to become a participant in meditation.
Psychology can become only a real psychology when meditation becomes its foundation. The word psychology means the science of the soul. Modern psychology is not yet a science of the soul.
Buddha certainly has denied the self, the ego, the “I,” but he has not denied the soul, and the self and the soul are not synonymous. He denies the self because the self exists only in the unconscious man. The unconscious man needs a certain idea of “I” otherwise he will be without a center. He does not know his real center. He has to invent a false center so that he can at least function in the world, otherwise his functioning will become impossible. He needs a certain idea of “I.”
You must have heard about Descartes’ famous statement: “Cogito ergo sum – I think, therefore I am.”

A professor, teaching the philosophy of Descartes, explained what he means by “I think, therefore I am.”
A student stood up and said, “I know that I think, thinking is there. I can see it, but I don’t see the conclusion to which Descartes’ statement leads. I think, that much is certain, but I don’t know who I am.”
The professor looked around the classroom, as if he is looking for the person who has asked the question. And then he said, “Who is asking the question?”
The student raised his hand and said: “I am.”
And the professor said: “So you know who you are!”

One needs a certain idea of “I,” otherwise functioning will become impossible. So because we don’t know the real “I” we substitute it by a false “I” – something invented, composite.
Buddha denies the self because to him self is simply another name for the ego, with a little color of spirituality, otherwise there is no difference. His word is anatta. Atta means self, anatta means no-self. But he is not denying the soul. In fact he says when the self is completely dropped, only then you will come to know the soul. But he does not say anything about it because nothing can be said about it.
His approach is via negativa. He says, “You are not the body, you are not the mind, you are not the self.” He goes on denying, eliminating. He eliminates everything that you can conceive of, and then he does not say anything about what is left. That which is left is your reality: that utterly pure sky without clouds, no thought, no identity, no emotion, no desire, no ego – nothing is left. All clouds have disappeared, just the pure sky.
It is inexpressible, unnamable, indefinable. That’s why he keeps absolutely silent about it. He knows that if anything is said about it, you will immediately jump back to your old idea of the self. If he says, “There is a soul in you,” what are you going to understand? You will think that he calls it soul and we call it self – it is the same. The supreme self, maybe, the spiritual self; it is not ordinary ego. But spiritual or unspiritual, the idea of my being a separate entity is the point.
Buddha denies that you are a separate entity from the whole. You are one with the organic unity of existence, so there is no need to say anything about your separateness. Even the word soul will give you a certain idea of separateness, you are bound to understand it in your own unconscious way.
Your friend says, “…that man is a biochemical computer and nothing more.” Can a biochemical computer say that? Can a biochemical computer deny the self, the soul? No biocomputer or any other kind of computer has any idea of self or no-self. Your friend is doing it – certainly he is not a biochemical computer. No biochemical computer can write a thesis on artificial intelligence. Do you think artificial intelligence can write a thesis about artificial intelligence? Something more is needed.
And he is absolutely wrong in thinking that Buddha also says the same thing: “…that all things are composite and there is no self, no soul, no spirit, no ‘I’…” He is wrong to think that Buddha agrees with his viewpoint – not at all. Buddha’s experience is of meditation. Without meditation nobody can have any idea what Buddha is talking about. Your friend’s observation is from the standpoint of a scientific onlooker. It is not his experience, it is his observation. He is studying biochemical computers, artificial intelligence, from the outside. Who is studying outside?
Can you conceive of two computers studying each other? The computer can have only that which has been fed into it, it cannot have more than that. The information has to be given to it, then it keeps it in its memory – it is a memory system. It can do miracles as far as mathematics is concerned. A computer can be far more efficient than any Albert Einstein, as far as mathematics is concerned, but a computer cannot be a meditator. Can you imagine a computer just sitting silently doing nothing, the spring comes and the grass grows by itself?
There are many qualities that are impossible for the computer. A computer cannot be in love. You can keep many computers together – they will not fall in love! A computer cannot have any experience of beauty. A computer cannot know any bliss. A computer cannot have any awareness. A computer is incapable of feeling silence. And these are the qualities that prove that man has something more than artificial intelligence.
Artificial intelligence can do scientific work, mathematical work, calculation – great calculation and very quickly and very efficiently because it is a machine. But a machine cannot be aware of what it is doing. A computer cannot feel boredom, a computer cannot feel meaninglessness, a computer cannot experience anguish. A computer cannot start an inquiry about truth, it cannot renounce the world and become a sannyasin, it cannot go to the mountains or to the monasteries. It cannot conceive of anything beyond the mechanical – and all that is significant is beyond the mechanical.

A policeman starts chasing a car after noticing that the driver is a computer, a robot – wearing a hat, smoking a cigar and driving with one hand hanging out of the window.
He finally succeeds in stopping the car. He approaches it and sees to his surprise that there is a man sitting next to the computer.
“Are you mad?” exclaims the officer, “letting your computer drive?”
“Excuse me, officer,” replies the man, “I asked him for a lift!”

Yes, in stories it is possible, but not in reality.

Mr. Polanski enjoys playing with cuckoo clocks. One rainy Sunday morning he takes his cuckoo clock apart and puts it back together again.
At twelve o’clock the family gathers, waiting for the pretty little bird to sing its song – nothing happens. They wait till one o’clock – no cuckoo. At two o’clock they are still waiting for the bird to appear. Finally at three o’clock, the little door opens and the cuckoo comes out.
“Dammit!” it squeaks. “Do any of you guys know the time?”

The second question:
Osho,
You spoke yesterday about Krishnamurti and masters, and that we can understand, we can know, we can surrender, and we can fall in love with the master, but we should not follow and believe in the master. Is it possible to surrender without believing? My heart says to me that to surrender and to believe is the same. I cannot feel the difference. What is surrender and belief? I want to believe. I need to believe! If you say that meditation is the source and I do meditation, I believe you, I trust you.
Surrender is not possible at all if you believe because belief is of the head, and surrender is of the heart. Belief means you are convinced logically, intellectually, that what is being said is right. The argument appeals to you. Belief has nothing to do with the heart, it is absolutely of the mind, a mind phenomenon. Belief is not a love affair.
Belief means intellectually you are convinced because you cannot see any argument that can destroy it, all the arguments that you can manage prove it. But deep down there is bound to be an undercurrent of doubt. Belief cannot destroy doubt, it can only cover it up. It can cover so perfectly that you may forget about the doubt, but it is always there. Just scratch any believer a little bit and you will find the doubt there. That’s why believers have always been afraid of listening to anything that goes against their belief.
The Catholic Church goes on prohibiting the Catholics: “Don’t read this, don’t read that.” They go on putting books on their black list, which are banned for the Catholics. The Vatican library has thousands of tremendously beautiful documents; for thousands of years they have been gathering all those scriptures that they have burned, banned, prohibited. But they have kept a few copies in the Vatican library just as a historical past, and what has been done in the past and what has been destroyed in the past – some proof of that. Anything that went against Christianity was destroyed.
The same has been done by Mohammedans, by the Hindus, by almost all the believers of the world. Why this fear? – because they are all aware of the fact that the believer is not free of doubt, the doubt is there and anybody can raise the dust again. Somehow they have managed to settle it, somehow they have covered the wound, but the wound has not healed. It is there, and underneath the cover it goes on spreading.
People believe in God, but does that mean their doubt has dropped? If the doubt is no longer there, what is the need of belief? Belief is an antidote, it is a medicine. If you are healthy no medicine is needed. If there is no doubt in you, no belief is needed.
Belief is very superficial, it divides you. The believer is only the superficial part of you and the remaining part, the major part, the nine-tenths of your being, remains full of doubts. There is turmoil within every believer and he is afraid, really afraid to come across something that may disturb his belief – and anything can disturb his belief.
Communists are not allowed to read anything against communism. In Soviet Russia, the government does not allow anything that goes against communism. Why this fear? The fear is because they know that if things against communism come into their country, people will start thinking again, their doubts will arise.
The first thing you have to understand is that believing is of the head and surrender is of the heart. Surrender is not a belief, it is not an intellectual conviction – it is just the ultimate in love. You cannot give any proof for your surrender; you can give a thousand and one logical proofs for your belief, but for your surrender you cannot supply a single proof. And whatsoever you say will look absurd to yourself, it will fall short. Surrender has a transcendental beauty, and belief is so ordinary and the proof is so mundane.
That is the trouble, why people feel a little embarrassed if you ask about their love. If you ask a man why he has fallen in love with a certain woman he will feel a little embarrassed. You are asking something which cannot be answered, hence the embarrassment. Why? He can manage to say something, but neither will he be convincing you nor will he himself feel that it is worth saying. He can say the woman is beautiful, that’s why, but these are all rationalizations, not reasons for his surrender.
Surrender has no reasons, no motives at all. Surrender simply means a happening, not a doing. Belief is a doing: you do it, you make every effort; but surrender happens from the beyond. You are simply possessed by it.
Lovers know it, how they become possessed. If you say, “Because the woman is beautiful,” the other person can say, “But nobody else has fallen in love with her. And she has been beautiful even before you had met her, and she is beautiful, but I have not fallen in love with her. How come you have fallen in love with her?”
In fact, that is a rationalization, it is not true. Somehow he is trying to save his face. He does not want to say that he does not know why it has happened – it has simply happened. He does not want to accept that he is living something irrational, that he has allowed something illogical to happen to him.
The reality is, the woman looks beautiful because you have fallen in love with her, not vice versa. It is not because of her beauty that you have fallen in love, otherwise the whole world would have fallen in love before you. Just the opposite is the case, she looks beautiful to you because you are in love. Love beautifies.
Falling in love with a man or a woman is the lowest kind of love. When you fall in love with a Buddha or a Christ or a Krishna it is the highest kind of love, the crescendo. It is just far out! It is outlandish! You cannot even give any reasons for your ordinary love – what reasons can you give when you fall in love with a master? There are no reasons at all.

Just the other day Vivek was telling me a joke. She said, “Osho, do you know why the Jews have short necks?”
And I said… [Osho shrugs his shoulders]
And she said, “Yes, that’s why!”

When you love, what can you say except shrug your shoulders? And if you go on shrugging your shoulders the whole day you will have a short neck!
Anna, you ask me, “Is it possible to surrender without believing?” Not only is it possible without believing, it is only possible if there is no believing. With belief there is no possibility – belief is a false substitute. Surrender happens out of trust, and trust and belief are not synonymous.
That is where Anna is confused: she thinks trust and belief are the same – they are not. Belief is of the head, trust is of the heart. Belief has arguments about it, trust has no arguments. Belief is intellectual, trust is supra-intellectual. You cannot say a single word in favor of your trust, and if you say you can be immediately refuted very easily. Any fool can destroy your argument for trust because in fact there is no argument possible.
You say, “My heart says to me that to surrender and to believe is the same.” It is not the heart, it is the head. You are confused. You don’t know what is the heart and what is the head – and this is the case with almost everybody. People live through their heads. Even if they love, they love via the head. They say, “I think I am in love.” I think – that comes first and then comes love. It is not a question of thinking at all, whether you think or not does not matter. If you are in love, you are in love. Love does not come via the head.
You say, “My heart says to me that to surrender and to believe is the same.” No, it is your head which is telling you that both are the same – to believe is to surrender. This is the language of the head, belief is the language of the head. Surrender belongs to a totally different dimension, it has nothing to do with belief. That’s why belief can be disturbed, but surrender cannot be disturbed.
This has been my experience of working with thousands of sannyasins. It almost always happens that whenever a man comes to me his approach is intellectual. There are a few exceptions, it is not an absolute rule, but it can be said that almost ninety-nine percent men are head oriented. When a man comes to me he comes through logical conviction. Listening to me, trying to understand me, if he feels convinced he becomes a sannyasin.
But his sannyas has not much value. Any day he can drop the sannyas. Anybody can destroy his belief because it is based on logic, and logic is just a game. If you come across a person who is more logical than you he will destroy your proof.
I have never come across a single proof that cannot be destroyed. In fact, to prove anything is difficult. To disprove is very easy. If you say, “The sunset is beautiful,” it can be argued it is not, and more easily. Anybody can object, anybody can say, “Give me the proof! What do you mean by beauty? What is beauty? How can you prove that this sunset is beautiful?” And you will be at a loss. You know it is beautiful, but that knowing is not of the head, that knowing is of the heart – and the heart cannot argue, it simply knows.
The problem is the head has all the questions and the heart has all the answers. The head has all the doubts and the beliefs, and the heart has only the trust. That is the flavor of the heart.
There is a beautiful story by Chekhov, a parable:

In a village there was one man who was thought to be an utter idiot, and of course he felt very offended. He tried in every way to convince people, but the more he tried the more it became known that he was a fool.
A mystic was passing through the village, and the idiot went to the mystic and said, “Somehow save me – my life has become impossible. The people of this place think I am an idiot. How can I get rid of this because it is torturing me day and night. It has become a nightmare! I am even afraid to face anybody in the town because wherever I go people start laughing. I have become a laughingstock! Only you can show me the way. What should I do?”
The mystic said, “This is very simple. From tomorrow morning, start asking people such questions which cannot be answered.”
He said, “For example, what?”
The mystic said, “If somebody says, ‘Look, how beautiful is the rose!’ you immediately raise the question: ‘Who says? What is the proof? What is beauty?’ If somebody talks about time, immediately ask, ‘What is time?’ If somebody asks about God, ask him, ‘Give me the proof!’ Somebody talks about love – don’t miss the opportunity – just go on asking. Don’t make any statement from your side. You simply ask the questions and make people feel embarrassed because these are the questions nobody can answer!”
Within seven days the villagers thought the man was one of the greatest geniuses because now he was not making any statement, so he was not available for them to refute. He was simply denying others.

That is the whole art of atheism: just go on saying no, and nobody can convince you. Yes comes from the heart, and the head is very efficient in saying no. And nobody can prove…nothing can be proved by the head. And the higher the value, the more difficult it is to prove.
When men come to me they come through the intellect, their sannyas is not very reliable. But when women come to me, and of course again there are exceptions, but very few – the same proportion. Ninety-nine percent women are going to remain sannyasins.
That’s why I have given my commune to be totally disciplined, to be controlled by the women sannyasins – for the simple reason that their approach to me is through the heart, they are more reliable. One percent men are reliable, one percent women are not reliable – they can drop sannyas. But ninety-nine percent women are reliable, they come through the heart. Nobody can refute their hearts; their approach is through trust and love.
You have to understand the difference between the head and the heart. It will take a little to understand it because the society has made everybody confused. Everybody is in a mess – nobody knows where the heart is and where the head is.
Just be here – Anna is new – soon you will be able to feel the difference clearly.
You say, “I cannot feel the difference.” Yes, right now it will be difficult, but become a little more silent. In silence the distinction will come very loud. You say, “I want to believe. I need to believe!” That’s why it is difficult for you to know the difference. You are desperately in need to believe, you are afraid not to believe because you don’t know anything about trust. Once you know of trust, who bothers about belief? Who cares? Belief is nobody’s need. It is the strategy of the priests imposed on you that belief is a need – it is not a need. Trust certainly is a need, is a nourishment, but belief is just artificial food, maybe very colorful, but not nourishing.
You say, “If you say that meditation is the source and I do meditation, I believe you, I trust you.” Please, trust but don’t believe. And of course, meditation is the way, the source – that’s why I have given you the name Dhyan Anna. Dhyan Anna means meditation, prayer. Through meditation you will come to prayer. Prayer is the highest form of love, of trust. Through meditation one finds the heart, and prayer arises. And through meditation ultimately one finds the being. And the moment you have found the being there is nothing more to be found, you have come home.

The third question:
Osho,
You can read in the Bible that Jesus warned about other masters coming in the future. Do you think his warnings were also including you? Your message is very different from important parts of the teachings of Jesus. How is it possible that enlightened masters can say so many contrary things?
One thing of great import has to be understood first: Jesus became enlightened only at the last moment on the cross. Hence the statements that he has made before that experience are not of an enlightened person – close, very close, approximate, but as far as truth is concerned there is nothing like approximate truth.
This thing has not been told to Christians at all, that Jesus became enlightened at the very last moment. On the cross he became enlightened, on the cross he became a Christ.
To me the cross is important not for the same reasons as it is for Christians. To them the cross is important because Jesus was crucified, and the cross has become the symbol of crucifixion. To me that is absolutely wrong – that is a kind of life-negation, that is worshipping death, that is making too much fuss about crucifixion.
I call Christianity “Crossianity” because it is not concerned with Christ, it is more concerned with the cross. I also love the symbol of the cross, but for a totally different reason: not because of crucifixion but because Jesus became enlightened on the cross, he became aware of the immortality of his ultimate being. To me it is not crucifixion, not death, but the beginning of eternal life.
At the last moment Jesus says to God, “Have you forsaken me?” And that shows that he was still living in the mind, expecting, desiring, hoping – even from God. There were a few expectations that at the last moment some miracle would happen. Not only the people who had gathered there were expecting a miracle looking at the sky – that a divine hand will appear and Jesus will be raised to ultimate glory, he will be saved at the last moment – but Jesus himself was also waiting.
He says, “Have you forsaken me?” What does it mean? It is a complaint, it is not a prayer; it is frustration, it is disappointment. And disappointment is possible only if there was some deep desire, some longing to be fulfilled. God has failed him – he has not come to his rescue. He was hoping.
These are the signs of an unenlightened person. These are symbolic of the ego, of the head, of the mind, of the very process of the mind.
But he was a man of great intelligence too: immediately he recognized that what he is saying is wrong, the very desire is wrong. One should not expect anything from the universe, one should not feel disappointed, one should not feel frustrated. This is not trust. This is not a love affair. This is not an absolute yes, it is a conditional yes: “You fulfill these conditions, then of course I will be grateful. But because the conditions have not been fulfilled I am angry.” There is anger in his voice; there is anxiety, disappointment.
But he understood the point, and immediately he corrected it. A single moment and he is no longer Jesus, he becomes Christ. Suddenly he looked at the sky and said, “Forgive me! Let thy kingdom come, let thy will be done – not mine. Let thy will be done!”
This is surrender. He has dropped the mind, he has dropped the ego and all the expectations. “Let thy will be done.” In this egoless state he became enlightened. But unfortunately it happened at the very last moment, and he had no time left.
Buddha lived for forty years after his enlightenment, hence whatsoever he says has a totally different significance than what Jesus says in the New Testament. It is poetry, beautiful, but still he is groping in the dark, making every effort to reach the light, but he reached the light at the very last moment. He could not say a single word. He died enlightened, but he could not live enlightened. He died too early – he was only thirty-three. If you understand this, then your question will be very simple.
You ask me, “You can read in the Bible that Jesus warned about other masters coming in the future.” That is the fear of an unenlightened person, the fear that somebody may replace him, that somebody may come and may convince people of other things. That fear is perfectly understandable in an unenlightened person because he is jealous. There is fear that once he is gone his teaching may be destroyed. He is too much concerned about the future.
The unenlightened person lives in the past or in the future, and Jesus did both things in the New Testament. He is talking continuously about the past, he is trying to prove that “I am the Messiah you have been waiting for. I am the man who has been predicted by the prophets of old. The Old Testament has simply prepared the way for me.” He is too much concerned about the past. He is too much concerned in convincing the Jews that he is the expected Messiah. Who cares?
People have asked me, “Buddha, we have heard, is going to come back after twenty-five centuries. Twenty-five centuries have passed. Are you the Buddha?” Why should I be? I am just myself. Why should I be the Buddha? He did his thing, I am going to do my thing. I am not anybody’s carbon copy! Why should I be a Buddha? If he wants to come, that is up to him, but I am nobody’s incarnation.
Hindus have asked me, “Krishna says, ‘Whenever there is need I will come.’ Are you that one?” I am not, absolutely not! I am just myself. If Krishna has to fulfill his promise he will come!
Jesus is too much concerned about the past. In fact, that concern brought him the whole trouble. If he had not bothered about being the Messiah, Jews may not have crucified him because then they started asking about the signs that the Messiah had to give. Then they started asking, “You have to fulfill this and you have to fulfill that – only then we can accept you, that you are the Messiah.” And then he went into unnecessary argumentation, but his whole effort was to prove that “I am the expected Messiah.” This is concern for the past, and only an unenlightened person is concerned about the past.
He is very much concerned about the future also. He warns about other masters coming in the future. “And beware of them,” he says, “because they will distract you, they will distract you from the path” – the path that he has shown. He is making sure that no follower is taken away from the fold, even when he is gone. This is too businesslike!
The reason is that he became enlightened at the very last moment and he had no time to correct, to change his statements. His statements were made in an unenlightened state.
That’s why you find his approach toward God very childish. He calls God, abba – papa, daddy! There is no daddy – daddy is dead! It is childish. It is the need of a child because the child cannot be without the father. Hence God becomes the father.
A strange thing has happened, now Christian priests are called fathers. A monastery is defined by someone as a place where unwed fathers live: they don’t have any wives, they don’t have any children, and they are fathers! What kind of fathers are these? But if God can be a father without a wife, then of course they can also be fathers without wives. Catholic priests being called fathers. Catholic nuns being called mothers, sisters, Mother Superiors! People who have renounced life, renounced families, are still clinging to some ideas of the family. Now God becomes the father, but the father is needed.
Jesus remained a little childish in his approach toward God. Buddha has a maturity, tremendous maturity. He is so mature that he can say there is no God; existence is enough, more is not needed. There is no creator, creation is enough. Creation itself is divine creativity, it is the process of creativity.
This fear of Jesus simply shows the fear of a Jew, a businessman. He is afraid his customers may go to somebody else. He is making sure that even in the future the customers never leave the shop. He will be gone, that much is certain, sooner or later he will be gone, but he is making sure that his priests will go on dominating the world; his representatives, his popes, will go on and on always dominating the world.
The very idea to dominate the world, to change the whole world into Christianity, is in some subtle sense an ego trip, an ego number. But it is understandable from an unenlightened person, you cannot expect more than that.
And you ask me, “Do you think his warnings were also including you?” The future is absolutely unknown. Nobody knows the future, not even the enlightened person knows about the future. That is the beauty of the future: it is unpredictable. Yes, a few inferences can be made, but they are only inferences.
But all the religions have tried to prove that their founders are all-knowing, omniscient. Jains say Mahavira is omniscient: he knows the whole past, whole present, whole future. And that is sheer stupidity because it is a well-known fact – Buddha has mentioned it, they were contemporaries – that Mahavira is known to have begged from a house where nobody had lived for years, and he was standing in front of the house with his begging bowl!
He was told by the neighbors, “That house is empty and has been empty for years. You are an omniscient person – can’t you see that there is nobody in the house?” And he knows all about the future – he does not know about this house in front of him! In fact, if people have not lived in that house for many years, even an unenlightened person will be able to infer, looking at the situation of the house – the dust that has collected, the doors that have been closed for years – that nobody lives here. You can see easily whether people live in this house or not. Where people live, the house has a different quality, aliveness; where nobody lives, the house is dead.
Buddha also mentions just jokingly that once Mahavira was walking on the road early in the morning. It was a winter morning, too much mist was there, and he stepped on the tail of a dog. When the dog barked, then he became aware that there was a dog. And he knows all about the past and all about the future!
Nobody knows about the future or about the past. The enlightened person knows only himself, and that’s enough. Knowing himself, essentially he knows everybody – essentially, remember, not in details. Essentially he understands everybody because he knows himself. Knowing himself he knows your potential, your possibility. Knowing himself he knows that you are in darkness. Knowing himself he knows how he has reached his light, and he can help you to reach the same light.
But the enlightened person knows only himself and nothing more. He knows himself totally, absolutely. His whole being is full of light, but that does not mean that he knows everything about the whole existence and past and future, all. That is sheer nonsense! Because of this nonsense so many problems have arisen for religion.
The Bible talks about the earth as if it is flat. That was the problem, that in the Middle Ages the scientists who discovered for the first time that the earth is a globe, circular, round, got into trouble because they were going against the Bible, and the Bible is omniscient. How can you dare to say something against Moses, against Jesus and all the prophets – because they talk about the earth as flat.
The Bible thinks that the sun goes around the earth, and one can understand why because we all see the sun moving, in the morning rising and in the evening setting. We see the arc of the sun going around, it is a common inference.
When, for the first time Galileo discovered that this is wrong, this is only apparently so, it is a visual illusion, the truth is just the opposite – the earth goes around the sun, not the sun around the earth – he got into trouble. He was very old when he discovered it, seventy or more, and very ill. When his book was published, he was summoned by the Pope. He went there. He must have been a man of great understanding. I love that man. Many have condemned him for this same thing, but I don’t condemn him. I respect him for the same thing for which he has been condemned for three hundred years or more.

The Pope asked him, “Have you written this?”
He said, “Yes, I have written it.”
The Pope said, “This goes against the Bible. Are you ready to change it? Otherwise you will be killed or burned alive.”
He said, “I am perfectly ready to change it. You need not take so much trouble burning me – forgive me. I declare that it is the sun who goes around the earth, not the earth. But remember, my declaration will not make any difference – the earth will still go around the sun. Who bothers about Galileo?” He said, “Neither the sun will listen nor the earth will listen. But if it is offensive to you, I am perfectly ready to change it!”

People have thought that he was cowardly; I don’t think so. He had a sense of humor! He was not a coward, but he was not stupid – that much is certain. It would have been stupidity to insist on such a small thing. Why bother about it? He was not suicidal – that much is certain. If he had been suicidal, if he had carried some idea of suicide in him, then this was a good chance to become a martyr. Then suicide takes spiritual color: one becomes a martyr, a revolutionary.
But he laughed at the whole thing like a joke and he said, “I will change it immediately – I declare!” But he reminded the Pope that, “My declaration won’t make any difference at all – nobody listens to me.”
There is the point, which he made clear at the end and he corrected with a footnote. In the footnote he wrote, “Although I am correcting it because it goes against the Bible – and I am the last person to disturb anybody’s religion – the truth is the earth goes around the sun.”
These people… If you try to look into the Vedas, into Gita, into the Bible, into the Koran, you will find thousand and one things that are absolutely wrong, but I can understand why they are wrong. They were writing thousands of years ago, and at that time that was the general notion, they were simply talking in that way.
Even today although we know that the earth goes around the sun, our language still carries the old idea – sunrise, sunset – and I think it is going to remain forever; we will not change the language. What does it mean now? It means nothing. There is no sunrise and no sunset because the sun never goes around the earth, so what do you mean by rising and setting? But the language carries the old idea because the language was created in those days.
Neither Jesus knows nor Mahavira nor Buddha nor anybody else about the future, but the followers try in every possible way to make their master omniscient, omnipresent, omnipotent! These are all ego trips. And if the master himself is yet unenlightened he will pretend himself.
Jesus certainly says, “Be alert, cautious because there will be many who will come and who will speak in such a way, in such a convincing way that you can be distracted from the right path.” He is simply afraid. Otherwise, the right path should not be afraid at all.
The truth is going to win. It is not Jesus or Krishna or Buddha or Mahavira who are going to win: it is always the truth that wins. So why be worried? But to keep people imprisoned these warnings help, these warnings make people afraid.
He knew nothing about me, he cannot know. I don’t know anything about the coming masters in the world, and I will not make you beware of the coming masters. I would like you to enjoy all the masters you will find in the future. Don’t miss a single opportunity. Enjoy the truth from whatsoever source it comes. The question is of being with truth, not with me. If you are with truth you are with me. Truth is nobody’s possession, it is neither mine nor Christ’s nor Buddha’s.
In Buddha’s time, Buddha was the most clear-cut expression of truth, that’s why people were with him. In Jesus’ time, a few people were with Jesus because they could see something beautiful in him. And this has been always so. It you are with me you are not with me – you are with truth. Because you feel truth being imparted, communicated, showered on you, that’s why you are with me. So wherever you find truth in the future when I am not here, nourish yourself from it. Don’t cling to people. People are insignificant. Truth is significant.
And you ask, “Your message is very different from important parts of the teachings of Jesus.” It is bound to be so, because two thousand years have passed. How can I be exactly the same as Jesus and why should I be? There is no need. In two thousand years much has changed: the language, the people’s understanding, the people’s approach. Man has become more mature. Jesus speaks in a very childish way.
Of course, the people, the masters who will come after me will be speaking in a far better way than I am speaking, obviously because they would have learned more. As time passes, better and better expressions will be available. But we start clinging and that creates trouble.
Jesus spoke in his context, I am speaking in my context. He could not speak in the way the twentieth century will understand. I cannot speak in the way that Jesus had chosen because those people are no longer here for whom he was speaking. A different humanity is here, a far more mature, far more ripe humanity is here.
Man has come of age. Now to talk about God as the father is foolish, after Sigmund Freud it is foolish. Jesus had no idea of Sigmund Freud. I have to take care of Sigmund Freud too because Sigmund Freud will say that talk about God as the father is simply a projection, and he is right. It is your longing to belong to a father figure, it is your childish desire to be dependent on somebody – you don’t want to be independent. Now after Sigmund Freud I cannot speak in the same way as Jesus spoke, but the ultimate experience is the same; the expression will be different.
What Jesus experienced at the last moment on the cross I have experienced, but that experience is of absolute silence. To bring it into language, to create methods to help others to experience it, certainly I am in a far better position than Jesus or Buddha or Mahavira. Naturally, the masters who will follow me will be in a far better position than me. They will have a far more accurate approach toward truth because man is continuously growing. Man is not deteriorating, man is growing, man is reaching to higher peaks.
And you ask, “How is it possible that enlightened masters can say so many contrary things?” They only appear contrary because the language changes, expressions change, ways and methods change; otherwise they are not contrary. And a man like me is bound to be not only contrary to Jesus and Buddha and Mahavira, I am going to be many times contradictory to myself for the simple reason that I am trying to bring all the religions in to a higher synthesis; different approaches have to be joined together. I am creating an orchestra.
Buddha is a solo flute player. Of course when you are playing the flute solo it has a consistency, but it is not as rich as when the flute becomes part of an orchestra. Then it has a totally different kind of richness, multidimensionality. But then you have to be in tune with others, you have to be continuously alert not to fall out of step. Somebody is playing a tabla, and somebody is playing the sitar, and you are playing the flute; all three have to be in harmony. And of course they are three different instruments, very different from each other, but to bring them into harmony can create a higher kind of music.
Jesus is a solo player, Buddha too, Mahavira too. In the past it was bound to be so because they all lived in small worlds. Buddha never went out of Bihar, just a small province of this country; Jesus was confined, Krishna was confined. Now the whole world has become a small village, a global village. You can see it – the whole world has gathered here! Buddha was not so fortunate, he was surrounded by Biharis. Jesus was surrounded by Jews, Krishna was surrounded by Hindus. They could only be solo players; they were bound because their listeners, the people they were working with, were of a certain tradition.
Now I am working with all the traditions together. Jews are here and Hindus and Mohammedans and Christians and Parsis and Sikhs and Jains and Buddhists. All traditions have gathered here. It is a unique experiment in the whole history of humanity, it has never happened in this way.
Even people who are moving in different countries are still carrying their solo instruments. For example, Maharishi Mahesh Yogi: he works in the West, but the method that he calls Transcendental Meditation is a very old Hindu method of chanting a mantra; it is neither transcendental nor meditation, it is just the old rubbish of chanting a mantra! Any word will do, you go on repeating it continuously. It creates a state of autohypnosis and nothing more. Although he is working in the West, he is using only an autohypnotic method invented thousands of years ago by the Hindus.
Now there are Zen monks working in America, there are Zen centers in America, but what they are doing there is the old method of Buddha. There are Sufis working in the West, but they are using the method invented by Jalaluddin Rumi, one thousand years old.
I am using all the possible methods, and when all these methods meet of course there is going to be great contradiction. If you don’t understand you will see only contradictions and contradictions. If you understand then you will understand the harmony of all these instruments together.
People are doing Vipassana, Sufi dancing, Yoga and Tantra; and using Zen methods, Zazen and other methods. And not only the old methods – they are doing all that has happened in this century after Sigmund Freud, all the psychological methods, all the psychotherapy groups.
This is a meeting of the whole world. It is a universal religiousness that I am creating here. It is bound to be multidimensional if you understand. If you don’t understand, if you still cling to a certain tradition, then it will look contradictory to you.

The last question:
Osho,
What is the difference between experiencing and indulging?
The difference between experiencing and indulging is that of awareness; there is no other difference, no other distinction. If you are not aware, it is indulgence. If you are aware, it is experiencing – the same thing. It may be eating food, it may be making love, listening to music, enjoying the night sky full of stars – whatsoever it is. If you are not consciously there, if you are not a witness to it, if you remain unconscious, mechanical, robotlike, then it is indulgence. If you are aware, then it is experiencing. Experiencing is beautiful, indulgence is ugly. But remember the distinction that I am making.
In the past all the religions have labeled things, I am not labeling things. They have labeled things: “This is indulgence and this is experiencing.” I am not labeling things – things cannot be labeled. Things are the same.
Buddha eating his food and you eating your food – as far as the outer, objective viewpoint is concerned both are doing the same: you are eating, Buddha is eating. What is it? Buddha is experiencing, you are indulging. The difference is not in the act, it is in your awareness. Buddha eating is eating as a witness, and he will eat only that much which is needed because he is totally aware. He will enjoy food, he will enjoy more than you can enjoy because he is more aware. You will not enjoy the food; you simply go on stuffing it, you don’t enjoy. And you are not there at all to enjoy, in fact, you are somewhere else, always somewhere else. You are never where you are – somewhere else. You may be in the shop, you may be in the field, you may be in the factory, you may be talking to a friend: physically you are eating, but psychologically you are not there.
Buddha is there totally: physically, psychologically, spiritually. When he is eating he is simply eating.

A Zen master, Rinzai, was asked, “What is your sadhana? What is your spiritual practice?”
He said, “Nothing much, nothing much to brag about. It is very simple, when I feel hungry I eat and when I feel sleepy I go to sleep.”
The man said, “But that’s what we all do!”
Rinzai said, “There you are wrong. Take your words back! Because I have lived like you, I have both the experiences. I have lived like a robot. The way you are, I have been, so I know the difference. You eat when you are not hungry, you eat because it is time to eat, you eat because the food is delicious, you eat because you are invited to eat. You don’t care what is the need. You sleep because it is a habit, whether you need it or not is not the point. And while you are eating you are not only eating, you are doing thousand and one other things – maybe making love in your fantasy. And when you are asleep certainly you are not doing only one thing, sleeping – you are dreaming. The whole night your mind goes on and on creating dreams upon dreams.”

So I don’t label anything as experiencing and indulging. The question is of awareness.

Two drunks in a tavern see a bug fall down on the bar. The first drunk says, “A bug.”
The other nods and says, “A bug.”
The first peers again and says, “Ladybug.”
The other drunk says, “Damn good eyesight!”

A talkative drunkard at a circus looked mystified at a contortionist as the performer went through his act. Unable to control himself, he cried, “What is the matter? You look like I am drunk!”

There is a story about a small youngster who was abandoned by his parents in Yellowstone National Park. He was raised by a pack of wild dogs. Years later he was found walking on all fours, eating raw meat and living in the open. He was put in school where in one year he breezed through grammar school, high school, and college. The day after he got his PhD he was killed – chasing a car.

Even if you get your PhD you are going to chase the car – unconscious habit! Knowledgeable you can become, but that is not going to transform you, you will continue to indulge. You can escape from the world, but that will not make any difference, you will still indulge.
Learn how to be aware.

A train is speeding through the countryside when, from a distance, the driver notices what looks like a couple involved in passionate lovemaking, lying right on the tracks.
The engine driver pulls the whistle…once, twice, then again and again, but there is no response from the couple. The engine driver starts to panic and, as a last resort, slams on the emergency brake. The lovers continue in their play, oblivious.
Finally the train screeches to a halt just a few feet away from the couple. The engine driver is furious. He gets out of his cabin and storms over to them.
“What the fuck are you doing?” he screams at them. “Didn’t you see the train coming? Didn’t you hear the whistle? You should be at home, behind bedroom doors!”
The man on the tracks looks up at the driver very coolly and says, “Listen mate, she was coming, I was coming, and you were coming, but you had the brakes!”

Enough for today.

============================================================

The one Self never moves,
yet is too swift for the mind.
The senses cannot reach It.
It is ever beyond their grasp.
Remaining still, It outstrips all activity,
Yet in It rests the breath of all that moves.

It moves, yet moves not.
It is far, yet It is near.
It is within all this.
And yet without all this.

He who sees everything as nothing but the Self,
and the Self in everything he sees.
Such a seer withdraws from nothing.
For the enlightened, all that exists is nothing
but the Self.
So how could any suffering or delusion continue
for those who know this Oneness?

He who pervades all, is radiant,
unbounded and untainted,
invulnerable and pure.
He is the knower, the one Mind,
omnipresent and self-sufficient.
He has harmonized diversity throughout eternal time.

Om
purnam adah
purnam idam
purnat purnam udachyate
purnasya purnam adaya purnam evavashishyate

Om
That is the whole.
This is the whole.
From wholeness emerges wholeness.
Wholeness coming from wholeness,
wholeness still remains.
Om represents the music of existence, the soundless sound, the sound of silence when your whole being hums with joy. Om represents the ultimate harmony, what Heraclitus calls “the hidden harmony.” To become one with this music of existence is to attain flowering, fulfillment.
The moment you lose your discord with the whole, the moment you are in tune with the whole – attunement simply means at-onement – when you are one with the whole, every fiber of your being, every cell of your being dances, for no reason at all. It is the dance for dance’s sake, joy which is uncaused, hence it is eternal – joy which is unmotivated, joy which is not dependent on anything. It is your intrinsic, natural music, your spontaneity.
All the Upanishads begin with this remembrance:
Om
That is the whole.
This is the whole.
That represents the innermost core of this. It is called that because it is not known to you yet. Those who know, for them there is only this and no that, or only that and no this. The duality disappears, but for the blind the duality is there. Everything is dual, if you are not fully aware, divided.
This means that which you can see and that means that which is invisible. This is the wheel and that is the axle. The wheel moves on the axle but the axle moves not. All movement depends on something unmoving. All change depends on something eternal. Time depends on timelessness. Birth and death happen into something which is never born and never dies.
This represents all that is known to the unenlightened, and that which is known when you become enlightened. When you are full of light you have clarity, perception, transparency; you can see through and through. In that vision, this starts melting into that, the circumference disappears into the center. The center is naturally hidden, it is bound to be hidden; only the circumference is available to the senses. You can see only the surface, you cannot see the depths. If you go to the ocean you can only see the surface and the superficial turmoil, you cannot see the depth. To see the depth you will have to dive deep, and as far as the ultimate that is concerned, only diving deep won’t do; you will have to dive so deep that you disappear totally, become one with it. In that oneness God is realized.
The people who go on arguing about God know nothing about God. Those who know, they cannot argue about God. Yes, their very presence is a proof, their very existence radiates the ultimate, their thisness is overflowing with thatness; but they cannot prove logically, intellectually the existence of God. God is not an object hence it cannot be put before you. It cannot be made a collective experience.
That’s why science goes on denying God, and science will go on denying God because science depends on collective observation. It believes only in that which can observed by everybody. It believes in the rock because the rock can be watched by everybody, everybody can agree that it exists.
The word object is significant. Object means that which hinders. If you try to pass through a wall, you will be hit hard by the wall. The wall is an object: it objects to your passing through it. You cannot pass through a rock – it objects, it prevents, it hinders.
God is not an object – you can pass through God, you are passing through God every moment. You are breathing God, your very heartbeat is God’s heartbeat. But God is so close… Even the word close is not right because the word close or closeness shows a distance.
This fan is close to me, but it is separate. This microphone is even closer, but still it is separate. The body is even closer, but it is still separate. God is inseparable with you, hence even the word closeness is not right. God is your very being, your very consciousness. It cannot be an object, it cannot prevent you; it helps you, it nourishes you. It is your subjectivity. Because it is your innermost core it remains hidden even from yourself – unless you take a one hundred and eighty degree turn, unless you recoil upon yourself.
You must have seen the symbol – a very ancient symbol and very significant too – of a snake eating its own tail. Many ancient mystery schools used that symbol, it is certainly very indicative. The snake eating its own tail means a one hundred and eighty degree turn. The snake is turned upon itself, the consciousness has recoiled upon itself.
And the snake is represented in almost all the wisdom cultures of the world. Jesus says, “Be ye as wise as a snake.” And in the East the snake, the serpent, has symbolized the inner energy of man, kundalini; hence it is called serpent power. The energy is coiled at the lowest center of your being. When it uncoils, the snake starts rising upward. It simply represents that there is something in the snake which can be used as a metaphor.
The snake can catch hold of its own tail, the dog cannot do it. Dogs try – you must have seen dogs trying – and the more they try, the crazier they go because the tail goes on jumping with them. They think it is something separate. They try to catch hold of it, and when they cannot catch hold of it… Of course they try desperately, but the more they try the more they are at a loss. Only the snake can do it, no other animal.
The same happens in enlightenment, your energy starts moving upon itself, it becomes a circle.
God is your subjectivity, you cannot find God anywhere else. But once you have found God within you, you will find him everywhere else too. All the arguments are stupid, and these arguments are really childish. Whatever proofs have been given of God are so childish that one wonders what these theologians were doing. They prove only one thing by their arguments, that they were fools!
God is an experience, unprovable because your senses cannot reach him. If God were an object, your senses would be able to reach. God is not a thought either, hence your mind cannot grasp it. But we have made God an object, statues have been created. Those statues are objects, they are made of stone or wood or some other material. And to make God an object is the greatest blasphemy because God is subjectivity. You are changing the whole idea of God, you are reducing it into a thing. God is not a thing.
That’s why Gautam the Buddha calls God nothingness. Remember, when he uses the word nothingness he means no-thingness – he does not negate. He is not saying there is no God, the word nothing simply means it is not a thing.
And the temples and the churches have all made God a thing, even though there may not be any statue – in the mosques there are no statues. But people are praying to God as if he is there, not deep in your own consciousness but somewhere else. It is the same – whether you are bowing down to a statue or to a God somewhere above the clouds, still it is an object. To whom are you praying? Your prayer means that you have accepted the idea of God’s separateness from you – he has to be prayed to. You are the prayer and he is the prayed. You are the praiser and he is the praised. The separation is accepted, and that is irreligiousness.
But people go on fighting everything. In fact, they want to fight; fight seems to be their joy. Then God is one of the most beautiful excuses to fight because it can never be conclusively decided.

In a one-horse town in front of the general store, two men were fighting. A ten-year-old boy was among the spectators who were enjoying the battle. A stranger came along and asked the youngster what was going on.
“My father and a man are having a real fight,” explained the boy.
“Which one is your father?” the stranger asked.
“That,” said the boy, “is what they are fighting about!”

And this is what religious people have been doing for centuries. They think they are creating great philosophical ideas. Professors of philosophy and professors of theology don’t know anything about themselves, but they are trying to prove that their idea of God is true. They themselves live in absolute unconsciousness. If they were not unconscious they would not argue about God; they would live God, they would radiate God. God would be their fragrance, their presence.

An absent-minded professor of philosophy was going out to dinner one evening with his wife.
“I don’t like that tie you have on,” she said. “I wish you would go upstairs and put on another.”
The professor quietly obeyed. Minute after minute passed until finally the impatient wife went upstairs to see what had happened. In his room she found her husband undressed and getting into bed.

Old habit! The moment he took off his tie, he thought the time had come to go to bed.
And these are the people who go on proposing great systems of thought. Immanuel Kant has created one of the greatest philosophical systems in the world, and he himself was such an unaware man that it seems almost impossible how a man can be so unaware. There are thousands of anecdotes about his life.

One day he came home after his evening walk. He was a very regular person in his habits, in his routines. He never got married for the simple reason that a woman may disturb his pattern. He never allowed any friendship because then you have to be polite to the friends. And if you want to go to bed and your friend is sitting there, just out of etiquette, mannerism, you have to go on talking. He was such a mechanical man that at exactly nine – and nine meant nine, not a minute before, not a minute after – he would go to bed. He never married for the simple reason that women are illogical and they won’t understand, and there will be unnecessary quarrels.
He kept a servant, and the servant used to only declare time. There was no need to say anything, he would simply come and say, “Sir, it is nine,” and Kant would jump into bed.
The servant was puzzled that it was almost ten in the night and his light was still on, so he went to have a look at what had happened. He looked from the window and he could not believe his eyes: Kant was standing in a corner of the room with closed eyes, and his walking stick was lying on the bed. When he came from his walk he forgot who is who – just a little confusion! And it was nine o’clock so there was no time to even think about the matter, to figure it out, who is who. He was in such a hurry!
The servant came in, shook him, and asked, “What is the matter? What are you doing?”
And he said, “I was also thinking what is the matter because I am feeling very tired! Now I know what the matter is.” When he saw the walking stick on the bed resting, then he realized.

And these people have created great systems of thought, and they talk about God and they talk about truth and they talk about love and they talk about beauty, and they define what is virtue and what is sin. So unconscious!
In the East we have a totally different approach. You cannot think such a phenomenon with a Gautam Buddha or with an Upanishadic seer because the whole approach is of being more and more conscious. One has to be a flame of consciousness, one has to be alert and aware. On the one hand is Immanuel Kant on the other hand is Gautam Buddha.
His chief disciple Ananda, who lived with him for forty years and served him with great love – he used to watch Buddha in every possible way because he was continuously following him like a shadow, and each of his movements was beautiful, it was graceful. He also watched him when he was asleep because he used to sleep in the same room in case the master needed him in the night. He used to watch him while he was asleep. Awake or asleep, his grace was the same, his beauty was the same, his silence was the same.
One day he asked Buddha, “I should not ask such questions, it looks so stupid, but I cannot contain my curiosity. You sleep, but I have watched you for hours. Sometimes in the middle of the night I wake up and watch you, sometimes just before you get up early in the morning I watch you, but my experience has been such that it seems to me that you are still awake even while asleep. You look so alive, so fresh! And one thing more – you never change your posture. You go to sleep and you wake up in the same posture. What is the secret of it?”
Buddha said, “There is no secret in it. The body goes to sleep – once you are awake you are awake! Whether it is day or night makes no difference, the inner flame goes on burning. The body goes to sleep because the body gets tired, and now there is no mind anymore so no question of the mind arises at all.” There are only two things.
In the unenlightened person there are three things: the body, the mind, the soul. And because of the mind he cannot see the soul. The mind is a turmoil, a chaos; it is all smoke, it is all clouds. The enlightened has no mind, there is only silence. So he has the body and he has the soul. The body tires, needs rest, but the soul is never tired, needs no rest: it is always awake. The body is always asleep and the soul is always awake. The nature of body is to be unconscious and the nature of the soul is to be conscious. These are intrinsic qualities. Once the mind is no longer there, then even in your sleep only the body sleeps, not you.
In the East we have called these people religious; those who have known such awakening, which cannot be clouded by any sleep anymore. The West has been thinking about Kant and Hegel and Fichte and Bertrand Russell and Nietzsche and Wittgenstein – these people, as if they are great explorers of truth. They are thinkers.
And remember always, only a blind man thinks about light. The man who has eyes knows it, he need not think about it. These are blind people – howsoever clever they are in argumentation, they are blind.
The Upanishad belongs to the seers. It expresses that which is experienced in the ultimate accord where you are no longer a separate entity from the whole, when the dewdrop slips from the lotus leaf and becomes the ocean.
The first sutra:
The one Self never moves,
yet is too swift for the mind.
You will come across many self-contradictory statements, for the simple reason that truth is paradoxical. It has to be paradoxical for the simple reason that it contains the whole, and the whole means the contradictory also is contained in it. It contains both the poles: the negative and the positive. It contains the day and night, life and death, summer and winter. It contains all opposites, in it those opposites are no longer opposites, they are complementaries. So don’t think of them as contradictions.
To the seer – to the one who has come to the ultimate peak of meditation, one who has attained samadhi – all the polarities are joined together into one existence. They are not separate, nothing is separate. Existence is one organic unity, hence to say anything about it will have to be paradoxical if it has to cover the whole truth. So you will come again and again from different sides. The contradictions have to be dissolved, they have to be talked about, so that you become aware of their complementariness.
The first is: The one Self never moves, yet is too swift for the mind. It never moves and yet it is too swift, unmoving and yet moving. But remember, these two phenomenon are not separate – movement and non-movement. Again let me remind you of the metaphor of the wheel and the axle: the axle remains unmoving, it is because of the unmoving axle that the wheel moves. They support each other. If the axle also moves then the wheel will not be able to move. By remaining unmoving it is supporting the wheel to move.
The world is the wheel. The Sanskrit word for the world is samsara. Samsara simply means the wheel – literally it means the wheel. That’s why Sanskrit is a language belonging to a totally different category; it is a transformed language, transformed by the seers. Each word has been coined in such a way that it can be used in two ways: it can be used in a mundane sense; it can also be used in a sacred sense. It is the most expressive language about the ultimate, about the inexpressible.
The Sanskrit word for the world is samsara. Samsara means the wheel. It goes on moving. But don’t forget the axle, the very center upon which the whole movement depends, and it has to be unmoving. The wheel and axle are not enemies; they are in partnership, a deep friendship. They are together, they are bound in a deep togetherness.
The one Self never moves, yet is too swift for the mind. One more thing has to be understood: whenever the Upanishads say the one Self, remember, it is exactly what Buddha says when he calls the ultimate reality no-self. Their expression is opposite to each other. The Upanishads speak the language of affirmation. Buddha speaks the language of negation. The Upanishads are via affirmativa, and the approach of Buddha – or at least the expression of Buddha – is via negativa. Both are valid approaches, it depends with whom you are speaking.
The Upanishads were spoken in a different context; they were spoken twenty-five centuries before Buddha arrived – from today, five thousand years before today. It was a totally different world. The Upanishadic seers were not moving from one place to another place, they were not talking to the crowds, they were not arguing with the skeptical minds. They were only talking to their disciples, the chosen few, it was a totally different context. To talk to your own disciples is certainly different than to talk to those who are skeptical, doubtful, antagonistic.
The days when the Isa Upanishad was born, were the days of innocence, deep innocence. People were simple, non-philosophical. They were not very concerned about logic; they were trusting people, honest, sincere, authentic. And the Upanishadic seers lived in their small ashrams.
The ashram, the commune of the master and the disciples, is an Upanishadic discovery. It is not a monastery, that is a totally different phenomenon. In English, ordinarily ashram is translated as monastery – it is not a monastery. A monastery is something against the world. A monastery means you have escaped from the world. A monastery simply shows a condemnation of the world.
The ashram is not a condemnation of the world. Rather it is a learning place, where you learn the art of how to live in the world. People used to go to the Upanishadic masters to learn how to live in the world.
In those days this was the process of life. Assuming that a person was going to live a hundred years, life was divided in four parts. The first twenty-five years everybody had to be with some awakened master so that he can have a taste of the beyond, so he can have some experience of the sacred. This first stage was called brahmacharya. Remember, to translate brahmacharya as celibacy is not right. The word brahmacharya simply means living like a god, living with the experience of the brahman, the absolute, living meditatively. If I am to translate brahmacharya I will translate it as the life of meditation.
Those twenty-five years, the beginning part of life – it will look strange. Why has God to be experienced in the beginning? – for many reasons. First: the first part of life is the most innocent part, the most courageous, adventurous, alive, intelligent. Once you become burdened with life’s experiences you start becoming cunning. To live in a world and not to be cunning is very difficult. To face the world you will have to be cunning, to face the world you will have to be on guard, cautious; otherwise you will be cheated, you will be exploited. To be in the world you have to be continuously fighting and competing, you have to be ambitious and violent and aggressive. And if all these experiences become part of your consciousness – and they are bound to become part – then trust will be more difficult, doubt will be more easy.
I have heard…

A man was going to commit suicide. At the moment he was to jump from the bridge into the river, a gentleman who was coming back from his club prevented him.
The gentleman asked him, “What is the matter? Why are you destroying your life?”
The man said, “I am in desperate need of a hundred dollars and I have lost all trust in humanity.”
The gentleman, who had prevented this would-be suicide, gave him a hundred dollars. The man who was going to commit suicide was puzzled, shocked, and he said, “How can I show my gratitude to you? You have helped me to regain my trust in humanity.”
In the morning, the gentleman who had given that hundred dollar bill to the man saw in the newspapers that a man has committed suicide from the same bridge that he had saved the man from last night. And the way the newspapers described it, it seemed to be the same man.
He could not believe what had happened because the man had said that now he would not commit suicide. He was committing suicide because he had lost all confidence in humanity, and what is the point of living with people in whom you cannot trust.
He rushed to the police station to see the body. Yes, it was the same man. He was very much puzzled. He could not figure out what had happened.
That evening he met one of his friends, with whom he had been gambling the night before, and from whom he had won the one hundred dollar bill.
His friend said: “What did you do with that hundred dollar bill? Because now I must confess, it was false.” Now everything became clear, why the man had lost his trust in humanity again.
At the point of suicide somebody had given him a false one hundred dollar bill. Seeing that it is false, he must have jumped immediately. Enough is enough!

In this world you are bound to be corrupted. This world is so corrupted. It is because of this fact that in the days of the Upanishads, the knowers, the seers, had decided that before you have any experience of the world it is better to have some taste of God – because that taste will save you from the corrupting influences of the world. If you have known something higher, then the lower cannot disturb you; if you have known something deeper, then the superficial does not matter. It is very scientific and very psychological.
The first part of life, twenty-five years, had to be devoted to meditation – living with a master, serving the master, being with the master, enjoying his presence, rejoicing his presence. It was not a monastery; it was a school, an academy, a real university to learn the art of life.
And after twenty-five years when the second stage used to begin – it was the stage called the stage of the householder, grihastha. Then one gets married, goes to work in the world, earns money, lives a worldly life, but now he has an inner center, a grounding. The world cannot disturb him, and he knows that that experience has to be again achieved, that light has to be again achieved. Whatsoever glimpses he has got in those first twenty-five years will haunt him, will remind him again and again that this world is only momentary. He will not become mad after money or power or prestige. He will do all the actions of the world but remain deep down unmoved. He will become a wheel as far as the outside is concerned, but inside he will remain an axle, unaffected, cool. Whether success comes or failure, it will be all the same. Whether he becomes rich or poor it will be all the same. Whether he becomes very famous or remains a nobody, it is all the same because he has experienced a joy within himself, now he cannot be deceived by anything from the outside.
And this experience is also needed to enforce, to reinforce the first experience of twenty-five years. This is an examination, this is the criterion whether what you have achieved you have really achieved, or it was only in the light of the master, in his presence, something borrowed. You have to go into the world – that is the test – so that you can see that it is something that has become part of your own being and nothing can take it away. Even coming away from the master is not going to affect it, it is your own, authentically your own. This is a beautiful, scientific procedure.
After twenty-five years when the person will be reaching the age fifty, his children will be ready to come from the ashrams, from those extraordinary devices for learning. His children will now be ready. They must be nearly twenty-five years old and they will be on the way back home. Now they will be getting married and they will take the place of the father.
Try to see the Eastern insight into human psyche: when the son returns home and he gets married, if the father still goes on reproducing children, it is ugly. It is like when your small son is born and he plays with toy boats and you are also playing with toy boats. It will be stupid, you will simply show that you are retarded. If you go on carrying a teddy bear… It is perfectly okay for a child, but a man of fifty years carrying a teddy bear and who cannot go to sleep without a teddy bear will be ugly; it will show immaturity, the man has not grown.
Fifty is the time – enough! Twenty-five years you have lived in the world, it is enough to see that it is only a drama. It is enough to give you an experience of its falseness, of its illusoriness. It is made of the same stuff dreams are made. It is enough to see. And now your children will be playing the same game, and you are also playing the same game; it does not look right.
The moment your son comes back, in the days of the Upanishads, the father will start removing himself from the jobs, the work, the money, the power game – all the games. Now the son has to be given the place, not reluctantly – rejoicingly, happily. Now let him play the games. Otherwise fathers are also in the same game, their children are in the same game, even their grandchildren are in the same game. The grandchildren are chasing girls and the grandfathers are chasing girls! It looks so ugly, as if nobody seems to have grown up. Maybe physically they are old, but not psychologically mature.
To grow old is not to grow up, remember it. To grow up is a psychological process. So when a man turned fifty he would start giving place to his children, and there was no competition. Now there is every competition in every field.
Somebody like Morarji Desai, at the age of eighty-five still trying again to be the prime minister of the country… Then what about the children? If you are interested in the teddy bears, then what about the children? What about the young people who really need space and opportunity? These old fools go on and on, they don’t stop. There is no retiring age for the politicians, no retiring age for the wealthy. They never retire, they only die. Only then reluctantly they have to retire, otherwise they won’t retire.
There is a college in London, a medical college; the man who founded the college, who gave the money, presided his whole life on the board of the directors, and when he died his will was opened and all were puzzled and shocked. His will said, “All my money is for the college, provided I still continue to preside.” After death – and he is still presiding! After two hundred years he is still presiding in that medical college. His body has been preserved. His body sits in the place of the chairman and when the board meets, he presides. Of course somebody else does the work as acting president, but the real president is there in the chair! People don’t even want to retire after death – he has not retired.
Now just think of that meeting, how the other directors who are alive will be feeling, sitting with a dead man, a corpse! And he is the president, and they must be addressing him, “Sir, president sir!”
But this is the situation all over the world. In Sri Lanka a man of ninety years is now the prime minister. Now these dead people are bound to create bad feelings in the younger generation, and they say it is the younger generation who are wrong. It is not so.
When people used to live not that long, when people used to live not more than seventy years, it was okay; the younger generation could tolerate them, hoping that they are going to die sooner or later – don’t get into a hurry, don’t kill them. But medical science has now made it possible for people to live indefinitely.
In Russia there are thousands of people who have crossed the age one hundred fifty, and they are still working. Now what do you want? The younger generation is bound to be angry. Sooner or later younger people will start killing these old people – they have to be killed! How long you can tolerate? They will destroy your whole life! By the time you are a hundred they may die, but then other younger people are there who will push you into the grave!
It was very psychological that when your children returned from the gurukul – the ashrams were called gurukuls. Gurukul means the place where the master lives and his family. His disciples are his family. Where the master lives with his disciples – the family of the master, the commune of the master.
When the children start coming, the father, the mother, the elders, have to vacate and joyously because now they are being relieved. Twenty-five years they will still remain in the home so that they can help their children to be in the world, so they can hand over everything to the children. By the time their grandchildren start coming home they will go back to the ashrams.
This is the full circle of life, four stages. It begins in the ashram, it ends in the ashram. It begins in the ashram as a disciple and it ends in the ashram as a master. The circle is complete. A man after seventy-five years of age: twenty-five years’ experience with a master, then twenty-five years’ testing time in the world, then twenty-five years of slow withdrawal, not a hasty renunciation, a very meditative withdrawal, slowly, and then back into the forest, into the ashram. Now he comes as a master in his own right; a fully lived life, experienced in all possible ways, sacred and mundane, he becomes a master himself – and children will be coming again.
The master in the Upanishads was talking to innocent people, unpolluted by the world, not skeptical, uncorrupted; trusting, loving.
Buddha after twenty-five centuries was speaking to a totally different audience. Ashrams had disappeared, died; the whole beautiful institution died. It died because of the Jains – they are the culprits because Jains insisted that the masters should not live in one place. Jains have a very life-negative attitude and they are as old as the Upanishads. They insisted on asceticism, they insisted on renouncing the world, and they insisted that one should not live in one place because if you live in one place long enough you may get attached to the place. Their fear of attachment was so much, they were so obsessed with the fear, they were living in a kind of phobia, in a panic.
The Jain muni, the Jain monk, is allowed to stay only three days in a town, then he should leave because if he stays longer than that there is a possibility he may start growing friendship, he may become loving to people, he may become attached to the place, to people, he may not like to move.
Jains are against ashrams. An ashram means the master lives there permanently with his disciples. Jains insisted that the Jain monk should be a wanderer; he should not stay anywhere. They destroyed the beautiful institution of the Upanishads, they destroyed it completely. And they appealed more to people because people are so foolish, they become attracted to any kind of unnatural thing. They became attracted to the Jain munis, they thought these are the real renouncers of the world because the Upanishadic seers lived very ordinarily, just as everybody else lives. The only difference was they used to live in forests. Of course, to live in the forests was far more beautiful than to live in the marketplace. They were not against the marketplace, but they knew the beauty of the forest, the nature and all its joys and all its climates. They were not there against the world, they loved the beauty of nature. They were not there for any negative reason, they were there for a positive reason. They loved the trees, the wild animals, the flowers, the silence of the forests. They were in immense love with the forest. They were poets. Their going to the forest was not renunciation, it was rejoicing in nature. Remember the difference.
Jains started a totally different kind of tradition in India – the tradition of the wanderer – and they destroyed the whole institution of the ashram. And the wanderers cannot be masters because what can you teach in three days living in a place? And they go on moving. They are afraid, very much afraid of relating to people. What can they teach? They are themselves afraid, living out of fear, their whole orientation is fear of the world. They destroyed the beautiful universities that existed around masters.
My effort here is to again create a real ashram, a real commune. That’s why I want to move to the forests. I am not against the world, against the marketplace, but I know the beauty of the hills, of the lakes, of the oceans, and I would like you to experience it and to experience it with me so you can share my vision, so you can dance with the trees and sing with the birds, so that you can start feeling the humming sound that comes when you meet with the universe – om – so that you can feel that music, the eternal music, the celestial music.
Buddha came after the Jains had completely destroyed the institution of the ashrams. He had to talk to the skeptical, he had to talk to the crowd, he had to talk to people who had never known any meditation. Hence, he had chosen the expression of the negative. He would say, “The ultimate is a no-self.” But the Upanishads say, “The ultimate is the supreme Self,” but they both mean the same thing.
The senses cannot reach It.
It is ever beyond their grasp.
Obviously the senses are to grasp the objective world. You can see the whole world with your eyes, except your eyes themselves. If you want to see your eyes you will have to use a mirror, and then too you are not seeing your eyes, you are only seeing their reflection in the mirror. And those are not your eyes, just a reflection, and the reflection may not be correct; it all depends on the mirror and the quality of the mirror. The mirror may be made in India! You may be seeing somebody else’s eyes which have nothing to do with you. And you must have seen, there are many kinds of mirrors: in some mirrors you look very small, in some mirrors very tall, in some mirrors very fat, in come mirrors very thin. It all depends on the mirror how you look. In fact, I don’t think there is any mirror which exactly represents you one hundred percent; there cannot be.
See the point: your eyes are capable of seeing everything except themselves; your hand can grasp everything except itself. Your senses are made for the external reality, they are your grasp toward the external. But to the internal they are impotent; they cannot grasp your interiority, and that is where your reality is. They can catch hold of the wheel, but the axle remains beyond them.
Remaining still, It outstrips all activity,
Yet in It rests the breath of all that moves.
It is the axle. …in It rests the breath of all that moves. And once you have experienced your absolute, unmoving center, then you know all activity depends on it – although it is not active.
This is the meaning of the Upanishadic emphasis of action in inaction, or the Zen emphasis of effortless effort, or Bodhidharma’s statement that if you can just sit silently doing nothing, everything will happen. You are not to do anything, just sit silently so you can have an experience of your axle. Sitting silently you become more aware of the axle than of the wheel. If you are active you remain on the wheel, the merry-go-round – or the sorry-go-round, it all depends on you – more or less it is a sorry-go-round! You cling to the wheel and the wheel goes on moving.
Sitting silently simply means settling at the very center where all activity ceases, but it is also the source of all activity. The inactive is the source of activity, the nothing is the source of all things.
It moves, yet moves not.
You walk, you go for a morning walk; in a way you are moving, in a way you are not moving. Your body is moving, your mind is moving, but your consciousness is the same. You were a child, then you became young, then old. Everything has moved and yet nothing has moved, your consciousness is still the same.
That’s why it is very difficult: if you don’t keep a record, if you don’t have a birth certificate, if you don’t have a calendar, it is very difficult to judge your age. If you close your eyes and you try to figure out how old you are, you will not be able to figure it out at all.
That’s why if you go to the primitive tribes where no clocks exist, no calendars, and nobody knows when he was born because people cannot count beyond their ten fingers… Even the person who can count the ten fingers is thought to be very literate, educated, cultured. He becomes the priest or the chief. If you ask people, “How old are you?” They will not be able to answer you, there is no way.
You cannot judge by your own inner being, some outer measurement is needed. Why? – because when you close your eyes and you look within it is always the same, it never changes – and in a way, everything has changed. You will not be able to recognize your photograph when you were one day old – or do you think you will be able to recognize? And in the mother’s womb, in nine months’ time, you passed through all the stages that life has passed through – millions of years. First you were like a fish and finally you were like a monkey – and very few people grow out of that stage!
Darwin may be right about a few people: a Buddha, a Christ, a Zarathustra, a Lao Tzu… In fact, I cannot count even Darwin! He may be right about a few people, that they have evolved beyond the monkeys, but as far as others are concerned they have only descended from the trees – that is true – but they have not evolved. They have not become better than the monkeys.
Just watch your mind and you will see: the monkey goes on jumping. Your mind is a monkey and it takes longer jumps – quantum leaps – than any monkey can ever do. The monkey can jump from one branch to another branch, from one tree to another tree, but not much, but you can jump from the earth to the moon. Your mind has become a greater monkey.
Every child comes to that stage in the mother’s womb. If you are shown a picture or a series of pictures you will not be able to believe that this is you! The first day in the mother’s womb, do you think you will be able to recognize? It will just be a dot, almost invisible to the naked eye, you will need a microscope to see it. But then all those changes are peripheral, at the center you are still the same. Nothing has changed, nothing ever changes.
Watch when you are going for a morning walk tomorrow: the body moves, but something in you remains unmoving.
It moves, yet moves not.
It is far, yet It is near.
It is far if you go through the mind, it is very far. In fact, it is so far you will never reach it. But if you go through meditation it is very near, nearer than your own ego – it is the nearest. It is your very being, but it depends. If you go through the mind, then you have taken the longest route possible; if you go through no-mind, then you have taken the shortest route possible.
It is within all this,
And yet without all this.
It is within and without both. But first you have to experience it within because that is the nearest point, the nearest door you can enter the temple of God. And then once you have experienced it as your very self you will know it is everybody’s self. Then you will see it in the trees and in the rocks, in the animals, in the people – you will see it everywhere. Once you have recognized it within yourself you cannot miss recognizing it anywhere.
He who sees everything as nothing but the Self,
and the Self in everything he sees.
Such a seer withdraws from nothing.
Remember these tremendously significant words: Such a seer withdraws from nothing.
The whole idea of renunciation is non-Aryan, but Indians think that that is their culture. That is just absolute unawareness of what they are talking about. Renunciation is a non-Aryan phenomenon, it has nothing to do with the Indian culture or Indian religion. It has come from the Jains, and Jains are not part of Indian culture.
When Aryans came to India, nearabout ten thousand years ago, India was a very civilized country. When the Aryans came, India was flourishing, it was not unpopulated. Now explorers have discovered Harappa and Mohenjo-daro. These two cities must have gone through tremendous calamities because both the cities show indications that they were destroyed seven times. They have excavated and they have found seven layers; the oldest is the seventh at the bottom. One is unable even to comprehend how old the oldest is, but somehow it was destroyed – maybe a great earthquake, some upheaval in the earth – and it is covered with earth. Then the second time again the city was populated and the third time… Seven times it has been populated and destroyed.
Naturally it has been destroyed by some natural calamity and the possibility is that the Himalayas were rising up very close by, and when such a great mountain rises, then all around it there are great upheavals, bound to be so. Such a great, huge… the greatest mountain coming up means everything will change for thousands of miles around. And the Himalayas are still growing. It is the youngest mountain in the world – still growing, still becoming higher. But when the first time it must have arisen out of the earth you can think what calamity must have surrounded the whole of North India; Harappa and Mohenjo-daro were destroyed seven times.
In Harappa and Mohenjo-daro statues have been found which can only be related to the religion of the Jains – naked statues, sitting like Mahavira in a lotus posture or standing like Mahavira, meditating. Only Jains are known to meditate standing, no other religion has prescribed meditation to be done in a standing posture. And they are all naked – only the Jain religion has believed in naked masters. Harappa and Mohenjo-daro must have survived a little bit. The Jain religion seems to be far older than the Hindu religion, it must have come from Harappa and Mohenjo-daro. Harappa and Mohenjo-daro must have been Jain cultures, remnants of it remained and they infiltrated the Aryan mind.
Otherwise the Aryans have never been in favor of withdrawing from life, they have always rejoiced in life. But Jains have contaminated the whole mind; they have succeeded in corrupting the whole idea.
Such a seer – says the Isa Upanishad – withdraws from nothing.
There is no need to withdraw because all is God. To withdraw from the world means to withdraw from God’s manifestation. It is an unholy act to withdraw, to renounce. The Upanishads believe in rejoicing, not in renouncing, and that’s my approach too.
Hence I would like to say to the so-called defenders of Indian culture that they are not really defenders of Indian culture. I am, because whatsoever I am saying is rooted in the Upanishadic vision: Rejoice in everything because all is God! From the lowest to the highest, everything is divine. I am certainly against the Jain attitude of withdrawal, renouncing, but I am not against the Upanishadic attitude – I am all for it.
For the enlightened, all that exists is nothing
but the Self.
The supreme self, God himself.
So how could any suffering or delusion continue
for those who know this Oneness?
There is no question of suffering or delusion. The moment you drop your ego and you become one with the whole, all suffering disappears. Suffering is only illusory; it is a dream, a nightmare. When you wake up, all dreams disappear. Just like that – when you become awake, aware, all suffering disappears. Life becomes a sheer joy, a dance, a celebration!
He who pervades all, is radiant…
God means that which pervades all, and he is very radiant. All that you need is to open your eyes. But first you have to see his radiance within yourself, then only will you be able to recognize it on the outside. He is unbounded because the universe is vast and there are no boundaries. He is untainted because there is no other thing that can taint it.
These are immense declarations: you are untainted, you are radiant, you are unbounded. Just drop the ego and you become one with this infinity, with this eternity that existence is. He is invulnerable and pure. So are you.
He is the knower, the one Mind…
What Buddha calls no-mind, the Upanishads call …the one Mind… but they mean the same thing.
He is the knower… God is the knower. When you become a knower you are a god. To know is to be a god because he is the knower:
…omnipresent…
He is present everywhere because there is nothing else that can be present.
Remember, the Upanishads don’t believe in any Devil, any Satan, they don’t believe in any hell because all is divine. How can there be a hell? Hell is your creation, the shadow of the ego. It is just a delusion – it exists not.
He has harmonized diversity throughout eternal time.
God is the harmony of all that is, and you can watch – everything is harmonious. The trees are swaying with the wind, there is harmony. They are not fighting the wind, they are dancing with the wind. The stars are moving in tremendous harmony. This vast existence is a great orchestra. All is tuned with everything else. There is no conflict, no division, no disharmony.
Only man can believe that he is separate because he has consciousness, and consciousness gives you the alternative. Either you can think yourself separate – then you fall in misery and hell – or you can try to understand the oneness and suddenly there is bliss. To be one with the whole is bliss, to be separate with the whole is misery.
Om
purnam adah
purnam idam
purnat purnam udachyate
purnasya purnam adaya purnam evavashisyate.

Om
That is the whole.
This is the whole.
From wholeness emerges wholeness.
Wholeness coming from wholeness,
wholeness still remains.
Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
Sitting fretfully, squirming endlessly, does the spring still come and the grass grow by itself?
The spring still comes. It does not depend whether you are sitting silently or fretfully, whether you are sitting or not sitting at all. It does not depend on you, it comes on its own accord. The grass goes on growing, but if you are not sitting silently you will miss it. It will come, but you will not be able to feel it. It will come, but you will not be able to experience it. The grass will grow, but you will not grow.
The sun rises, the night disappears, but the light is only for those who have eyes and only for those who open their eyes; otherwise you will remain in darkness. The sun will be there, the light will be there, but you will not be bathed in its light. You will remain the same.
The whole question is whether you are closed or open. Silence opens you, the inner noise keeps you closed to existence, both within and without. The outside is a beautiful world – the whole sky with the stars, the flowers, the birds singing, the clouds floating, the rivers, the mountains. And the inside world is even far more beautiful because the outside is the manifest part of the inside and the inside is vaster than the outside. The unmanifest is unlimited, the manifest is bound to be limited. The unmanifest contains all the future possibilities; the manifest contains only that which has become actual in the past. The unmanifest contains all the universes that will ever happen in the coming eternity. Of course, it is far bigger than the outer.
Between the two is the mind. Between the within and the without there is a wall – a China Wall of thoughts, desires, memories, expectations, frustrations… And because of the thick wall and the constant noise that is bound to be there – each memory hankering to be listened to, each desire nagging you to be fulfilled, each imagination forcing you to be realized, each expectation torturing you, goading you so that you can succeed in fulfilling it… The noise is great, there is great conflict. The desires are antagonistic to each other.
If you want to be powerful, of course you will have to choose a few desires and you will have to leave a few desires. There are desires to be famous, desires to be wealthy, desires to be powerful, and desires to be healthy, and desires to be loved, and desires to be creative; they cannot all be fulfilled simultaneously. And whenever you choose, the unchosen desires will nag you; they will try to drag you toward themselves.
This chaos cannot allow you to see either the beauty that surrounds you or the beauty that resides in you. It cannot allow you to see the rainbows on the circumference and it cannot allow you to see the source of all joy, of all truth, of all beauty within you – the kingdom of God within you.
You ask me, “Sitting fretfully, squirming endlessly, does the spring still come…” Certainly, the spring comes, but not for you; you are not available, you are not there. You are so occupied, so engaged, that you can’t see out, you can’t see in. Your eyes are covered with layers of desires and thoughts.
The grass certainly goes on growing because the grass is sitting silently doing nothing – but you are not sitting silently doing nothing. If you can sit silently doing nothing like the grass, you will also grow.
That’s the way the ignorant become enlightened: becoming silent, just now. Just a moment of silence, a pause and you can hear the songs of the birds and you can suddenly feel the silence. Then there are no longer five thousand sannyasins here; the Buddha Hall is empty, and that emptiness is a great experience. It is ecstatic.
The spring is felt suddenly – it can be felt right now. Then nothing distracts you. This noise of the plane is not a distraction, it will even deepen your silence, it will become a contrast to the silence, it will help define the silence.
The outer noise is not a distraction, but the mind inside remaining continuously in an insane state is the only distraction.
There are foolish people who renounce the world in search of silence. The world does not disturb you, what disturbs is your mind – and they don’t renounce the mind. When a Hindu becomes a monk he still remains a Hindu. Do you see the absurdity? He has renounced the Hindu society, but he still carries the idea of being a Hindu. If you have renounced the Hindu society, then this idea of being a Hindu was given by the same society, how can you carry it?
Somebody becomes a Christian monk, but he still remains a Christian – a Catholic, a Protestant. The mind is so stupid; if you look at its stupidities you will be surprised, amazed. How can you be a Catholic if you have renounced the world? But people renounce the world, they don’t renounce the mind – and the mind is a byproduct of the world! The child is raised by the Hindus, then he becomes a Hindu because the parents are cultivating Hindu ideology – or Christian, or Mohammedan, or Jain.
Just the other day I was talking about how Jainism destroyed the beautiful concept of the Upanishadic ashrams. When I passed around the Buddha Hall going back, I looked particularly at my Jain sannyasins – they were not looking happy. Even my sannyasins! But whenever I criticize Hinduism – and I have seen the same sannyasins so joyous – of course the Hindus feel offended. Even my sannyasins somehow go on carrying their minds deep down.
I don’t teach you to renounce the world, I teach you to renounce the mind. And that’s what is meant by this immensely beautiful Zen saying:
Sitting silently, doing nothing,
The spring comes and the grass grows by itself.
All that is needed on your part is to be absolutely silent. And that’s exactly the meaning of the word upanishad: sitting silently, doing nothing, by the side of a master – that means by the side of a spring, allowing the spring to possess you, to take you along with it like a tidal wave.
Your inner being is not something that has to be developed, it is already perfect. No spiritual development is needed, it only has to be discovered. Once silence falls over you, you start discovering it. It is the noise and the dust that the mind creates that goes on hindering the discovery.

The second question:
Osho,
My parents are so disappointed in me, they worry all the time. They have made my being here possible, so how can I turn from them? What do I owe to my parents?
The trouble with the family is that children grow out of childhood, but parents never grow out of their parenthood. Man has not yet learned that parenthood is not something that you have to cling to forever. When the child is a grown-up person your parenthood is finished. The child needed it, he was helpless. He needed the mother, the father, their protection. But, when the child can stand on his own, the parents have to learn how to withdraw from the life of the child. And because parents never withdraw from the life of the child they remain a constant anxiety to themselves and to the children. They destroy, they create guilt; they don’t help beyond a certain limit.
To be a parent is a great art. To give birth to children is nothing, any animal can do it. It is a natural biological instinctive process. To give birth to a child is nothing great, it is nothing special; it is very ordinary. But to be a parent is something extraordinary, very few people are really capable of being parents.
The criterion is that real parents will give freedom. They will not impose themselves upon the child, they will not encroach upon his space. From the very beginning their effort will be to help the child to be himself or to be herself. They are to support, they are to strengthen, they are to nourish, but not to impose their ideas, not to give the shoulds and should-nots. They are not to create slaves.
But that’s what parents all over the world go on doing: their whole effort is to fulfill their ambitions through the child. Of course nobody has ever been able to fulfill his ambitions, so every parent is in turmoil. He knows death is coming closer every day, he can feel death is growing bigger and bigger and life is shrinking, and his ambitions are still unfulfilled, his desires are still not realized. He knows that he has been a failure. He is perfectly aware that he will die with empty hands – he will go just the way he had come, with empty hands.
Now his whole effort is how to implant his ambitions into the child. He will be gone, but the child will live according to him. What he has not been able to do, the child will be able to do. At least through the child he will fulfill certain dreams.
It is not going to happen. All that is going to happen is the child will remain as unfulfilled as the parent, will go on doing the same to his children. This goes on and on from one generation to another generation. We go on giving our diseases, we go on infecting children with our ideas that have not proved valid in our own lives.
Somebody has lived as a Christian, and his life shows that no bliss has happened through it. Somebody has lived like a Hindu and you can see that his life is a hell. But still they want their children to be Hindus or Christians or Mohammedans. How unconscious man is.
I have heard…

A very sad, mournful man visited a doctor in London. Seating himself in a chair in the waiting room and glumly ignoring the other patients he awaited his turn. Finally the doctor motioned him into the inner office where after a careful examination the man appeared even more serious, sad and miserable than ever.
“There’s nothing really the matter with you,” explained the doctor, “you are merely depressed. What you need is to forget your work and your worries. Go out and see a Charlie Chaplin movie and have a good laugh.”
A sad look spread over the little man’s face. “But I am Charlie Chaplin!” he said.

It is a very strange world. You don’t know people’s real lives, all that you know is their masks. You see them in the churches, you see them in the clubs, in the hotels, in the dancing halls, and it seems everybody is rejoicing, everybody is living a heavenly life – except you of course because you know how miserable you are within. And the same is the case with everybody else. They are all wearing masks, deceiving everybody, but how can you deceive yourself? You know that the mask is not your original face.
But the parents go on pretending before their children, go on deceiving their own children. They are not even authentic with their own children. They will not confess that their life has been a failure; on the contrary, they will pretend that they have been very successful. And they would also like the children to live in the same way as they have lived.
You ask, “My parents are so disappointed in me…” Don’t be worried at all – all parents are disappointed in their children! And I say all, without any exception. Even the parents of Gautam the Buddha were very disappointed in him, the parents of Jesus Christ were very disappointed in him, obviously! They had lived a certain kind of life – they were orthodox Jews – and this son, this Jesus, was going against many traditional ideas, conventions. Jesus’ father, Joseph, must have hoped that now he is growing old, the son will help him in his carpentry, in his work, in his shop – and the stupid son started talking about the kingdom of God! Do you think he was very happy in his old age?

Gautam Buddha’s father was very old and he had only one son, and he was born to him when he was very old. His whole life he had waited and prayed and worshipped and did all kinds of religious rituals so that he could have a son, because who is going to look after his great kingdom? And then one day the son disappeared from the palace. Do you think he was very happy? He was so angry, violently angry, he would have killed Gautam Buddha if he had found him! His police, his detectives were searching all over the kingdom. “Where is he hiding? Bring him to me!”
And Buddha knew it, that he would be caught by his father’s agents, so the first thing he did was he left the boundary of his father’s kingdom, escaped into another kingdom, and for twelve years nothing was heard about him.
When he became enlightened he came back home to share his joy, to say to the father, “I have arrived home,” “I have realized,” “I have known the truth – and this is the way.”
But the father was so angry, he was trembling and shaking – he was old, very old. He shouted at Buddha and he said, “You are a disgrace to me!” He saw Buddha – he was standing there in a beggar’s robe with a begging bowl – and he said, “How dare you stand before me like a beggar? You are the son of an emperor and in our family there has never been a beggar. My father was an emperor, his father was too, and for centuries we have been emperors! You have disgraced the whole heritage!”
Buddha listened for half an hour, he didn’t say a single word. When the father ran out of gas, cooled down a little – tears were coming out of his eyes, tears of anger, frustration. Then Buddha said, “I ask for only one favor. Please wipe your tears and look at me; I am not the same person who has left the home, I am totally transformed. But your eyes are so full of tears you cannot see. And you are still talking to somebody who is no more. He has died.”
This triggered another rage and the father said, “You are trying to teach me? Do you think I am a fool? Can’t I recognize my own son? My blood is running in your veins – and I cannot recognize you?”
Buddha said, “Please don’t misunderstand me. The body certainly belongs to you, but not my consciousness. And my consciousness is my reality, not my body. You are right that your father was an emperor and his father too, but as far as I know about myself I was a beggar in my past life and I was a beggar in a previous life too because I have been searching for truth. My body has come through you, but you have been just like a passage. You have not created me, you have been a medium, and my consciousness has nothing to do with your consciousness. What I am saying is that now I have come home with a new consciousness, I have gone through a rebirth. Just look at me, look at my joy!”
The father looked at his son, not believing what he was saying. But one thing was certainly there: that he was so angry, but his son had not reacted at all. That was absolutely new – he knew his son. If he was just the old person he would have become as angry as the father or even more because he was young and his blood was hotter than the father’s. But he was not angry at all, there was absolute peace on his face, a great silence. He was undisturbed, undistracted by the father’s anger. The father had abused him, but it seemed not to have affected him at all.
He wiped his tears from his old eyes; looked again, saw the new grace…

Your parents will be disappointed in you because they must have been trying to fulfill some expectations through you. Now you have become a sannyasin, all their expectations have fallen to the ground. Naturally they are disappointed, but don’t become guilty because of it, otherwise they will destroy your joy, your silence, your growth. Remain undisturbed, unworried. Don’t feel any guilt. Your life is yours and you have to live according to your own light.
When you have arrived at the source of joy, your inner bliss, go to them to share. They will be angry – wait because anger is not anything permanent, it comes like a cloud and passes. Wait! Go there, be with them, but only when you are certain that you can still remain cool, only when you know that nothing will create any reaction in you, only when you know that you will be able to respond with love even though they are angry. And that will be the only way to help them.
You say, “…they worry all the time.” That is their business! And don’t think that if you had followed their ideas they would not have worried. They would have still worried, that is their conditioning. Their parents must have worried and their parents’ parents must have worried, that is their heritage. And you have disappointed them because you are no longer worrying. You are going astray! They are miserable; their parents have been miserable, and so on, and so forth up to Adam and Eve. And you are going astray! Hence the great worry.
But if you become worried you miss an opportunity, and then they have dragged you back again into the same mire. They will feel good, they will rejoice that you have come back to the old traditional, conventional way, but that is not going to help you or them.
If you remain being independent, if you attain the fragrance of freedom, if you become more meditative – and that’s why you are here: to become more meditative, to be more silent, more loving, more blissful – then one day you can share your bliss. To share, first you have to have it, you can share only that which you have already got.
Right now you can also worry, but two persons worrying simply multiplies worries. They don’t help each other.
You say, “…they worry all the time.” It must have been their conditioning. It is the conditioning of everybody in the world.

A rabbi was the guest of a family. The man of the house, impressed by the honor, warned his children to behave seriously at the dinner table because the great rabbi was coming. But during the course of the meal they laughed at something and he ordered them from the table.
The rabbi then arose and prepared to leave.
“Anything wrong?” asked the concerned father.
“Well,” said the rabbi, “I laughed too!”

Don’t be worried about their seriousness, about their worrying about you. They are trying unconsciously to make you feel guilty. Don’t let them succeed because if they succeed they will destroy you and they will also destroy an opportunity for them which would have become possible through you.
You say, “They have made my being here possible…” Be thankful for that, but there is no need to feel guilty. “…so how can I turn from them?” There is no need to turn from them, but there is no need to follow them either. Go on loving them. When you meditate, after each meditation pray to existence that “Something of my meditativeness should reach my parents.” Be prayerful for them, be loving to them, but don’t follow them. That won’t help you or them.
You say, “What do I owe to my parents?” You owe this: that you have to be yourself. You owe this: that you have to be blissful, that you have to be ecstatic, that you have to become a celebration unto yourself, that you have to learn to laugh and rejoice. This is what you owe to them: you owe to them enlightenment.
Become enlightened like Gautam the Buddha and then go to your parents to share your joy. Right now what can you do? Right now nothing is possible. Right now you can only pray.
So I am not saying turn away from them. I am saying don’t follow them, and this is the only way you can be of some help to them. They have helped you physically, you have to help them spiritually. That will be the only way to repay them.

The third question:
Osho,
Why is it I feel fully alive only when I am in love? I tell myself that I should be able to spark myself without the other, but so far no luck. Is this some stupid “Waiting for Godot” game I am playing with myself? When the last love affair ended I swore to myself I was not going to let the same old deadening process happen, but here I am again feeling half alive, waiting for him to come.
One remains in need of the other to that point, up to that experience, when one enters one’s own innermost core. Unless one knows oneself, one remains in need of the other. But the need for the other is very paradoxical, its nature is paradoxical.
When you are alone you feel lonely, you feel the other is missed, your life seems to be only half. It loses joy, it loses flow, flowering; it remains undernourished. If you are with the other, then a new problem arises because the other starts encroaching on your space. He starts making conditions upon you, he starts demanding things from you, he starts destroying your freedom – and that hurts.
So when you are with somebody, only for a few days when the honeymoon is still there… And the more intelligent you are, the smaller will be the honeymoon, remember. Only for utterly stupid people can it be a long affair, for insensitive people it can be a lifelong thing. But if you are intelligent, sensitive, soon you will realize what you have done. The other is destroying your freedom, and suddenly you become aware that you need your freedom because freedom is of immense value. And you decide never to bother with the other.
Again when you are alone you are free, but something is missing because your aloneness is not true aloneness; it is only loneliness, it is a negative state. You forget all about freedom. Free you are, but what to do with this freedom? Love is not there, and both are essential needs.
Up to now humanity has lived in such an insane way that you can fulfill only one need: either you can be free, but then you have to drop the idea of love… That’s what the monks and nuns of all the religions have been doing: drop the idea of love, you are free. There is nobody to hinder you, there is nobody to interfere with you, nobody to make any demands, nobody to possess you. But then life becomes cold, almost dead.
You can go to any monastery and look at the monks and the nuns, their life is ugly. It stinks of death, it is not fragrant with life. There is no dance, no joy, no song. All songs have disappeared. All joy is dead. They are paralyzed – how can they dance? They are crippled – how can they dance? There is nothing to dance about. Their energies are stuck, they are no longer flowing. For the flow the other is needed, without the other there is no flow.
The majority of humanity has decided for love and dropped the idea of freedom. Then people are living like slaves. Man has reduced the woman into a thing, a commodity, and of course the woman has done the same in her own subtle way: she has made all the husbands henpecked.
I have heard…

In New York a few henpecked husbands joined hands together. They made a club to protest, to fight – the Men’s Liberation Movement, or something like that! And of course they chose one of the most henpecked husbands for the president of the club.
The first meeting happened, but the president never turned up. They were all worried. They all rushed to his home and they asked him, “What is the matter? Have you forgotten?”
He said, “No, but my wife won’t allow me. She says, ‘If you go out, I will never allow you in!’ And that much risk I cannot take.”

I have heard that on the doors of paradise there are two signs – there are two doors in fact. On one sign is written: “Those who are henpecked should stand here.” This is the door for them. The other door is for those few rare human beings who are not henpecked. St. Peter has been waiting and waiting that some day somebody will come who will stand by the other door which is not meant for the henpecked ones, but nobody ever stood by that gate.
One day St. Peter was surprised: a very small, thin, weak man came and stood there. Peter was puzzled, amazed. He asked the man, “Can you read?”
He said, “Yes, I can read – I am a PhD, a professor of philosophy!”
Then Peter said, “This door is only meant for those who are not henpecked husbands. Why are you standing here when the whole queue is standing at the other door?”
He said, “What can I do? My wife has told me to stand here! And even if God says to me…I cannot leave this place unless my wife allows!”

Man has reduced woman into a slave and the woman has reduced man into a slave. Of course both hate the slavery, both resist it. They are constantly fighting, any small excuse and the fight starts.
But the real fight is somewhere else deep down, the real fight is that they are asking for freedom. They cannot say it so clearly, they may have forgotten completely. For thousands of years this is the way people have lived. They have seen that their father and their mother have lived in the same way, they have seen that their grandparents have lived in the same way. This is the way people live – they have accepted it. Their freedom is destroyed.
It is as if we are trying to fly in the sky with one wing. A few people have the wing of love and a few people have the wing of freedom – both are incapable of flying. Both wings are needed.
You say, “Why is it I feel fully alive only when I am in love?” It is perfectly natural, there is nothing wrong in it. It is how it should be. Love is a natural need, it is like food. If you are hungry, of course you will feel a deep unease. Without love your soul is hungry, love is soul nourishment. Just as the body needs food, water, air, the soul needs love. But the soul also needs freedom, and it is one of the strangest things that we have not accepted this fact yet.
If you love there is no need to destroy your freedom. They can both exist together, there is no antagonism between them. It is because of our foolishness that we have created the antagonism. Hence the monks think the worldly people are fools, and the worldly people deep down know that the monks are fools – they are missing all the joys of life.

A great priest was asked, “What is love?”
The priest said, “A word made up of two vowels, two consonants, and two fools!”

That is their condemnation of love – because all the religions have condemned love, they have praised freedom very much. In India we call the ultimate experience moksha. Moksha means absolute freedom.
You say, “I tell myself that I should be able to spark myself without the other, but so far no luck.” It will remain so. It will not change. Rather you should change your conditioning about love and freedom. Love the person, but give the person total freedom. Love the person, but from the very beginning make it clear that you are not selling your freedom.
If you cannot make it happen in this commune, here with me, you cannot make it happen anywhere else. This is the beginning of a new humanity. Of course it is only a seed now, but soon you will see it will grow into a vast tree. But we are experimenting upon many things. One of the dimensions of our experiment is to make love and freedom possible together, their coexistence together. Love a person but don’t possess, and don’t be possessed. Insist on freedom and don’t lose love. There is no need. There is no natural enmity between freedom and love, it is a created enmity. Of course for centuries it has been so, so you have become accustomed to it, it has become a conditioned thing.

An old farmer down South could barely speak above a whisper. Leaning on a fence by the side of a country road he was watching a dozen razorbacks in a patch of woodland. Every few minutes the hogs would scramble through a hole in the fence, tear across the road to another patch of woodland, and immediately afterward scurry back again.
“What’s the matter with them hogs anyway?” a passing stranger asked.
“There ain’t nothing the matter with them,” the old farmer whispered hoarsely. “Them hogs belongs to me and before I lost my voice I used to call them to their feed. After I lost my voice I used to tap on this fence rail with my stick at feeding time.”
He paused and shook his head gravely. “And now,” he added, “them cussed woodpeckers up in them trees has got them poor hogs plumb crazy!”

Just a conditioning! Now those woodpeckers are driving them hogs plumb crazy because when they do the knocking they rush, thinking that it is food time.
That’s what is happening to humanity.

One of the disciples of Pavlov, the founder of the conditioned reflex – the discoverer of the theory of the conditioned reflex – was trying an experiment on the same lines. He bought a puppy and decided to condition him to stand up and bark for his food. He held the pup’s food just out of reach, barked a few times, then set it on the floor before him. The idea was that the pup would associate standing up and barking with getting his food and learn to do so when hungry.
This went on for about a week, but the little dog failed to learn. After another week the man gave up the experiment and simply put the food down before the dog, but the pup refused to eat it. He was waiting for his master to stand and bark! Now he had become conditioned.

It is only a conditioning, it can be dropped. You just need a little meditativeness. Meditation simply means the process of unconditioning the mind. Whatsoever the society has done has to be undone. When you are unconditioned you will be able to see the beauty of love and freedom together, they are two aspects of the same coin. If you really love the person you will give him or her absolute freedom – that’s a gift of love. And when there is freedom, love responds tremendously. When you give freedom to somebody you have given the greatest gift, and love comes rushing toward you.
You ask me, “Is this some stupid ‘Waiting for Godot’ game I am playing with myself?” No. “When the last love affair ended, I swore to myself I was not going to let the same old deadening process happen, but here I am again feeling half alive, waiting for him to come.”
But just by swearing, just by deciding, you cannot change yourself. You have to understand. Love is a basic need, as basic as freedom, so both have to be fulfilled. And a man who is full of love and free is the most beautiful phenomenon in the world. And when two persons of such beauty meet, their relationship is not a relationship at all. It is a relating. It is a constant, riverlike flow. It is continuously growing toward greater heights.
The ultimate height of love and freedom is the experience of God. In God you will find both: tremendous love – absolute love – and absolute freedom.

The fourth question:
Osho,
Why are you not getting bored while you are telling the same stories and the same jokes?
Divakar Bharti,
The first thing to be understood is that Divakar Bharti is an Indian, and Indians are absolutely unable to understand jokes! They don’t have any jokes in India. I have not come across a single Indian joke. Indians are serious people – spiritual people, religious people. They only talk of great things: God, heaven, hell, the theory of karma and rebirth.
When you tell a joke to an Indian he feels offended…you see? He feels offended, insulted! Look at his face, he feels embarrassed. Talk about something esoteric – bullshit him! – and then he is perfectly happy. He never laughs, he cannot; laughter is beyond him. He has forgotten laughter.
That’s why the question has arisen in you. Otherwise each joke, in a different context, is different. The joke in itself may be an old one – and in fact, there are no new jokes in the world. The proverb that there is nothing new under the sun may not be right about other things, but about jokes it is absolutely right. If Adam and Eve come back to the earth they will recognize only the jokes and nothing else. The same jokes, but the context goes on changing, and in a different context the same joke has a different meaning.
But because you cannot understand the jokes you must be feeling bored.
G. C. Lichtenberg has a profound statement. He says: A person reveals his character by nothing so clearly as the joke he resents.
I have heard…

It is said: The gravest fish is an oyster, the gravest bird is an owl, the gravest beast is a donkey, and the gravest man is an Indian fool!

There are fools of all kinds, they come in all shapes and sizes, but the Indian is the best. Each race reacts, responds differently to jokes.
If you tell a German a joke, he laughs once, just to be polite. If you tell the same joke to a Frenchman, he also laughs once because he understands immediately. If you tell the same joke to an Englishman he laughs twice: first to be polite, and second in the middle of the night when he gets it. If you tell the same joke to an American he laughs, but not loudly, and he says, “I have heard it before!” If you tell the same joke to a Jew, instead of laughing he says, “It is an old joke, and what is more, you are telling it all wrong!”
I don’t feel bored because I cannot feel bored – it is simply impossible for me. I have completely forgotten how to feel bored. You can go on telling me the same joke again and again and I will always find some new meaning, some new nuance, some new color, some new dimension to it, but I cannot feel bored because I am no more. To feel bored you need the ego, it is the ego that feels bored. When the ego is no longer there it is impossible to feel bored.

A simple-minded old woman had a cow that fell sick. In her distress she called the rabbi to pray for its recovery.
To comfort the poor woman, the rabbi walked around the cow three times intoning, “If she dies, she dies, but if she lives, she lives.” Happily the cow recovered.
Some time later the rabbi became ill and the woman, recalling how he had cured her cow, visited him. She walked around his bed three times, solemnly repeating, “If he dies, he dies, but if he lives, he lives.” Where upon the rabbi burst out into sidesplitting laughter that soon led to his recovery.

I cannot feel bored – I am no longer there. And I don’t remember what I have said to you yesterday, so how can I tell the same joke again? It is never the same, it cannot be. I never remember what has been said by me, and I have been telling people thousands of things for the last twenty-five years. I never read any of my books. I never listen to any of my lectures – why should I feel bored?
But you are in the wrong place here. This is not a place for serious people like you! You should find some old Hindu monastery.

The little red man woke up, opened up his little red curtains and looked out at the little red sunrise. He showered in his little red bathroom, put on his little red clothes and left his little red house. Getting into his little red car, he drove through the little red town to his little red office block. There he went up in the little red elevator to the tenth floor, walked along the little red corridor and entered his little red office. He sat down at his little red desk and read his little red newspaper. Deciding that his life was too boring to live any more, he took out a little red knife and slashed his little red wrists.
Ten minutes later his little red secretary entered his little red office and found her little red boss covered in little red blood. She grabbed the little red telephone and phoned the little red hospital. Soon a little red ambulance arrived. The little red attendants rushed into the little red office, put the little red man on a little red stretcher and raced across the little red town to the little red hospital. Quickly they carried the little red man into the little red operating theater and placed him on a little red table.
One minute later the door to the little red operating theater opened and in walked a little green man. “Sorry!” he said. “I seem to have walked into the wrong joke!”

This is not a place for you – a little red world and you are a green man here! You have walked into the wrong joke – walk out!

The last question:
Osho,
How do you always find new names to give to your sannyasins?
It is a secret!

Two women were looking in the new arrivals section in a bookshop. One woman was very interested in a book. The title of the book was, How to Torture Your Husband. She said to the other woman, “Look at this book! I am going to purchase it. Are you also interested in it?”
“No, the other woman said, “I have my own system!”

I also have my own system, but I cannot tell you. Certainly I have given more names than anybody may have ever given in the whole history – there are almost two hundred thousand sannyasins in the world! But my system is such that I can give names to the whole humanity.

A Red Indian boy was asking his father, “Father, how do you give names to new children? Your name is Black Horse, my mother’s name is Buffalo, my uncle’s name is White Cloud – how do you manage to find out what is the true name for the new arrival, the new child?”
The father said, “It is not difficult – we have a system. Whenever a child is born, the eldest member of the family – the grandfather, the grandmother or the father – goes out of the house, and whatsoever he sees first… For example when my grandfather went out he saw a black horse, that’s how I was named Black Horse. But why are you asking Two Dogs Fucking?”

That was his name! I have my own system, but I cannot tell you.
Just the other night I gave sannyas to a beautiful woman, her name is Diotima. I called her Dhyan Diotima. Diotima is a mythological name. In Greek mythology Diotima is the priestess of love or goddess of love. But it can be derived from another root also, diota. Diota means a jar with a neck and two handles.
So I told the woman, “This is your situation right now: a jar with a neck and two handles. That’s what a woman is all about! But through meditation you can become a priestess of love. That transformation is possible. Otherwise you will remain just a jar with a neck and two handles!”
It is not very difficult, and the more names I have given the easier it has become because I have become more proficient. I can find some way, either from the root of the word – and there are different roots; even in one language a word means many things. Sometimes a word has different roots in different languages. In one language it means one thing, in another language it means another thing. And it is very easily possible to play with words, names are nothing but a game.
I give you a new name only to make you feel that names are not important. Your old name can simply disappear because it was only a label, it can be changed. You are not the name. To insist on this fact, to emphasize this fact upon your consciousness, that the name is not your reality…
Every child comes into the world without a name, but we have to give a name, it has some utility. It is absolutely false, but in a vast world with millions of people it will be difficult to manage if nobody has a name, it will become almost impossible to manage. Some names are needed; they are false, but they work, they have a utility. They have no reality, but utility certainly they have.
But ordinarily you grow with your name, in fact, you become conscious only later on. Your name is deeper than your consciousness, hence there arises an identity with the name. You start feeling, “This is my name, this is me.”
When you become a sannyasin I want to destroy that identity because this is the beginning of destruction of all identities. First I destroy the identity with the name, then I will destroy the identity with the body, then the identity with the mind, then the identity with the heart. When all these identities have been destroyed you will be able to know who you are: the unidentified, the nameless, the formless, the indefinable. And that is only a pure witness in you. Nothing can be said about it, no word is adequate to explain it.
Hence, I change the name to give you a break, to give you the idea that your name is just a given thing. Your old name disappears, a new name becomes your reality, but now you will not get so identified because now you are more mature. The first name was given when you were a small child, you were not aware. Now you are a little bit aware. And by becoming a sannyasin you are becoming committed to more and more awareness, to a life of witnessing in which all identities have to be dropped.
A man is absolutely free only when there is no identity left. You are neither a Christian nor a Hindu nor a Mohammedan, you are neither an Indian nor a Japanese nor a German, you are neither a man nor a woman. You are just a pure consciousness, and that consciousness is eternal. The Upanishads are talking about that consciousness.
The only thing to be learned in the communion with the master is that witness, that watcher, that seer, that watcher on the hills who is beyond everything. Everything falls short to that which is transcendental. To know that transcendental reality of you, I start by changing your name. That is just taking one brick out of your false edifice. And then if you allow me to take one brick, I will go on taking other bricks. I change your clothes just to give you a discontinuity with the past.
You have to become discontinuous to the past. Unless you die to the past you cannot be reborn, you cannot be here-now. The past has to be completely dropped and forgotten – it was a dream, nothing more – and out of the past arises the future. If the past is dropped, the future disappears. Then the only reality is now and here. And to be here and now, absolutely here and now, is to know all that is worth knowing, is to really live an authentic, sincere life, a life full of truth and bliss and godliness.
Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
Can an enlightened person be wrong? This refers to what you told us about J. Krishnamurti, who keeps on saying that one does not need a master, which is actually not right. Please comment.
An enlightened person can never be wrong. Neither is J. Krishnamurti wrong, but he never considers the situation that you are in. He considers only the space in which he is, and that freedom is part of enlightenment.
The enlightened person has reached the highest peak of consciousness, his abode is on Everest. Now it is his freedom to speak according to the peak, the sunlit peak where he is, or to consider the people who are still in the dark valley, who know nothing about the light, for whom the peak of the Everest is only a dream, only a perhaps. This is the freedom of the enlightened person. Krishnamurti speaks in terms of where he is.
I speak in terms of where you are, I consider you because if I am speaking to you, you have to be taken into consideration. I have to lead you toward the highest peak, but the journey will begin in the dark valley, in your unconsciousness. If I talk about my experience, absolutely inconsiderate of you, I am right but I am not useful to you.
An enlightened person is never wrong, but he can be useful or he can be useless.
J. Krishnamurti is useless! He is perfectly right, about that there is no question because I know the peak and what he is saying is certainly true – from the vision of the peak. Those who have arrived, for them the journey becomes almost a dream phenomenon. For those who have not arrived the journey is real, the goal is just a dream. They are living in two different worlds. When you are talking to a madman you have to consider him, if you don’t consider him you cannot help him.

Once a madman was brought to me. He had this crazy idea that one afternoon when he was sleeping, a fly had entered his mouth. And because he used to sleep with his mouth open, nobody could deny the possibility. Since then he was very much disturbed because the fly was roaming inside him, jumping inside him, moving in his belly, going to his bladder, circulating in his bloodstream, sometimes in his head, sometimes in his feet. And of course he could not do anything because he was continuously occupied, obsessed with the fly.
He was taken to the psychoanalysts and they said, “This is just in your mind, there is no fly. No fly can move in your bloodstream, there is no possibility. Even if a fly has entered, it must have died. And now six months have passed, it cannot be alive inside you.”
He listened, but he could not believe it because his experience was far more solid. He was taken to the doctors and everybody examined him and they did everything, but finally they would say, “It is just a mental thing. You are imagining.” He would listen to what they were saying, but he could not trust because his experience was far more certain than their words.
His family brought him to me as a last resort. The man was looking very tired because he was being taken to one person, then to another, then all kinds of physicians: allopaths and homeopaths and naturopaths; and he was really tired. In the first place the fly was tiring him, and now all these “pathies,” medicines. Everybody was insulting him – that was his feeling. They were saying that he was just imagining. Is he a fool or is he mad, that he will imagine such a thing? They were all humiliating him – that was his feeling.
I looked at the man and I said, “It is so clear that the fly is inside!”
For a moment he was puzzled. He could not believe me because nobody had said that to him – because nobody had considered him. And they all were right and I was wrong – there was no fly, but the madman has to be considered.
And I said, “All those fools are just wasting your time, you should have come here first. It is such a simple thing to bring the fly out, there is no need to bother. Medicines won’t help – you are not ill. Psychoanalysis will not help – you are not crazy.”
And immediately he was a changed man. He looked at his wife and said, “Now what do you say? This is the right man,” he said, “who really knows. And all those fools were trying to convince me that there is no fly. It is there!”
I said to him, “It is simple – we will take it out. Lie down.”
I covered him with a blanket and told him to keep his eyes closed and said, “I will do some mantra, some magic, and we will bring the fly out. You just keep quiet so that the fly sits somewhere. Otherwise the fly is continuously running – where to catch it?”
He said, “That looks logical. I will keep absolutely still!”
And I said, “Don’t open your eyes. Just remain silent, breathe slowly, so the fly settles somewhere, so we can catch hold of it!”
Then I rushed into the house to find a fly. It was a little bit difficult because I was trying that for the first time, but finally I succeeded – I could get a fly in a bottle. And I came to the man, I moved my hand on his body, and I asked him, “Where is the fly?”
And he said, “In the belly.”
And I touched the belly and I said, “Of course it is there!” And I convinced him that I perfectly believed in him and then I uncovered his blanket and showed him the fly.
And he said to the wife, “Now see! Give this bottle to me, I will go to all those fools and take all the fees that they have taken from me. I have wasted thousands of rupees, and all that they did was they told me I am mad. And now I don’t feel the fly anywhere because it is in the bottle!”
He took the bottle and he went to the doctors.
One of the doctors who knew me, came to see me. He said, “How did you manage? Six months a fly can live in the body? And that man has taken his fee back from me because he was making such a fuss that I said, ‘Better give it back to him!’ And he proved that he was right!”
I said, “It is not the point who is right.”

Gautam the Buddha defines truth as that which works. This is the most ancient pragmatic definition of truth: that which works. All the devices are truth in this sense: they work. They are only devices. The Buddha’s work is upaya. Upaya exactly means device.
Meditation is an upaya, a device. It simply helps you to get rid of that which you have not got in the first place: the fly, the ego, the misery, the anguish. It helps you to get free of it, but in fact it is not there. But it is not to be told…
Krishnamurti has been doing that. He has been telling crazy people that the fly does not exist and you don’t need any doctor. I say to you the fly exists and you need the doctor. Because just telling you that the fly does not exist is not going to help you at all.
For thousands of years you have been told the ego does not exist. Has it helped you in any way? There have been people who have said, in this country particularly, that the whole world is illusory, maya, it does not exist. But has it helped India in any way? The true test is there: whether it has helped, whether it has made people more authentic, more real. It has not helped at all. It has made people more deeply cunning, split, schizophrenic; it has made them hypocrites.
All the religions have done this because they don’t consider you. And you are far more important than the ultimate truth because the ultimate truth has nothing to do with you right now. You are living in a dreamworld, some device is needed which can help you to come out of it. The moment you are out of it, you will know it was a dream – but a person who is dreaming, to tell him that it is all dream is meaningless.
Have you not observed in your dreams that when you are dreaming it looks real? And every morning you have found that it was unreal. But again in the night you forget all your understanding of the day – again the dream becomes real. It has been happening again and again, every night the dream becomes real, every morning you know it is false, but that knowing does not help. In the dream one can even dream that “This is a dream.”
And that’s what has happened in India: people are living in maya, deeply in it, and still saying, “This is all maya.” And this talk too is part of their dream, it does not destroy the dream. In fact it makes the dream more rooted in them because now there is no need to get rid of it because it is a dream! So why get rid of it? It does not matter.
In a subtle way all the religions have done this, they have talked from the highest peak to the people for whom that peak does not exist yet. The people are living in darkness, and you go on telling them that darkness has no existence. It is true – darkness has no existence, it is only the absence of light – but just by saying to people that darkness has no existence is not going to bring light in.
That’s what Krishnamurti is doing. It has been done by many people, Nagarjuna did it – Krishnamurti is not new, not at least in the East. Nagarjuna did it. He said, “Everything is false. The world is false, the ego is false, nothing exists. Because nothing exists you are already free. There is no need for any meditation, there is no need for any master. There is no need to find out any device, strategy, technique because in the first place there is no problem. Why go on looking for solutions? Those solutions will create more problems, they are not going to help.”
Nagarjuna did it; before Nagarjuna, Mahakashyap did it, and it has been a long tradition. Zen people have been saying the same thing for centuries. Krishnamurti never uses the word zen, but whatsoever he is saying is nothing but Zen – simple Zen.
Zen says no effort is needed, nothing has to be done. When nothing has to be done, what is the need of a master? – because the master will tell you to do something. Nothing has to be done. What is the need of the scriptures? – because the scriptures will tell you to do something, to know something. Nothing has to be done. Nothing has to be known. You are already there where you are trying to reach.
And I know this is true, but to talk about this ultimate truth to people who are living in tremendous darkness is futile.
No enlightened person can ever be wrong, but only few enlightened persons have been of help. The majority of enlightened people have been of no help at all, for the simple reason that they never considered the other.
In fact, George Gurdjieff used to say, “Don’t consider the other.” It was one of his basic teachings: “Don’t consider the other. Just say what is absolutely true.” But the absolute truth is truth only when experienced, people are living in relative truth.
My approach is different from Krishnamurti’s. I know that one day you will come to that point where nothing is needed – no master, no teaching, no scripture – but right now the scripture can be of help, the methods can be of help, and certainly a living master can be of immense help.
The function of the master is to give you that which you already have and to take away that which you don’t have at all.

The second question:
Osho,
Jesus, Buddha, Krishna, etc. certainly were enlightened masters. But Buddhism, Hinduism, Christianity and whatsoever has developed from them, have not much to do with the ideas of the masters. Osho, I am sure you are an enlightened master too, but what can we do, or what at all is possible to do, to prevent Oshoism?
Hermann, nothing can be done at all, and don’t waste your time. Whatsoever has happened was natural. Christianity was bound to happen, it was inevitable. When a man like Christ walks on the earth he will leave footprints on the sands of time, and people will worship those footprints. Christianity is nothing but worship of the footprints, it leads you nowhere. But it is bound to happen.
It is as inevitable as the birth of a child bringing death in; you cannot avoid death. If the child is born, death is going to happen. And of course we have known that so many people were born before and so many people have died, so when your child is born you may try to do something so he need not die. That is impossible – birth brings death.
When a living master is there, sooner or later the master will be gone and there will be a dead teaching left. That dead teaching becomes Christianity, Hinduism, Buddhism; it will become Oshoism too. Nothing can be done about it – in fact, your very concern is the beginning of it, even the fear. That means Christianity has not happened yet, but the anti-Christian has arrived.
I am alive! Oshoism will happen when I am gone, but to you it has already happened and you are trying to find ways to prevent it. And why should you bother? Who are you to decide for others? You are not a sannyasin, you are not part of my commune, you have no communion with me, you have not tasted of the wine that is available here – and you are worried about others, that these people will worship the bottles when the wine is gone! [At this point a cuckoo bursts loudly into song…]
Look! It always happens exactly at the time – even the birds agree with me. The bird was saying, “Hermann, you are a fool!” Drink right now! Who are you to bother about the future? And why should you prevent people from Oshoism? If they want it, then that is their business. Why you should take the responsibility? Why should you prevent people from their freedom? If they want to worship something dead they are entitled to it!
But to me you are far more foolish than those people. At least they will be worshipping a bottle – and you are missing the wine! Drink the wine and leave the bottle. If people want to play with the bottle they will play, they are collectors. There are collectors who collect bottles of wine, and sometimes it helps too.
I have heard one case…

In the First World War two brothers separated. The father divided all his property because he was getting old and he was worried about the younger son – because he was a drunkard and he will destroy the whole thing, and even the eldest son will suffer because of the younger. So he divided them equally.
And a miracle happened. In the First World War the value of money went so low – as it always does in wartime, things become very costly and money loses its purchasing capacity. The drunkard had a habit of collecting bottles. He finished all the money, he drank and he enjoyed. And the other son was so miserly that he was clinging to the money that he had got, but money was going down every day.
And the miracle was this: a moment came when the money became almost useless, almost valueless, and the younger son sold all his bottles and he had more money than the elder brother. He enjoyed the wine and he sold the bottles. And the elder was a fool – he was just clinging to the money.

Life is very mysterious and the ways of God are very strange. God is always for the drunkards! He loves these crazy people.
If you really feel that I am an enlightened person, then what are you doing here? Drink out of my enlightenment! Others are drinking. And I don’t think that you think that I am enlightened because the way you say: “Osho, I am sure you are an enlightened master too…”
You are not sure. When people are not sure, only then they use the word sure. If you are sure, then take the jump in! Then why are you standing on the bank? And while the river is alive, do something so that you can quench your thirst. And leave it to others.
Oshoism is bound to happen – I am not worried about it. It is a natural phenomenon. Don’t become obsessed with it. Christianity has happened, Buddhism has happened, Jainism has happened, Hinduism, Mohammedanism, all kinds of “isms.” They are not unnatural, otherwise they would not have happened.
There are people who can connect themselves only with dead masters – and you seem to be one of those people, you can also connect with dead masters. Now you are so concerned about Jesus, Buddha, Krishna because they are dead. Now a few are Christians – they are concerned with the dead. Now a few are anti-Christians – they are also concerned with the dead.
Bertrand Russell has written a book: Why I Am Not a Christian. Why bother about it? There are people who are writing books why they are Christians and there are people who are writing books why they are not Christians. Both are wasting their time!
Friedrich Nietzsche became so obsessed with anti-Christianity that in the last years of his life, when he went mad, he started signing his name as “Antichrist Friedrich Nietzsche.” Friedrich Nietzsche became secondary, that anti-Christ attitude became more primary. And he was not really anti-Christ, he was only anti-Christian, but when you start moving in a certain direction, if you are logical, you will reach the logical end. This was the logical end. First he started condemning Christianity, and then slowly, slowly he found that Christianity is a byproduct of Christ, so naturally he started condemning Christ, and for everything! Sometimes he would go to such absurd lengths to condemn Christ and he would find such rationalizations, such excuses, that one has to say one thing, that he was really imaginative and really logical.
For example, Jesus at the last moment prays to God on the cross, “Forgive these people my father, because they know not what they are doing.” It is one of the most beautiful utterances, but Friedrich Nietzsche became so obsessed with anti-Christianity that he cannot accept even such a beautiful statement. And if you are not interested in accepting anything as beautiful, if you are bent upon finding something wrong, you can always find it. He found something wrong even in this. He said, “This means Jesus thinks only he knows and everybody else is ignorant.”
Look at his approach. Jesus is praying to God, “Forgive these people. They are crucifying me only because they know not what they are doing.” Friedrich Nietzsche condemns it – even this beautiful statement is condemned. He finds a logical reason that this shows only an egoistic approach: “I know, and all these people are fools, ignorant. They know not, so forgive them.” This asking, praying to God to forgive the people, is an egoistic approach; it is not love, it is ego, according to Friedrich Nietzsche.
Jesus has said, “If somebody slaps you on one cheek, give him the other too.” Now this is one of the greatest statements ever made by anybody, of tremendous beauty, of deep love, of nonviolence – but Friedrich Nietzsche condemns it. He says, “This is humiliating to the other person. This is insulting the other person’s integrity, his humanity. When somebody hits you on one cheek and you give him the other you are showing him, ‘Look how saintly I am, holier-than-thou, and you are just an animal.’ You are insulting him!” Nietzsche says it will be far better to hit him back because that means you have accepted him on equal terms; you are not lowering him. And if you listen to his logic you can find there is something in it.
Logic is a game, it can be played from both the sides. Logic is a prostitute – it can be with anybody, whosoever is ready to pay.
Nietzsche remained concerned against Christianity and against Christ his whole life. Now this is sheer wastage. There are people who are praying to Christ and there are people who are condemning Christ, but both are concerned with the dead person. And if you are concerned, I think praying is far better than condemning because the person who is praying may get something out of it, but the person who is condemning is not going to get anything out of it.
My approach is that if you happen to meet a Jesus, a Buddha, a Krishna, don’t miss the opportunity. And don’t become concerned about others – respect them. They have their own life and they have to decide about it. And millions will always decide to be with a dead master because that is convenient, comfortable. A living master is always uncomfortable, inconvenient.
Just think of yourself being with Jesus when he was alive, there were a thousand and one difficulties…

One day Jesus was a guest in a house and Mary Magdalene came – and she was a prostitute. She started washing Christ’s feet with a very costly perfume, with a very costly oil. Judas could not tolerate it – he was a socialist. He is the real founder of communism in the world; Karl Marx, etcetera, are just offshoots.
He immediately said to Jesus, “This is not right! This perfume, this perfumed oil is so costly that if we sell it we can feed all the poor of this town for at least three days. This is sheer wastage – you should not allow such wastage. A man like you should immediately stop.
“Secondly” – now he is far more religious than Jesus – “a prostitute should not be allowed to touch your feet, it is prohibited. A man like you, a man of God, should not allow a prostitute to touch him.”
Jesus said, “Look at her heart. Thousands of people come to me, but rarely I see such love, such surrender. How can I say to her, ‘Don’t touch me.’ That will be ugly!”
Now to be with this man who is going against the whole tradition of religion is dangerous. To be with this man who is allowing the woman to destroy a precious thing that can feed the poor people…and what does Jesus say? Jesus says, “When I am gone the poor people will still be with you, so there is no hurry, you can feed them later on. While the bridegroom is here, celebrate!”

Now, will you be ready to say yes to Jesus? Immediately your rational mind will say, “This is not right! He is not concerned about the poor people at all. He is not concerned about the tradition of the sages at all. He is very unsocialistic, he does not understand anything of economics, he is not compassionate to the poor.”
Do you think Mother Teresa of Kolkata would have agreed with him? Impossible! She would have said, “This can help many orphans. We can open a school for the poor children or we can purchase medicine for the ill, and what are you doing?”
Do you think Jesus could get a Nobel Prize? I don’t think – impossible. You would rather agree with Judas – he is more rational, more socialist than Jesus.
To be with Buddha would have been difficult for you because to be with Buddha means surrender, total surrender. The ego has to be put aside.
It is very easy to be with dead masters because to be with dead masters is very nourishing to the ego – that you are a follower of Jesus, follower of Buddha, follower of Krishna. But to be with Krishna would have been really impossible – he had sixteen thousand wives! Would you agree with this man? What kind of enlightened man is this Krishna? Sixteen thousand wives! And they were not all married to him – many he had stolen – they were married to other people. How can you agree with this man?
And he persuaded Arjuna to go into war, and the reasons that he gave were, “The soul is eternal, so don’t be bothered. You can kill – the soul is not killed, only the body, and the body is dead anyway. So there is no violence involved because the soul is immortal and the body is mortal. You are only separating the immortal from the mortal, there is nothing wrong in it – just separating the essential from the nonessential.”
Do you think you would have agreed?
That’s why people create Christianity, Buddhism, Hinduism, Mohammedanism – it is easier, very easy because then you can manage the dead master according to your ideas. You can put your ideas in his mouth, you can ignore the ideas that go against you, you can interpret, manipulate, rationalize; you can do thousand and one things because the master is no longer there.
So many people need dead masters, that is their need. And remember one economic law: wherever there is demand there will be supply. Because people need dead masters, that’s why the Pope is needed – a representative of a dead master. The Shankaracharya is needed – a representative of a dead Shankara. Ayatollah Khomeiniac is needed – a representative of a dead Mohammed. People need, that’s why these things happen, and nothing can be done about it.
My concern is not at all about the future. I accept the way things are, they cannot be otherwise. My insistence is while I am here, if you are really interested in transforming your life, then the opportunity is available. Don’t miss it.

The third question:
Osho,
I always feel that I have to ask you a lot of things. I feel a burden inside. But every time I form a question it looks ridiculous and stupid.
It is ridiculous and it is stupid – you are perfectly right in not asking. And even if you ask, do you think I answer? I never answer any question, I simply destroy the question! It is not answering it, it is destroying it. It is hitting the question from all sides. It is a kind of murder: murdering the question, and, if possible, the questioner too! So nothing is left because if the questioner is left he will again ask.
You see here are five thousand people. Many are killed already! They don’t ask, they have understood that I never answer any question. I just play around the question a little bit, and if you are acquainted with me and I know that you will not escape, then I start hitting you. If I think you will escape, then for a few days I behave very politely!
I never answer anything. I am an ancient Jew…

Once a rabbi was asked by a Christian priest, “Rabbi, will you please give me a straight answer to a plain question? Why is it that the Jews always answer a question by asking one?”
The rabbi reflected for a moment, then replied, “Do they?”

The prosecutor was questioning a Jewish witness.
“Do you know the man who has just testified?”
“How should I know him?” said the Jew.
“He said you borrowed five thousand dollars from him. Did you?”
“Why should I borrow money from him?” said the Jew.
Visibly annoyed, the judge interrupted, “Why do you answer every question put to you with another question?”
“Why not?” said the Jew!

In a lawsuit for damages the Jewish lawyer for the plaintiff had long experience with juries. He gave force to his words by all kinds of body movements, waving his arms, hammering with his fists, his face expressing a raging storm of feelings. Finally he sat down, his voice drained, his body exhausted.
The defense counsel arose, who was also a Jew, and began to mimic his opponent. He swung his arms freely in front of the jury, twisting and distorting his face, pointing with fingers, tearing his passion to tatters – without ever uttering a word.
After a few minutes he smoothed his hair and straightened his tie and said quickly to the jury, “Now that I have answered every argument of my learned opponent, let me discuss with you the facts in this case.”

You see my hands go on making all kinds of gestures? That is just an old Jewish tradition!
You ask, “I always feel that I have to ask you a lot of things.” Everybody feels that because the mind is like a tree. Just as on a tree leaves grow, on the mind questions grow. And my effort here is not to prune the leaves because pruning simply makes the foliage thicker. My effort here is to cut the roots, the very roots, so the tree dies.
Everybody comes here with a lot of questions, but whether you ask them or not they are worthless. I answer them just to keep you engaged here, to keep you occupied. And side by side the real work goes on; in meditations, in therapy groups, I have put people to cut your roots. I go on answering so that you feel that your philosophical inquiry is satisfied, and you remain occupied with questions and answers. And I have put my people…meanwhile they are cutting your roots. Sooner or later your roots are gone, then the leaves disappear of their own accord.
When all questions disappear, the answer is found, never before it. The answer is never found by questioning; the answer is found by dropping all questions, questioning as such because the answer is your own experience of silence, joy, godliness. That is the answer. Unless that is found, questions will go on arising.
But it is good that you yourself have started feeling that “Every time I form a question it looks ridiculous and stupid.”
All questions are ridiculous and stupid.

The fourth question:
Osho,
In the Mahabharata, Yudhishthira was asked a question: “What is surprising?” (kim ashcharyam) by a yaksha. If you were in his place, what would be your answer?
The most surprising thing in life is that nobody seems to be surprised! People take life for granted; otherwise everything is a mystery, everything is simply amazing. It is a miracle that a seed becomes a tree, that as the sun rises in the morning the birds start singing. It is a miracle! Each moment you come across miracles and still you don’t look surprised. This is the most surprising thing in life.
My answer would have been that people take life for granted – this is the most surprising thing. Only children don’t take it for granted. That’s why children have beauty, a grace, an innocence. They are always living in wonder, everything brings awe. Collecting pebbles on the seashore or seashells… Watch the children, with what joy they are running, with what joy they are collecting – just colored stones, as if they have found great diamonds; collecting flowers, wild flowers, and look into their eyes; or running after butterflies, watch them. Their whole being, each cell of their body is mystified. And that’s the most important quality that makes life worth living.
The person who loses his quality to be surprised is dead. The moment your surprise is dead, you are dead. The moment your wonder is dead, you are dead. The moment you become incapable of feeling awe, you have become impotent.
To be born with the gift of laughter and a sense that the world is mad is the quality that makes life worth living – not only worth living, but worth dancing, worth celebrating.

An old farmer visited a circus for the first time. He stood before the dromedary’s cage, eyes popping and mouth agape at the strange beast within. The circus properly began and the crowds left for the main show, but still the old man stood before the cage in stunned silence, appraising every detail of the misshapen legs, the cloven hoofs, the pendulous upper lip, and the curiously mounded back of the sleepy-eyed beast.
Fifteen minutes passed. Then the farmer turned away in disgust. “Hell!” he exclaimed. “There ain’t no such animal!”

Rather than feeling surprised people would like to deny: “There ain’t no such animal!” That makes you at ease again, otherwise a restlessness arises in you.

I have heard about a general, a great military general who was posted in Paris. One morning he took his small son to the garden, just for a morning walk. He was very happy that the child was so fascinated by the statue of Napoleon mounted on a horse, a big marble statue. The child said, “Daddy, Napoleon is so beautiful, so great! Can you bring me every day when you come for a morning walk, just to have a look at the great Napoleon?”
The father, being a general, was very happy that the child is also becoming interested in people like Napoleon: “This is a good sign. Sooner or later he will also become a great general!”
After six months he was transferred, and he took his son for the last time to the garden so that he could say good-bye to Napoleon. And the son went there, tears in his eyes, and he said to the father, “I have always wanted to ask one question, but I become so fascinated with the great Napoleon when I come to the garden that I always forgot to ask the question. Now this is the last day and I would like to inquire. Who is this guy, always sitting on top of poor Napoleon?”

I was reminded of this story just a few days ago. In a press conference, Morarji Desai was asked, “If people want you to become the prime minister of India again, will you be ready?”
And he said, “Yes, if people want me to ride on a donkey, even then I will be ready.”

I was reminded about this story. There will be a problem: how will people know? “Who is this guy riding on poor, poor Morarji Desai?” And how will they make a distinction who is who?
That’s why in India, in a marriage procession when the bridegroom goes to the house of the bride, he rides on a horse. A small child asked his father, “Why does the bridegroom always rides on a horse? Why not on a donkey?”
The father said, “You don’t understand. If he rides on the donkey, then how is the bride going to find who is the bridegroom? A donkey riding on a donkey will be very difficult to make distinctions!”
Morarji Desai riding on a donkey! It will be a really great joy to see a donkey riding on a donkey!

If you look at life you will find everywhere immense surprises.

He was fifty and had spent the best years of his life with a woman whose constant criticism had driven him mad. Now, in poor health and with his business on the verge of bankruptcy, he made up his mind. He went to the dining room, fastened his tie over the chandelier, and was about to end it all. At that moment his wife entered the room.
“John!” she cried, shocked at the scene before her. “That is your best tie!”

A young man vacationing in the upper Midwest woods decided to write to his girl, but having no stationery with him, walked to the trading post. The attendant was a young, well-stacked girl with a sensual appeal.
“Do you keep stationery?” he asked.
“Well,” she smiled, “I do until the last few seconds, and then I go wild!”

Just look around!

A soldier disembarked in New York after two long years abroad and was met by his beautiful wife.
Alone at last in their room at the hotel, they were disturbed by the sudden clamor in the corridor and a cry of “Let me in!”
The rattled soldier jumped out of bed and panted, “It must be your husband!”
His distracted mate reassured him. “Don’t be foolish!” she said. “He is thousands of miles away somewhere in Europe!”

One just needs a clear perspective, and each moment you are in for a great surprise.

She was very nearsighted and very pretty, but too vain to wear glasses on her honeymoon and unable to wear contact lenses. When she returned from her honeymoon, her mother immediately got in touch with the oculist. “You must see my daughter at once,” she pleaded. “It is an emergency!”
“There is nothing to be excited about,” he reassured her. “She is nearsighted, that’s all.”
“That’s all?” repeated the mother. “Why, this young man she has got with her is not the same one she went on her honeymoon with!”

The only thing that is most surprising is that you don’t look surprised. And this is how your life becomes a life of boredom, a life of sadness.
Bring your surprising quality back as you had it in your childhood. Again look with those same innocent eyes. Dionysius calls it agnosia, a state of not knowing, and the Upanishads call it dhyana, samadhi, a state of not knowing. It is not ignorance.
Ignorance and knowledge belong to the same dimension: ignorance means less knowledge, knowledge means less ignorance; the difference is of degrees. Agnosia, samadhi, is not ignorance; it is beyond both ignorance and knowledge. It is a pure state of wonder. When you are full of wonder, existence is full of God.

The last question:
Osho,
I spent thirteen years in different nuns' convents, and was born in a family composed of one priest, two nuns, one monk and one missionary. With such a number, any jokes you tell about these people provoke a healing laughter for which I am grateful. Could you tell us some more good ones?
This is really surprising – such a great family, and you still survived! Not only that, you have arrived here! That’s what makes me hopeful about humanity, that’s why I never lose hope.

Two men met at a bar and struck up a conversation. After a while one of them said, “You think you have family problems? Listen to my situation. A few years ago I met a young widow with a grown-up daughter and we got married. Later my father married my stepdaughter. That made my stepdaughter my stepmother, and my father became my stepson. Also my wife became the mother-in-law of her father-in-law. Then the daughter of my wife, my stepmother, had a son. This boy was my half-brother because he was my father’s son, but he was also the son of my wife’s daughter, which made him my wife’s grandson. That made me the grandfather of my half-brother. This was nothing until my wife and I had a son. Now the sister of my son, my mother-in-law, is also the grandmother. This makes my father the brother-in-law of my child, whose stepsister is my father’s wife.
“I am my stepmother’s brother-in-law, my wife is her own child’s aunt, my son is my father’s nephew – and I am my own grandfather. And you think you have family problems!”

Feel grateful to God, to be born in such a family is rare. It is a unique opportunity!

A Catholic nun in a small residential hotel complained to the desk clerk that the man in the adjoining room kept annoying her with indecent songs.
“You must be mistaken,” replied the clerk politely “Mr. Pritchard never sings any songs.”
“I know,” replied the Catholic nun, “but he whistles them.”

Grandma was in her eighties. She tired easily, had little appetite, and was sometimes confused mentally. Her son called the doctor, who arrived shortly and was shown up to Grandma’s room. Half an hour later he came down.
“There’s no need to worry,” he explained. “I have given her a thorough examination and there is nothing really wrong with her except her age. She will be all right.”
Son and daughter-in-law, much relieved, went upstairs to see her. “Well, mother,” asked her son, “how did you like the doctor?”
“Oh, so that was the doctor?” she said. “I thought he acted rather familiar for a clergyman!”

The young couple moved from their small town to the big city, leaving behind family and relatives, mostly elderly. Their young son still continued to include them in his nightly prayers. One night he seemed to have forgotten Uncle Joseph. Strangely enough, the next day they learned that Uncle Joseph had passed away.
Some months later he again skipped a name in his prayers – Aunt Mary. The next day they learned that Aunt Mary had passed away.
Thereafter they listened most carefully to his nightly prayers to discover if any blessings were left out. Sure enough, several weeks later, after “God bless Mommy” he omitted “God bless Daddy.” This panicked his father, who did not dare go downstairs all night or even leave the bedroom, but stayed in bed worrying about his child’s supernatural powers of prophecy.
The next morning they got word from their former hometown that their friendly priest had died.

And the last:

A salesman is forced to share a room with a rabbi in a crowded hotel. He enters the room and finds the rabbi kneeling in a corner, rocking on his heels while murmuring his prayers.
“Hi!” says the salesman. “I’m your new roommate.”
The rabbi nods without interrupting his prayers.
“Well then, which bed shall I take?”
The rabbi points to one bed, continuing to pray.
The salesman nervously unpacks his bag, then all of a sudden says, “Say, rabbi, do you mind if I bring up a girl?”
The rabbi, still praying, holds up two fingers.

Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
Is there something wrong with me? I feel proud to be a Polack!
There is nothing wrong with being a Polack. Polacks are as beautiful as anybody else, or a little more, a little more juicy.

A sign outside a police station read: “Man Wanted For Rape.” Next day three Polacks applied for the job.

But it is certainly wrong to feel proud. Whether one feels to be proud as an Indian or as a Polack or as an Englishman, it does not matter. These are just excuses. The real thing is that the ego wants some support. The ego cannot stand on its own feet, it needs crutches. It claims, “My country is the best country in the world, my religion the most superior, my culture the most evolved,” and so on and so forth.
Anything can be used as a prop for the ego, and that’s certainly wrong, particularly for the sannyasin because the whole effort of sannyas is to drop the ego in all its possible forms, subtle or gross, manifest or unmanifest, direct or indirect.
One has to be constantly aware of the tricks of the ego, its ways are subtle. If you throw it out from one door, it enters from the other door – and in a new disguise. Unless you are really alert it is going to grab you from behind.
Many times you feel the misery that is created by the ego and many times you have dropped it, but it again creates new temptations. And because the temptations are new you think it is not the old ditch you are falling in. It is the same ditch – of course painted with fresh colors, changed a little bit here and there, renovated…
Beware of the ego. Pride is not good for a sannyasin. That’s the only difference between a sannyasin and a non-sannyasin. The old idea of sannyas was to renounce the world; my idea of sannyas is to renounce the ego because even if you renounce the world the ego will go on hidden within you wherever you go. In fact, when it starts taking on spiritual colors it becomes far more difficult to get rid of it.
Just as if your chains are made not of ordinary steel but of the purest of gold, studded with diamonds – then you would not like to drop them. To you they will appear like ornaments, and if somebody says, “These are chains,” you will be offended, you will be angry.
A Hindu is offended if you say to him that to be a Hindu is to be in a prison. A Mohammedan is angry if you say to him that to be a Mohammedan means to be a slave. The same is true about the Christians and the Jains and the Buddhists.
But to be proud simply means you are thinking yourself separate from existence. Secondly, you are thinking of yourself as special.
To be a sannyasin means to be just natural. You are not higher than anybody and you are not lower than anybody. You are simply part of the same existence. How can one be lower or higher? It is not only a question of being on equal terms with human beings; you are on equal terms with the trees, with the rocks, with the stars. Simply, there is nobody inside you who feels separate. This is true equality, and the true equality is always rooted in equanimity, equilibrium.
To feel higher in any way is simply a proof that deep down you are suffering from an inferiority complex – it is just a compensation. The politician feels higher than others because he has power, political power. The wealthy feels higher than others because he has power, economic power. And the so-called spiritual person also feels higher than others because he has again the same kind of thing: power – spiritual power, purity, morality, virtue. But these are nothing but properties.
In my vision a sannyasin is utterly ordinary, and in that very ordinariness the extraordinary explodes.

The second question:
Osho,
The other day in darshan you were talking about women and transforming their energy. You said that in the past, masters such as Jesus, Mahavira, and even Gautam the Buddha were not able to understand and transform women's energy and allow it to come to a peak. You said that this time here with you it will be possible for women as well as for men to flower and come to a peak. Somehow, I was very deeply touched by this. Can you say something more about this difference between man and woman and how you work with us in different ways?
The difference between man and woman is not much. The difference is simple. It is like a man by your side is standing on his head: what is the difference between you, who is standing on your legs, and the man who is doing a headstand, a shirshasana? In fact, none! You are both the same, but in a way there is a difference. The difference is that the man who is standing on his head is upside-down. That’s the only difference between a man and a woman.
What is conscious in man is unconscious in women, and what is unconscious in women is conscious in men. Man is man only in his consciousness; in his unconsciousness he is woman, feminine. That’s why whenever you feel a man in any way moving closer to his unconscious he becomes softer, feminine, loving, tender.
That’s why the people who are condemned by the society, the sinners, are more loving people than your so-called saints. Your so-called saints are hung up in the conscious, they don’t allow their unconscious, they repress it. They disassociate themselves from their unconscious. They condemn it. They create a distance between themselves and the unconscious, they define themselves only through the conscious. That’s why they look so hard.
Look at the faces of your so-called saints: the moralists, the puritans, the people who are continuously carrying the load of “holier-than-thou.” Just look at their faces and you will find hard lines, stiffness, uptightness – a quality that cannot be called soft, tender, loving.
Watch the so-called sinners, the condemned people, and you will be surprised that they have more tender hearts. They are more loving people, more companionable. You can enjoy the company of the sinners, you cannot enjoy the company of the saints. If you put four saints together they will be constantly quarreling – quarreling about stupid things: how many angels can dance on the head of a pin, how many hells there are. Buddha says there is only one hell, Mahavira says there are seven, Sanjaya Vilethiputta says there are seven hundred!
If you put a dozen saints in one house there will be no peace at all in that house, they will be constantly barking at each other. Sometimes I am fascinated by the idea that dogs may be reincarnations of saints – barking at anything, and particularly at a few things. For example, all dogs are against uniforms: they will bark at the postman, the policeman, the sannyasin. Maybe they are angry at their own past life!
But sinners are very friendly for the simple reason – I am not telling you to become sinners, I am simply making a point so that you can understand why sinners look so soft, loving, human, and why saints look so inhuman. The reason is the sinners are closer to their unconscious and man’s unconscious is feminine.
The same happens with intellectual women, particularly the women who belong to the Liberation Movement. They are harsh, ugly, hard, and constantly argumentative. They become unloving, they become very egoistic. They are a new version of female saints, for the simple reason again because they have gone against their natural unconscious spontaneity. They are living in their heads. They have dropped the very idea of the unconscious, they are not allowing their instincts. They are lopsided, they have lost their balance.
The balanced man is neither man nor woman; he is a mixture of both, a synthesis rather. His masculinity compensates his femininity. They are not at daggers with each other; they are dancing in tune, in deep harmony, together. There is great accord.
So the difference is not much, the difference is very little. Of course it has become very big because for at least ten thousand years man has dominated the scene. He has repressed the woman in himself and because of that he has repressed the woman on the outside too. He had to – both are part of one logic.
If you allow your own inner woman freedom to meet with the man inside you, to have a deep togetherness, an orgasmic quality, so that as far as your consciousness is concerned it is no longer split as man and woman; it is one, it is human, it is whole. It is no longer a conflict, it is a concord. It has attained the highest synthesis possible. When this happens one is whole, whether one is man or woman does not matter.
But for centuries man has dominated, and the only way to dominate is to destroy the outer woman, to reduce her into a slave, to reduce her into a commodity, sellable, purchasable, something of the marketplace. This is the ugliest thing that has happened in the past. Because of this, the whole past of humanity is rotten, unbalanced, insane. And if the man represses the woman on the outside, of course he cannot allow the woman inside either: he has to repress that too.
The woman has been told that she has to be womanly, that means she has to reject all that is masculine in her. She has been forced to go to the very extreme of being a woman and the man has to be completely denied. And this has been taught as if it is something of great value – as culture, as religion, as civilization. The woman has to be shy, the woman has to be in every possible way dependent on man. She has to be a servant, not a companion, not a friend.
This idea affected everything, even religion. And the people like Jesus, Mahavira, Gautam the Buddha, these great persons who are the very salt of the past humanity, the few people who had flowered, even they could not absolutely go against the social structure. I can understand why they could not go against the social structure because they had to work with a society that was not of their making, it was already there.
Buddha had only forty years to work. Now you cannot transform everything in the society. He had to decide whether he has to work and create something or he has just to fight. If he has to fight for every single inch, then no work would have been possible. He had to compromise. He accepted many things that I know were accepted very unwillingly.
The same is true about Mahavira, Lao Tzu, Zarathustra, Jesus, Mohammed. They had to function in a particular society, which was given, already there, and it had existed for thousands of years. They decided it was better to work silently and help a few people to become enlightened rather than fight with the society and waste their whole time, and not help even a few people become enlightened. That was the choice before them.
Buddha was not willing to allow women to be initiated as sannyasins for the simple reason that the Indian society has been very repressive, it has created great walls between men and women. To destroy those walls would have released a chaos. It would have released so much repressed energy that Buddha did not think that he would be able to help anybody, everything would go berserk. Hence he postponed as long as he could.
When the women became very insistent, and particularly when his own stepmother asked to be initiated, he could not refuse. He owed much to this woman because his own mother died the very day he was born. He was brought up by his stepmother with such care, with so much love, he had never felt that she was a stepmother; he had never missed his mother. When his stepmother asked to be initiated – and she was getting very old, and death was coming close – he could not say no. Very unwillingly he said yes.
But when he said yes to his own mother, then other women also said, “Now you have accepted one woman as a sannyasin, then why debar us?” And it was logical. The door opened.
And Buddha said very sadly, “My religion would have lived for at least five thousand years and helped thousands of people to become enlightened, but now it will only exist for five hundred years.”
And that’s how it happened because once the women came in, the repressed male sannyasins started getting infatuated. They had lived in compartments and suddenly they were free – suddenly the women were there, and beautiful women. The first sannyasins had almost all come from royal families. It almost always happens when a man like Buddha arrives on the earth, it is the most intelligent ones who come first to him. It is natural because only they can understand.
You can see it happening here: the most intelligent people in the world, from every nook and comer of the world, have arrived here. But the Indian masses go on ignoring as if it has nothing to do with them. They are not yet at the level of that intelligence where they can understand what is happening here. What to say about ordinary masses?
Just the other day the Pune magistrate gave his judgment concerning the case of one madman who had thrown a dagger at me, obviously intentionally to kill me. He has freed him, and the reason that he has freed him, the most basic reason that he has given, is really worth consideration. I laughed at it. I enjoyed it!
The reason that he freed him is that if it was an attempt to murder me, then I would not have continued my discourse! Who can continue talking when somebody is trying to murder you? But he does not know me. I would have continued even if I had died – I would not have finished before ten!
But he cannot understand, and I can understand him – he cannot understand. When somebody is trying to kill you, can you go on speaking the same way? His argument seems to be very valid. So what to say about the ordinary masses? – even an educated magistrate thinks in the same way.
Once Buddha allowed women to enter his commune, the repressed male sannyasins started losing their grip on their own consciousness. It happened because of repression. That’s why Jesus and Mahavira were also of the same opinion.
I can allow for the simple reason that twenty-five centuries have passed and in these twenty-five centuries much has happened, particularly in the West. That’s why my appeal will be far more in the West than in the East because in the East nothing much has happened. Karl Marx has not happened in the East, Friedrich Nietzsche has not happened in the East, Sigmund Freud has not happened in the East, Carl Gustav Jung has not happened in the East, Albert Einstein has not happened in the East.
The West is far more ready. The West has gone through a great revolution about sex, about the discrimination between sexes. The West has dropped the old nonsense. That’s why it is possible for me to allow man and woman to be here together. And you can see the difference: when Indians come here they create trouble.
For the six years I have been here, at least over three to four hundred thousand westerners have visited the place. Not a single Westerner has tried to rape an Indian woman. What to say about rape – they have not even bothered about Indian women, they have not even thought about Indian women! But so many Indians have tried molestations, efforts to rape; all kinds of things they have done. And they go on asking me why Indians are not easily allowed in the ashram. They come for wrong reasons, even the well educated.
Just a few days ago the manager of the Ambassador Hotel – rich, well educated – came to see, and when he found Padma working in her department alone, he immediately grabbed her breasts! And the first thing the man had asked Sheela was, “Why don’t I see many Indians here?” And when he was caught red-handed Sheela told him, “Now you know the reason why so many Indians are not there in the ashram. We have to throw them out, just as we are throwing you out!”
One government officer, an SDO, had come to investigate the morality of my sannyasins, and Sheela was showing him around the ashram. When he found that Sheela and he were alone he asked Sheela, “Can I kiss you?” And he had come to investigate the morality of the ashram! And because Sheela reacted and shouted at him he had written a very nasty and wrong report about the ashram, and he has been one of the reasons that we could not get the Saswad land for the commune. He created every possible trouble. And he was sending messages: “If Sheela comes to me, then I will help you!”
Now these are the people! Buddha had to work with these people, and Jesus, and Mahavira. They can be forgiven. They wanted to help both man and woman, but the trouble was the society.
To me there is a possibility. I can choose people from all over the world who are ready to drop this stupid division between sexes. Of course the approach will be different: the woman will start with love and end with meditation, and the man will start with meditation and end with love. Only this much difference will be there. To the man, love will come as a consequence, as a fragrance of meditation. To the woman, meditation will come as a consequence, as a byproduct, as a fragrance of love.
But whether the man or the woman, when they reach the highest peak of consciousness, the Everest of consciousness, they will have both exactly balanced: meditation and love.

The third question:
Osho,
How about telling us a little esoteric bullshit?
Bullshit is simply bullshit! Even if you make it esoteric it does not change its quality – it still stinks! You can give it a beautiful cover, a beautiful packet, but the content will be the same. You can wrap something beautiful around it, but that will only be a wraparound. When you dive deep into it, then you will know you have fallen into a ditch full of bullshit!

A sannyasin and a newly arrived non-sannyasin are sitting together in Vrindavan cafe. “Hey, Swami,” says the non-sannyasin, “you have probably been around this place for a while. Can you tell me what Osho is teaching you?”
The sannyasin ponders over this for a while, then says, “It’s like this: imagine two guys walking along a road, they both fall into a ditch. One of them gets dirty, the other does not – which one of them is going to have a shower?”
“The dirty one, of course!” says the non-sannyasin.
“No. The dirty one sees the clean one and he thinks himself to be clean. The clean one sees the dirty one and he thinks he is dirty, so the clean one is going to wash himself. Now imagine they fall into a ditch again – who is going to shower now?”
“Now I know,” answers the non-sannyasin, “the clean one!”
“No. The clean one realizes while showering that he was clean, and the dirty one realizes while the clean one is taking a shower, so now the right one showers! Now imagine they both fall into a ditch again – who is going to shower now?”
“From now on, of course, always the dirty one!”
“No. Have you ever seen two guys fall into a ditch three times, and one always comes out dirty and the other always clean?”

A Catholic priest was walking along a cliff by the sea when he heard the shouts of someone in difficulty. He saw a man who obviously could not swim struggling for his life in the water.
“Save me, save me, father! I am drowning!” cried the young man.
“Are ye Catholic or Protestant, son?” asked the cleric.
“Protestant, father!” gasped the young man as he went under the water. The priest began to walk on.
“For God’s sake, father, save me!” screamed the terrified boy surfacing again.
“What religion are ye, son?” shouted back the priest.
“Protestant, father!” spluttered back the answer. The priest again began to walk on as the unfortunate youngster went under for the second time.
“For the love of God, save me, father!” screamed the boy in desperation.
“What religion are ye, son?” came the demand again.
After a moment’s hesitation the young man shouted, “I’m a Catholic, father!”
The priest immediately threw off his clothes, dived into the sea and swam strongly to the boy, catching him by the hair as he went under for the third and last time.
“What religion are ye, son?” asked the priest again, as he held the young man’s head above the water.
“Catholic, father!” came the response.
The cleric smiled, let go the young man’s hair, and as he sank said, “Good, die in faith!”

The fourth question:
Osho,
Why are the so-called authoritative scholars, theologians, and philosophers on religion against you?
It is natural. They philosophize about God – I know. They think about light – I see. They read the scriptures – I have read the universe. We cannot agree.
It is like a blind man collecting information about light. How can he agree with the man who has eyes? Although he collects information about light, information about light is just information, it is not an experience. The experience is bound to be totally different. The experience is qualitatively different, it is not only a question of quantity. It is not that I know more than they know or less than they know, it is not a question of more or less. I simply know, and they have been collecting information from others. Their knowledge is borrowed, and of course the man who lives with borrowed knowledge, whose whole life depends on borrowed knowledge, is bound to be afraid of the man who has experienced it.
They have always been against, it is nothing new. If they were not against me, that would be surprising. That will be almost unbelievable! Their being against me simply proves that man has not learned anything, as if the evolution of man has stopped long before. They still behave in the same way they behaved with Jesus, with Buddha, with Krishna. Their behavior has not changed, and I don’t see that it is going to change ever because of their vested interest. Men like me are dangerous to their business.
It is a question of life and death for them. Their whole profession depends on borrowed knowledge, and my insistence is to help you to know it on your own. The moment you know, all that is borrowed fades away, becomes irrelevant, meaningless, loses all significance. And with it disappear all the priests, all the theologians, all the philosophers, all the scholars, the pundits.
Right now you respect them, you honor them because you feel ignorant and you think they know. And the blind are leading the blind! You are far more honest – at least you recognize your blindness. Your scholars are far more cunning, they don’t recognize that they are ignorant. Deep down they know it, but they don’t show it. They go on hiding it in every possible way. And people like me start exposing them – how can they tolerate it?
It has always been a known fact that scholars are one-dimensional. They have to be one-dimensional if they want to be scholarly. If a man tries to know everything about God – and remember about. By knowing God he will become multi-dimensional because God means the whole existence. By knowing God he will know the whole, but by knowing about God he has to become one-dimensional. He has to focus his mind, he has to go on narrowing his consciousness, he has to pinpoint it. Naturally he knows more and more about God, but less and less about everything else. His knowing becomes only inclusive about God and excludes everything else.
That’s why authorities always behave foolishly. As far as their own field is concerned they are great experts. If you ask any question about something which is not part of their expertise they are at a loss – they are as foolish as no fool can ever be because fools have a little bit of multidimensionality. But the scholars are absolutely one-dimensional, they are fixed on one point, they are specialized people.
In the beginning, just two thousand years ago, there was only one knowledge without any divisions; it was called philosophy. In the days of Aristotle it was called philosophy; philosophy meant all knowledge. So if you look in Aristotle’s books – he is the father figure of the Western philosophy – you will find everything, things that have nothing to do with philosophy at all.
For example, how many teeth a woman has. Now what has that got to do with philosophy? And even about that he is wrong. He had two wives, not only one – he could have counted very easily. And as far as a woman’s teeth are concerned you need not even ask her to open her mouth – it is always open! You can count very easily, there is no trouble. And having two wives and committing such a mistake! He says that women have fewer teeth than men. The logic is how can women have anything equal to men? He never bothered to experiment.
But his books contain everything. They contain biology, religion, philosophy, mathematics, logic, language, aesthetics – everything possible. They contain physics. That’s how the name metaphysics was born because in Aristotle’s books, after physics comes religion. Metaphysics simply means the chapter next to physics. After the chapter on physics there is a chapter on religion, hence it was called metaphysics.
If Aristotle comes back he will be absolutely puzzled. If he goes to Oxford there are three hundred and sixty-five subjects taught. He would not be able to believe it – three hundred and sixty-five subjects! And they are growing more and more every day– branches of branches of branches.
I have heard a future story…

A man goes to his optician. He is suffering from pain in one of his eyes, and he tells the doctor.
The doctor asks, “Which eye, right or left?”
And he says, “Left.”
And the doctor says, “Sorry, but I have specialized only in the other eye. You have to go to somebody else.”

A man’s son came back from the medical college and the man asked his son, “In what you have specialized?” He was an old physician, the old kind of physician who used to treat every kind of disease.
The son said, “I have specialized in the nose.”
And the father asked, “Which nostril?”

Yes, it is going to happen one day – right nostril or left nostril, and you will have to go to different experts.
This is the way of specialization; one becomes narrowed, one starts knowing more and more about less and less. And a moment comes, is bound to come – at least logically it can be conceived that it will happen one day. If this is the process of science – knowing more and more about less and less – then one day somebody will declare, “I know all about nothing.”
The process of experiencing is totally different: it is knowing less and less about more and more. And a moment comes when one knows nothing about everything. That’s what Dionysius calls agnosia, that is the state of meditation: one knows nothing about everything. He has become absolutely multidimensional. He is simply aware, not a knower. There is no knowledge, he is simply wise.
Now how can the expert agree with the wise man? The expert cannot agree with the Buddha, impossible; their dimensions are totally different. One knows more and more about less and less, the other knows less and less about more and more. One reaches ultimately to know everything about nothing, the other reaches ultimately to know nothing about everything – they are following diverse paths. But the Buddha experiences and the expert only accumulates information.

A very pretty secretary, wearing a sweater and miniskirt, passed through a chemistry lab.
“Get a load of that!” said one of the scientists to the other.
The other glanced at the well-stacked figure and replied indifferently, “So what? She’s nine-tenths water!”
“Sure,” said the first, “but what surface tension!”

A great scientist riding on a bus had noticed a clock on a building that showed nine-thirty. Farther on he saw another clock, this one showed nine-fifteen. “Good heavens!” he cried. “I must be going the wrong way!”

A story is told about a professor of English who was indisposed and stayed home one day. “What happened?” one of the students asked his daughter.
“He is terribly upset,” she disclosed. “Last night an owl in one of the trees kept repeating, ‘To who? To who?’ instead of ‘To whom?’”

The newlywed wife was a professor of philosophy – and it almost always happens with the professors of philosophy – suffered from insomnia. She kept waking up her husband whenever she heard noises downstairs.
Finally he said, “Go to sleep, dear, please. Burglars don’t make noises!”
So she started to wake him up every time she heard nothing.

That is logical! That is philosophical!

Before beginning a postmortem the doctor wanted to check the chest. The cadaver was wheeled into the X-ray department and placed properly in the apparatus by the pretty technician, then she put the photographic plate into the control panel. As she stuck her head out from behind it she said automatically, “Please take a deep breath and hold it!”

A technician is a technician! They function automatically. Experts function very unconsciously. They know not what they are doing, they know not what they are saying. They know nothing because their whole consciousness is full of dead facts and information. They can talk about love, but they have never loved. They can talk about God…
And remember the meaning of the word about. About means around. Around and around they go, but they never touch the center of it. It cannot be touched just by knowing about God. You can quote the Bible, the Koran, the Gita, the Vedas, that is not going to help, unless you can speak out of your own inner communion.

And Jesus said unto them, “Who do you say I am?”
And they replied, “You are the eschatological manifestation of the ground of our being, the charisma manifested in conflict and decision in the humanizing process.”
And Jesus said, “What?”

Now this language! Even the Polack Pope would have understood – this is the language of the Christian theologian: “You are the eschatological manifestation of the ground of our being, the charisma manifested in conflict and decision in the humanizing process.”
And Jesus said, “What!”
You ask me, “Why the so-called authoritative scholars…” They are not authoritative, they are quoting others. What authority can they have? Authority should come from your own authentic experience. That is the only source of authority, there is no other source of authority.
A Ramakrishna can speak authoritatively, a Raman can speak authoritatively, but not Vivekananda; he is just a scholar. Mahavira can speak authoritatively, but not Gautam Ganadhar, his disciple, who is just a brahmin pundit collecting information, taking notes, compiling what Mahavira has said. Jesus can speak authoritatively, but not the popes.
The irony is that these people are thought to be authoritative because they can quote exactly the words of the scriptures. But the words of the scriptures can be quoted by a computer more efficiently, more accurately! It can be done by a mechanical device; no consciousness is needed for that, no awareness is needed for that. One need not be a Christ to repeat the Beatitudes: “Blessed are the meek for theirs is the kingdom of God.” This can be repeated by a record, a gramophone record!
Have you seen the symbol of the most famous gramophone company: His Master’s Voice? – the dog wagging its tail. A gramophone record can do it, and that’s what these popes are doing – His Master’s Voice – the shankaracharyas are doing, ayatollahs, imams are doing – just repeating.

A small child was teaching his parrot all the four-letter words. His mother heard, was shocked. She came running in and she said, “What are you doing? Have you gone mad? You are destroying the parrot – you are teaching him four-letter words!”
And the child said, “No Mummy, I am just telling him, ‘Please remember, these words are not to be repeated by you!’ Just the way you have taught my father and my father has taught me, I am teaching him and I am telling him, ‘Remember to tell your children not to repeat these words. These are very ugly and dangerous words.’”

You can teach a parrot and he can repeat anything, but a parrot is not an authority. Machines can do, computers can do, in a far better way.
So don’t call these people authorities – they are not. They are befooling others and perhaps themselves. They are not real philosophers, they are more foolosophers than philosophers! The very word philosophy means love of wisdom, and they have nothing to do with wisdom at all.
Wisdom happens only through meditation, it never happens by collecting information. It happens by going through a transformation. Wisdom is the flowering of your consciousness, the opening of the one-thousand-petaled lotus of your being. It is the release of your fragrance, the release of the imprisoned splendor.
Real philosophy has nothing to do with thinking; on the contrary it has everything to do with transcending thinking, going beyond and beyond thinking, going beyond mind, reaching the pure space of no-mind. Out of that space something flowers in you. You can call it Christ consciousness, Buddhahood, or whatsoever you like. That is true philosophy.
The better word for philosophy will be philosia – not only love for wisdom but love for seeing the truth. Sia means to see, philo means love – love to see. That’s exactly the Indian word for philosophy, darshan. Darshan means philosia. Don’t translate it as philosophy. Doctor Radhakrishnan and others have done a great disservice to the East by translating darshan as philosophy. It is philosia.
In the East our interest has always been to see the truth because by seeing the truth, as the Isa Upanishad says, you become the truth itself. Only by becoming the truth do you have authority, then the truth speaks through you. You are just a medium, a vehicle, a hollow bamboo flute, and God starts singing through you.
That miracle has to happen here to my sannyasins. That’s what my only teaching is: become a hollow bamboo flute. Don’t hinder. Let God flow through you naturally, spontaneously. And if you allow your nature and spontaneity, just as every river reaches the ocean you will also reach the ultimate ocean of God.

The last question:
Osho,
You are talking and talking and I hear flowers and silence and laughter everywhere.
Come now! Admit it! Are not you in the tradition of Gautam Buddha's great Italian disciple, Maha-Gossipa?
I am nobody’s disciple, and I am nobody’s master either. I am not your master, just a friend on the way, a fellow traveler. And I am nobody’s disciple because nothing can be learned from anybody, and I am nobody’s master because nothing can be taught.
I can allow you to be with me. Something can happen which is neither done by me nor done by you. Nobody can claim, “I am the doer of it.” It can simply happen, just as in the morning the sun rises and the flowers open and the birds start singing. The sun cannot say, “I have opened the flowers.” The sun cannot say, “I have managed this whole orchestra of music that suddenly has arisen on the earth.” Neither the birds can say, “It is because of our singing that the sun has risen.”

You must have heard an old story of a woman who had a hen. She believed that it was because of her hen that the sun rises, because early in the morning just before the sunrise the hen gave a joyous shout. She was very proud because she was the only one who had a hen in the village.
Nobody seemed to be grateful to her, so one day out of disgust she said, “I am leaving this village, and then you will know! The sun will never rise in this place because I am taking my hen away.”
She left the village. When she reached another village, and of course when the hen shouted with joy in the morning, the sun rose there and the woman was tremendously happy. She said, “Now, now those fools will realize, the sun has risen in this village, it cannot rise there! Now it will always be night there!”

Neither the birds can say nor the flowers can say, “The sun has risen because of us,” nor the sun can say… It is a synchronicity. This word is very beautiful, it was coined by Carl Gustav Jung. You understand the law of causality: in the law of causality one thing functions as a cause and the other thing happens as an effect. Wherever the cause is produced, the effect is bound to follow. It is a mechanical process. You heat the water to a certain degree and it evaporates, heating is the cause and evaporation is the effect.
Synchronicity is a noncausal relationship. Things happen, but you never know who is the cause and who is the effect. They happen simultaneously.
That’s the beauty that happens whenever you are with a buddha. The buddha is not a master, you are not a disciple; you are not learning anything from buddha, the buddha is not teaching anything to you. It is just being together. It is a love affair! Being together and something happens, something that is beyond both. Something is triggered. At the most it can be said that the buddha functioned as a catalytic agent, but whatsoever happens, happens in you; he has not caused it.
Hence I say I am not anybody’s disciple nor I am anybody’s master. But you have found the right name for me: I am an Italian, Maha-Gossipa! Remember me not as the man who has given you a great gospel but as a man who has given you many gossips. My gospel is my gossip!

At a local businessman’s club four members got together after a few drinks and began to confess their secret vices.
“I must own up,” said the leading banker, “that I gamble. Every week or so I place a bet on the horses, not too much, but I have been doing it for years.”
“Well, I will come clean of my weakness,” said the prominent executive. “No one in town has ever seen me drunk, but twice a year I drive to another town where I am not known, rent a motel room for a few days, get stoned, and return home feeling better than ever!
“I am not ashamed to admit that my weakness is women,” said another important businessman. “I have to be very discreet, of course, but with a cautious secretary it can be managed easily enough. I have never yet been found out.”
The fourth member of the group, who had been listening intently, said nothing. He was the rabbi of the village. The others expected him to reveal something, but he shrugged his shoulders as is the way of all the Jews of all the ages. He simply shrugged his shoulders.
“Well,” asked one of them, “Rabbi, how about you?”
“I would rather not confess,” he said shaking his head. They looked at him with suspicion. What could he be covering up? Each of them accused him of being a poor sport, especially since they had all opened up.
Finally the rabbi gave in. “All right,” he said reluctantly, “if you must know my weakness, it is scandal – and I can hardly wait to get out of this place!”

Enough for today.

============================================================

Into a blinding darkness go they who worship action alone.
Into an even greater darkness go they who worship meditation.

For It is other than meditation,
It is other than action.
This we have heard from the enlightened ones.

Meditation and action –
he who knows these two together,
through action leaves death behind
and through meditation gains immortality.

Into a blinding darkness go they who idolize the Absolute.
Into an even greater darkness go they who dote on the relative.

For It is other than the relative,
It is other than the Absolute.
This we have heard from the enlightened ones.

Om
purnam adaha
purnam idam
purnat purnam udachyate
purnasya purnam adaya purnam evavashishyate

Om
That is the whole.
This is the whole.
From wholeness emerges wholeness.
Wholeness coming from wholeness,
wholeness still remains.
P. D. Ouspensky has written a tremendously significant book, Tertium Organum. The fundamental of Tertium Organum is based and rooted in this sutra: From the whole comes the whole, yet the whole remains behind, intact. From that comes this. That is whole, this is whole, but even though it has come from the whole, the whole is not reduced in any way. It remains the same, as if nothing has been taken out of it.
This is a strange mantra, one of the strangest ones because it goes against the very idea of arithmetic. It belongs to meta-mathematics. The ordinary mathematics will not agree with this. If you take something from anything, then that much is reduced in the original, and if you take the whole then nothing is left behind.
Ouspensky has done a great service to humanity by proposing a higher mathematics, a mathematics of the beyond. That’s what the Upanishads are.
First, the whole is not a finite entity. If it is finite, then of course if you take something out of it, it will be reduced, it will not be the same anymore. The whole is infinite, so whatsoever you take from it, it remains still the infinite.
Where can you take it? The whole pervades all, so the very idea of taking is just an idea. As far as reality is concerned nothing is taken out of it and nothing is added unto it, it is always as it has always been.
Secondly, in ordinary mathematics the whole is the sum total of its parts. In the higher mathematics that is not so: the whole is not the sum total of its parts, it is more than that. That more is very significant. If you cannot understand that more you will remain absolutely unaware of the religious dimension of things.
For example, the beauty of a roseflower, is it just a sum total of its parts? It should be, according to the ordinary mathematics – it is not. The beauty is something more. Just by putting all the chemicals: the water, the earth, the air, and everything that constitutes the flower – even if you put all that together, the beauty will not arise. The beauty is something more, hence in analysis it disappears.
If you go to the chemist, the scientist, to inquire about the beauty of a rose, he will analyze it. Analysis is the method of science. Analysis means breaking it into its parts so that you can know of what it constitutes. But the moment you break it into parts, the invisible more disappears. The invisible more exists in the organic unity, you cannot analyze it. It is synthesis. It is totality.
The same is true about all the higher values. A beautiful poem is not just the words that compose it; it is something more. Otherwise anybody who can put words together in a rhythmical form will become a Shakespeare, a Kalidas, a Milton, a Shelley. Then any linguist, grammarian, will become a great poet. That does not happen. You may know the entire grammar of the language, you may be acquainted with all the words of the language, still to be a poet is a totally different phenomenon. Poetry comes first then come the words, not vice versa – it is not that you arrange the words and the poetry arises.

Once, a few of the students of Charles Darwin played a trick on the great scientist – because he was continuously searching about all forms of life and he was always categorizing to what species a certain animal or insect belongs to.
It was his birthday and his students thought of playing a trick, just a joke. They dissected many insects and glued their parts – legs from one insect, wings from another, head from the third one, the body from the fourth, and so on. At least from twenty insects they managed to glue together a new insect which exists nowhere.
They brought it to Charles Darwin and they said, “Here is a great surprise for you, as a birthday present. You may have never come across this insect! And we have been hiding it for this day. Can you tell us what species it belongs to, what is its name?”
Darwin looked at the insect and he asked only one question to the students: “Does it hum?”
They said, “Yes, when it was alive it used to hum.”
“Then,” he said, “it is a humbug!”

You can put parts together, but you will create only a humbug, you will not be able to create life. You will not be able to create a new form, a new manifestation of something living.
The Upanishads talk about two trinities. One is called satyam shivam sundaram. Satyam means truth. Shivam means good, virtue, goodness. Sundaram means beauty. The Upanishads say these three are beyond ordinary mathematics.
They also talk of another trinity: Sat-chit-anand – sat, chit, anand. Sat means being. Chit means consciousness. Anand means bliss. The Upanishads say this trinity also belongs to the higher realm, the world of synthesis, wholeness. It is beyond ordinary logic, ordinary mathematics.
These two trinities are far more beautiful, far more meaningful than the Christian trinity of God the father and Christ the son and the Holy Ghost. Compared to these two trinities the Christian trinity looks very immature, childish. Sometimes even children have more insight than the Christian trinity.
When Sigmund Freud said that God the father is nothing but a deep desire of an immature person to cling to the father, the idea of father, it is a father fixation, he was right. But he had never heard about satyam shivam sunderam or sat-chit-anand. He would not have been able to say anything derogatory about these ultimate visions.
The Christian trinity is certainly very childish, and I say to you, sometimes even children are far more intelligent.

A small child was asking another child, his friend… They were learning the alphabet and the first child asked the second, “Why it is so that B always comes before C?”
And the other child said, “Obviously, you can see only if you are. First you have to be and then only you can see! That’s why C comes after B. How can it come before?”

Now even these two children are far more developed, far more perceptive than the Christian trinity – father, son, Holy Ghost – what nonsense they are talking about!
Higher values are truth, good, beauty, being, consciousness, bliss. Why they are called higher? – because they don’t come within the realm of the lower mathematics. The lower mathematics means the whole is simply the sum total of its parts, that defines the world of the lower mathematics. The higher mathematics, the meta-mathematics, means the whole is more than the sum total of its parts.
You cannot know beauty by analysis; it needs a different vision, a synthetic vision. The poet can understand beauty, not the scientist. The painter can understand beauty, but not the chemist. Truth can be understood only by a mystic, not by a philosopher. It can be understood by a lover, but not by a logician. It can be comprehended by intuition, but not by intellect. Intellect divides; intuition puts things together, and not only puts things together – it creates an organic unity.
Life can be looked at in two ways: the scientific, the analytical, or the religious, the synthetical.
Today’s sutras are of such great value that they are incomparable in the whole of religious literature. Even in the world of the Upanishads – there are one hundred and eight Upanishads in all – these sutras are incomparable, unique.
The first sutra:
Into a blinding darkness go they who worship action alone.
Into an even greater darkness go they who worship meditation.
Action means that which is external to you, meditation means that which is internal to you. Action is outer, meditation is inner. Action is extroversion, meditation is introversion. Action is an objective approach; science is rooted in it, hence science insists on experimentation. And because science insists on action, experiment, it destroys all that is more than the external – it denies. It simply denies the world of interiority, the world of subjectivity. It is so absurd that science accepts the outer without accepting the inner. How can the outer exist at all without the inner? It is nonsensical.
If there is a coin, it is bound to have two aspects, you cannot find a coin which has only one aspect to it, only a one-sided coin; it is impossible. Howsoever thin you make it, it will always have two sides to it. You cannot make it so thin that it has only one side.
But science goes on insisting on this foolishness: that the external is true and the internal is false. It believes in matter, but it does not believe in consciousness. It says matter has validity, and science asks for objective validity. Of course the world of subjectivity cannot have an objective validity – it is so obvious. The very asking is wrong. The inner cannot come and manifest itself as the outer, but science is blind about it. Those who believe in science say that consciousness is illusory.
Karl Marx, who thinks he is creating a scientific communism, says that consciousness is an epiphenomenon, a byproduct of matter. It does not exist in its own right; it is just a combination of material elements, chemistry, physics. It is just a combination, nothing more than that. When a person dies the elements start falling apart and then there is no consciousness left. Hence there is no immortality, no soul. Man becomes just a machine with a wrong notion that it has a soul. Man is not a he or she but only an it.
This scientific approach has colored even the world of psychology. In fact, ninety percent of the psychologists should not use the word psychology at all; it is just wrong for them to use the word because they deny the psyche, and still they go on using the word psychology.
Ninety percent of psychologists belong to the school called Behaviorism: Pavlov, Skinner, Delgado and others. They say man is nothing but his behavior, there is nobody inside him. The inside exists not; whatsoever man is, he is on the outside. Hence he can be studied just like any object, any other object. He can be studied like any other machine.
The Isa Upanishad says: Into blinding darkness go they who worship action alone. They are falling into a blinding darkness by only following the outer, the extrovert, the objective. They are losing all sense of the inner. They will exist like robots.
That’s why it was so easy for a man like Joseph Stalin to kill millions of people. You see the strange world of logic? Krishna could say to his disciple Arjuna, “You can kill, there is no problem because the soul is eternal; it cannot be killed, it cannot be burned. No weapon can enter it. Nainam chhindanti shastrani: there is no way – no sword, no spear can even touch it. Nainam dahati pavakah: neither the fire can burn it. The soul is immortal, eternal; only the body dies.”
Hence he says to his disciple Arjuna, “Don’t be worried, don’t feel guilty. You can kill because nothing is killed: Na hanyate hanyamane sharire. When you kill a body, nothing is killed because the body is already dead and the soul is immortal, so who is killed? The body is already dead, has always been dead, it is matter. And the soul has always been immortal, is still immortal. You are only de-linking them, and there is nothing wrong in de-linking them. You are just separating them – separating the essential from the nonessential. In fact, you are doing a great service to the person you are killing! He himself was not able to separate the essential from the nonessential, you have done it for him.”
Joseph Stalin could kill millions of people – the logic was totally different, but the result is the same. That’s why I say the world of logic is very strange. Joseph Stalin is a scientific communist, a fanatic follower of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels. He says there is no soul, so nothing is killed – you can kill. The body is only matter, and the matter will remain. The air will remain in the air, the earth will go back to the earth, the water will go to water, and all the elements will be dispersed back. There is no soul, so nothing is killed. Without any guilt he killed millions of people.
Arjuna also killed millions of people without any guilt. Mao Zedong did the same, but their approaches are very different. But it seems, to deny one – either the external or the internal – is dangerous. Its ultimate outcome will be destruction.
Hence the Isa Upanishad is right: Into a blinding darkness go they who worship action alone. Into an even greater darkness go they who worship meditation.
Meditation alone again leads to another extreme. Meditation means the internal, the subjective; it means introversion. And obviously the introverts start denying all external reality, they start saying it is maya, it is illusion.
Karl Marx says the inner is illusory, an epiphenomenon. And Shankara and Berkeley say the external is illusory, the internal is the only truth. Both are incapable of accepting the totality. They choose, they are not choiceless people.
Religion is born out of choiceless awareness. The first, who has chosen action alone, becomes a scientist. The second, who has chosen meditation alone, becomes a philosopher. But both miss the whole.
And remember one thing: the half-truth is far more dangerous than the untrue itself; the partial truth is more harmful than the untrue itself. Why? – because it is very difficult to refute the partial truth because it has something of truth in it, although it is partial, but because of that presence it is difficult to deny it.
It is difficult to deny Karl Marx and it is difficult to deny Shankara. Both are believers of one aspect of reality, neither of them are religious. One is moving toward the external, the other is moving to the internal, and reality is both and more.
That’s my approach here, the total approach to life. Therefore I don’t say to my sannyasins, “Escape to the monasteries or to the Himalayan caves.” I don’t say, “Renounce the world.” Renouncing the world means renouncing action. Then what will you be doing in your caves and in your monasteries? Then only meditation is left.
In the past this has been the case: either a person lived in the world, then he was very active, but his action was superficial because there was no meditation in him, no depth, no inner world. He was just his behavior, he was just his outer garb, his periphery. Naturally he created a superficial world with no depth, with no height; he created a very poor world.
Then there was the other extremist who escaped from the world. Seeing its superficiality, seeing its peripheralness, he renounced it. Of course he started going deeper into himself, but his going deeper into himself became uncreative. He has depth, but that depth remains unexpressed. He was silent, but there was no song in it. And when a silence is without song it is dead, it has depth but no manifestation.
You may be a great painter but unless you paint, what is the point of being a great painter? You may be a great poet but unless you sing, what is the point of your being a great poet?
So, on the one hand there were people who had chosen action, the world – the extroverts; and on the other hand were the introverts who had chosen their own being. Both were lopsided. Hence I agree with the Upanishads: life has to be total, not lopsided. Only then is there balance and in that balance is music, in that balance there is a center and a circumference. In that balance you are rooted in yourself, but you are not uncreative, you are creative.
The monks, the nuns, down the ages have been absolutely uncreative, they have not contributed anything to the world. In fact, the superficial people have contributed far more, hence this emphasis. The Isa Upanishad says: Into blinding darkness go they who worship action alone. Into an even greater darkness… Remember the emphasis. Into an even greater darkness go they who worship meditation. Alone!
The Upanishads are really courageous, they say the truth as it is, with no compromise. Nobody would have thought that the Upanishads would be so hard on meditation. It can be easily understood that they are hard on the extrovert mind, but they are harder on the introvert for the simple reason that the extrovert is superficial, but at least he has contributed something to the world.
You can see it? The East has lived with meditation alone and the West has lived with action alone. The West lives in a kind of blindness, but the East lives in a deeper darkness, in a deeper blindness. The Western mind is superficial, but it at least has contributed much: technology, industry, scientific farming. It has given people a better standard of life; it may not have given them a better quality of life, but at least it has given them a better standard of life. It has given them better houses, better roads, better cars, better airplanes. It may not have given them a better consciousness, but it has contributed, it has been creative – of course superficially. But the East, which became escapist in the name of meditation, became basically a dropout, it has not contributed even that much.
What have your so-called saints in the East contributed? It is poor because of those saints, and it is going to remain poor unless those saints are no longer respected. But people go on respecting the same old rotten traditions. They cannot see – deeper is their blindness, darker is their darkness. They cannot even see who the cause of all this misery is.
Twenty-two centuries of slavery in India. Who is the cause of all this? Your saints, your mahatmas, your so-called sages who escape to the monasteries, who escape to the Himalayan caves, to the forests, to the jungles – and you have worshipped them, you have respected them. When you respect somebody it means deep down you would also like to be like him, that’s what respect means.
The word respect is beautiful, it means seeing again and again – re-spect. When you pass a beautiful woman, if she is really beautiful you will have to look again and again. That is respect, seeing again and again. You will walk slowly, you will find excuses to go back, you will enter the same shop the woman has entered, you will start asking for the same commodities she is purchasing so that you can be on the same counter. You will not be looking at things, you will be looking at her. This is respect – the literal meaning of the word.
When you respect a person it means you are fascinated, infatuated. You would like to be like him. And the East still goes on respecting the same fools who are the cause of its misery, its starvation, its whole ugly state.
People are dying. Sixty percent of people in India are starving, and by the end of this century India will be the biggest country as far as population is concerned. It is going to surpass China. By the end of this century it will be the most populated country. Right now its problems are immense – what is going to happen by the end of this century? A great calamity is waiting. At least half of the population will die through starvation, famine, floods. By God’s grace something is bound to happen!
Who is responsible for all this? – the people who have insisted at least for three thousand years continuously that the real is inner and the outer is maya, illusory, why bother about it?
In the whole world things have changed, except in this unfortunate country. India is not yet part of the twentieth century, it lags behind at least one thousand years. People in India have not yet even been able to provide themselves with simple toilet facilities. The whole country is used as a vast latrine and nobody seems to be bothered about it. It is taken for granted. The whole country is living in unhygienic conditions, in illness, but that too is taken for granted. We have found explanations and rationalizations for it – that it is because of our past karmas that we are suffering. That means all the sinners are born only in India and all the saints are born in the Western countries – which are materialist. They should not go there at all! But these are ways to avoid seeing the truth. The truth is that you have praised the inner too much and destroyed the outer.
I agree with the Upanishad, that if you have to choose between action and meditation it is better you choose action. It will lead to darkness, but it will not be as dark as it will be if you choose only meditation alone. But there is no need to choose in the first place – you can have both! When you can have both, why choose?
For It is other than meditation…
The truth is other than meditation.
…It is other than action.
The truth is far more than action: it is both and more. And you will know the more only if you are capable of creating a synthesis between the outer and the inner, between action and meditation. Meditate, but let your meditation be expressed in action. Act, and let your action become a part of your meditation. There is no dualism, there is no antagonism between the two. One can act meditatively. One can dance meditatively.
When you dance meditatively your dance starts having a new flavor – something of the divine enters it – because if you are dancing meditatively then the ego disappears, the dancer disappears. That is the whole art of meditation: disappearance of the ego, disappearance of the mind. The dancer become thoughtless, silent. The dance continues and the dancer disappears. This is what I call the divine quality. Now it is as if God is dancing through you, you are no longer there.

One of the greatest dancers of this age was Nijinsky, and by coincidence there must have happened a certain synthesis between dance and meditation in him. He was not the master of it because he had never learned the art of meditation. It must have happened, just as a consequence of his total effort to go into dance, his total commitment.
A miracle used to happen – once in a while Nijinsky would take such high jumps, leaps in the air, which were not physically possible because of the gravitation of the earth. The spectators were simply mystified, they would miss a few beats of their hearts. It was a miracle to see Nijinsky moving, as if there was no gravitation – he would take such high leaps and so easily.
The second thing was when he would start descending back, he would come as a feather comes, very slowly, as if there is no hurry, as if the gravitation is not pulling him like a magnet. It is, according to scientific rules, impossible, but what can you do when it is happening? Even scientists observed Nijinsky and they were puzzled.
Again and again Nijinsky was asked, “How do you manage it?”
He said, “That I cannot say because when it happens I am not there. I have tried to manage it and I have always failed. Whenever I try to manage it, it doesn’t happen. Once in a while when I forget myself completely, when I am utterly abandoned, it happens. It happens on its own, I cannot manage. I cannot say that tomorrow it will happen. You are not the only one who is surprised. When it happens, I am myself surprised, utterly surprised because I become weightless.”

A meditator can be a dancer, in fact a far greater dancer than anybody else. A dancer can be a meditator, a far greater meditator than anybody else. A painter can be a meditator, and then his painting will have a totally different fragrance, a different flavor, a different beauty.
And this is so about all the actions – whatsoever you are doing, don’t renounce it, transform it through meditation. Action has to be transformed, not renounced. The world has to be transmuted, you are not to escape from it. It is a God-given opportunity.
Remember, the ultimate truth cannot be reduced either to action or meditation: it is both and more. Never forget the more because if you forget the more you will miss the whole point – you will miss the higher mathematics. It is transcendental, it is surpassing all dualism and all polarities. It is not just the sum total of its parts, it is something more – like beauty, like music, like poetry.
This we have heard from the enlightened ones.
Remember, these Upanishads were not written by the masters themselves; these are notes of the disciples. The masters have always believed in the spoken word and there are reasons for it. The masters have never written books. The spoken word has a lively quality to it; the written word is dead, it is a corpse.
When I am speaking to you, it is a totally different thing than when you will be reading it in a book, because when you are reading in a book it is only a word, when you are listening to the master it is more than the word. The presence of the master is overpowering. Before the word reaches you, the master has already reached, he is already over-flooding you. Your heart is breathing with the master, beating with the master in the same rhythm. You are breathing in the same rhythm. There is a communion, an invisible link. The presence of the master, his gestures, his eyes, the words spoken by him are ordinary words, but when spoken by a master they carry something of the beyond; they carry some silence, some meditativeness, some of his experience because they come from his innermost core.
It is like passing through a garden – even though you have not touched a single flower, when you reach home you can still feel the fragrance of the garden; your clothes have caught it, your hair has caught it. The pollen of the flowers was in the wind. You have not touched anything, but the fragrance was in the air; it has become something, part of you.
The master simply means a certain noosphere. The word noosphere is coined by Chardin, one of the very strange men of this century. He was basically trained as a scientist, he was a geologist, but his whole heart was that of a mystic. It is very unfortunate that he belonged to the Catholic Church, and the Pope prevented him from publishing any of his ideas while he was alive. He was such an obedient person, he followed the order, so while he was alive nobody came to know about him. His books were published only posthumously, but those books are of tremendous import because he was a scientist and yet a meditator, a man of great prayer. There is a certain synthesis. His approach is very clear, like that of a scientist and yet full of poetry.
But the world missed a direct communion with Chardin. The Catholic Church is the culprit – they prohibited. They have always been against anything new happening in the world. So only when he died did his friends start publishing his books. Now the people who have come across his books can see what the world has missed because now they are only words – beautiful words.
Chardin coined the word noosphere. We are acquainted with the word atmosphere; atmosphere means the air that surrounds you, the climate that surrounds you. Noosphere means the world of subtle vibes, thoughts, feelings, that surrounds you.
A master carries a noosphere around himself, I call it the buddhafield. Jains have a very specific idea about it, they worked very hard to find it, find out exactly what it is. And I think no other tradition has discovered all the details about the buddhafield that surrounds a master like Mahavira. Jains have worked – they were a little bit scientific in their approach – and I agree with their discoveries about the buddhafield.
They say a master has a buddhafield around himself extending in all the directions for twenty-four miles – a circle with the radius of twenty-four miles becomes a buddhafield whenever a person becomes enlightened. No other tradition has worked it out with such scientific detail – they have even measured the length, how big the circle is that surrounds the awakened person.
Whosoever is a little bit open entering the buddhafield will start feeling something strange that he has never felt before. But it happens only if one is open.
Many people ask me, “If we come here and don’t become sannyasins, will not we be able to receive your grace?” From my side there is no problem, I am not addressing my energy to anybody in particular, it is simply there. It is a noosphere, it all depends on you. To become a sannyasin simply means that you are dropping all your defenses, that you are withdrawing all your arguments, that you are opening your windows and doors to me – that’s all. It is a gesture from your side that you are vulnerable, that you are receptive, sensitive, that you are available. I am available whether you are a sannyasin or not, it does not matter. I am available even to these poles of the Buddha Hall! But what can I do – if they are not orange they will miss!
A sannyasin simply means a readiness to receive. The energy is there, if something is missing it is on your part.
All the masters of all the ages have depended on the spoken word for the simple reason that the spoken word comes directly from their innermost core. It carries the fragrance of their inner world, the richness of their inner world, the beauty of their inner world. It is soaked with their inner being, it is full of their energy. By the time it is written it will be not the same thing.
The spoken word means a communion between the master and the disciple. The written word is not a communion, it is a communication; anybody can read it. The student can read it, he need not be a disciple. The enemy can read it, he need not even be a student. Somebody can read it just to find faults in it, just to find something so that he can argue against it.
But with the spoken word it is totally different. Even if the opponent comes, the spoken word dances around him. There is every possibility that although he has come with a conclusion, a fixed idea, his fixed idea may become a little bit loosened, he may become a little relaxed. He may start looking again before he takes any decision. He may start putting his a priori ideas aside. The rumors that he has heard can be easily put aside if he comes in contact with the spoken word.
That’s why the disciple who has written these beautiful sutras, recorded them – they are his notes – says: This we have heard from the enlightened ones.
He is not saying, “This is my experience.” He is not saying, “I am the writer of these beautiful sutras.” His humbleness – that is the sign of a disciple. It has disappeared from the world; the very phenomenon of the disciple has become more and more rare, it has become almost nonexistential. Otherwise there was nobody preventing him from signing these sutras. He could have said, “These are mine.”
Just a few days ago a book in Marathi was published in Mumbai. He has stolen a whole chapter from one of my books – the whole chapter without any change, not even a single word has been added or deleted! And he has used that whole chapter as an introduction to his book. It is one of my introductions to Ashtavakra Gita, and when it was found, a letter was written to him saying, “How has this happened?” He didn’t reply. Then a notice was given to him – then he came running and he said, “I was not aware of the law.” But he was told it is not a question only of law.
“Were you not aware that you were translating the whole chapter into Marathi without changing a single word? You have not mentioned from where you have taken it, you have not asked our permission, but that is not of much importance. You have not even mentioned…even that is not of much importance. We had written a letter to you, you have not even replied to that.”
People have lost all sincerity, and this is not only so with the ordinary people – sometimes it even happens with my sannyasins. When they go back to their countries and they start a center there, sooner or later – only a few of them, but that too should not happen – they start functioning as if what they are saying is their own. They start pretending that they are enlightened people, that they are masters. If you are enlightened people, there is no problem. If you are a master there is no problem, but you are not! They go on coming to me, and they go on asking the same stupid questions they used to ask before, but back in their own countries they start behaving as if they are enlightened or masters in their own right. They repeat my words.
Just the other day I saw a booklet from a commune in Spain. The commune is run on absolutely the same lines as my commune, they even call themselves “the orange people.” They call themselves sannyasins, they use orange clothes, they wear a mala. The only difference is that there is no locket in the mala, instead of the locket they have this Hindu symbol om. They do Dynamic Meditation, they do Kundalini Meditation, they do Nadabrahma. They change their names, they use Sanskrit names, Indian names, but they don’t want it to be known that they belong to me – a commune of thirty people behaving independently!
The man who is the head has never been here, but he goes on sending his people. Many people have come here, they take sannyas here, and when they go back the only change that has to be done is to drop the picture from the locket and replace it with om, and everything is okay.
In their brochure they have used my words, my statements, without mentioning me, just translated into Spanish, and it has become their own. And you will be surprised, they run a mala shop, a boutique, a Vrindavan cafe. It is a true carbon copy!
People have lost all truthfulness. The person who has taken these notes has not even given his name, but he repeats again and again: This we have heard from the enlightened ones.
And remember, he does not say, “This I have heard” even. “We have heard…” He is simply representing the whole world of the masters’ disciples. He is not even using the word I, that “this I have heard.” This we have heard from the enlightened ones.
“Those who have known, we have heard it from them.” He does not bring himself in at all.
Just the other day I received a letter from Sudha. A few days ago she wrote a letter saying, “Osho, I am in a great conflict. I cannot leave you, I cannot live without you, and yet when I am in the commune I don’t feel absolutely surrendered to you. That makes me feel sad. I want to be absolutely surrendered, to drop all my mind and all my ego. That I cannot do, and because I could not do it you have sent me to the West. But I cannot live in the West either! I hanker for your presence, I want to be back home as soon as possible.”
She said this to one of our sannyasins, Gunakar, who runs a beautiful center in Germany, Karuna. She talked to him on the phone and Gunakar wrote her a letter saying, “Come to me and I will help you to get rid of Osho, I will help you to go beyond this attachment.”
Now he runs a center for me – helping people to get rid of me! He was here. Twice he tried to become enlightened and failed. He will declare he has become enlightened and then he will come to his senses again. Now running a center he is imitating, now he is trying to help people to go beyond the attachment.
Sudha has done a good job of writing a letter to him, saying, “I don’t want to get rid – I want to get rid of myself, not Osho! And I don’t need your help. First help yourself. Physician, heal thyself first!”
But Gunakar is getting into stupid ideas. Just a few days before he wrote a letter to all the members of UNO: “I represent Osho, I represent the hierarchy of the esoteric masters, and I want you to do these things. Unless these things are done, the world is not going to be saved.” Now he is trying to save the world – he has not even been able to save himself!
But these egoistic ideas are bound to happen because deep down the ego has lived for so long that it does not want to leave you. Even when you think you have dropped it, it simply hides somewhere, in some dark corner of your unconsciousness, and it starts functioning from there.
This is the true way of a disciple to say:
This we have heard from the enlightened ones.

Meditation and action –
he who knows these two together,
through action leaves death behind
and through meditation gains immortality.
Words that should be written in gold, far more precious than any diamonds can ever be. This is my whole approach:
Meditation and action – he who knows these two together… It is so clear. And in India people go on reciting the Isa Upanishad, but I don’t think that they ever ponder over what they are reciting. They are all escapists, they are all renouncers of the world – they have left action behind. If they have understood the Isa Upanishad and its message, they will be my sannyasins, not the old, traditional ones.
My sannyasin represents togetherness of action and meditation. He is in the world and yet not of it. He is like a lotus flower coming out of dirty mud, but transforming the mud into the beauty of a lotus – living in a lake, yet untouched by the water, absolutely untouched.
A true sannyasin should be in the world, in action, and deeply rooted in meditation. Your roots should be in meditation, your branches should be in action. You should be like a tree. Its branches go high in the sky, they are longings for the stars; it goes on rising high. But remember, a tree goes high only if its roots go deep, in the same proportion: deeper the roots, higher the branches; higher the branches, deeper the roots. They balance each other. The roots have to be in meditation and the branches in the world – in the full sunlight, dancing in the wind, whispering with the clouds; and deep inside you, in the inner world, growing roots into meditation. Then you will be a full tree.
Up to now two types of people have existed: a few have existed without roots of course, without roots a tree is bound to be false. And a few people have existed just as roots without trees, and just roots are ugly. Have you seen beautiful roots? Flowers are beautiful, but flowers need foliage, branches, the sun, the moon, the stars, the rain, the wind. They need the whole world, then those colorful flowers… These both have to be together; only then you will be an integrated, whole being.
The worldly has only branches but no roots, hence he is dull, juiceless, dry, dead, a corpse, just somehow dragging, out of old habit. And your monks, your nuns – Catholic, Hindu, Jain, whatsoever their denomination – they are just roots, ugly, not worth looking at. No question of respect, not even worth looking once! The question of twice does not arise – and without any flowers.
My sannyasin has to be both, with roots in the interior world and with flowers in the exterior world. My sannyasin has to be both, capable of intellect and also capable of intuition. There is no need to choose, whatsoever God has given has to be used to its fullest.
…through action leaves death behind and through meditation gains immortality. It is only through action, through creativity, that you go beyond death. Action functions as negative, it is the art of removing hindrances. For example, you are digging a well. Action means removing all the layers of earth and the rocks – if sometimes needed, dynamiting the rocks, drilling so that you can find the water sources. The function of action is negative; it is removing hindrances, obstacles, obstructions. The function of meditation is the realization of that which is. When the water starts coming up, meditation is drinking of the water to quench the thirst. Both are needed – action to remove the rocks, and, meditation to make you capable of drinking the ultimate, the wine of the ultimate.
…through action leaves death behind and through meditation gains immortality. These are two aspects of the same phenomenon. If you don’t leave death behind, how you can enter the world of immortality? Leave time behind so that you can enter the timeless, the deathless.
Into a blinding darkness go they who idolize the Absolute.
Philosophy idolizes the absolute. Bradley, Hegel, Shankara, they idolize the absolute and they deny the relative. The relative means it is illusory; absolute is true, and whatsoever is relative is illusory.
Into an even greater darkness go they who dote on the relative.
Science emphasizes the relative. Albert Einstein discovered the theory of relativity. Jainism has a little bit of scientific attitude hence Jains were the first to contemplate on the theory of relativity. Albert Einstein without knowing it is a Jain! Before Albert Einstein, twenty-five centuries before him, Jains discovered syatvad. Syatvad means the theory of relativity. Einstein says everything is relative. Syatvad can literally be translated as perhapsism. Everything is just a perhaps, nothing is absolutely certain, just a perhaps.
If you ask Mahavira, “Does God exist?” he will say, “Perhaps.” If you ask him, “Are you absolutely sure about it?” he will say, “Perhaps.” He will never budge from his perhaps. Everything is only a perhaps because everything is relative. Nothing can be said absolutely, certainly, categorically. It depends, and one thing can be looked at from many standpoints.
Syatvad, perhapsism, has seven standpoints. If you ask about God, Mahavira will give you seven statements. He will confuse you more than you were ever confused before! He will say, “Perhaps God is,” his first statement. “Perhaps God is not,” his second statement. “Perhaps God is both,” his third statement. Fourth: “Perhaps God is and inexpressible,” his fourth. “Perhaps God is not and is inexpressible,” fifth. “Perhaps God is and is not both, and also is inexpressible.” You may have come to him with a little bit of understanding for or against, but he will destroy all your standpoints. He will give you the whole perspective, from all the standpoints.
That’s what Albert Einstein has done, of course in a more scientific way; Mahavira’s way is far more philosophical. Albert Einstein used to say, “At the most only one dozen people in the whole world understand what I am saying.” Not that there are not many more intelligent people in the world, but the very idea of relativity has something fundamentally wrong about it.
Something can be relative only if you accept the absolute. If you don’t accept the absolute, then what do you mean by the relative? Even the meaning of the word relative loses all significance, it loses meaning. Relative simply means that which is not absolute, but what is absolute? According to Albert Einstein there is nothing absolute: all is relative. And according to the absolutists there is nothing relative, all is absolute. Then what do you mean by absolute? The very term has meaning only in contrast to the relative.
The Upanishads are very clear. They say: Into the blinding darkness go they who idolize the Absolute.
Because they have chosen again one side of the coin: the unchanging, the axle. And: into an even greater darkness go they who dote on the relative. They have chosen the other side, the wheel, the moving, the momentary, the temporary, the changing. But change is possible only on the foundation of no-change. The wheel cannot move without the axle. And what is the meaning of the axle if there is no wheel? They are together and they are meaningful only in their togetherness.
The Isa Upanishad is trying to make it clear to never choose, remain choicelessly aware and accept life as it is, don’t impose any choice of your own. The absolute is there. The relative is there. Your mind is relative, but your consciousness is absolute. Your body changes, your mind changes – they are like a wheel – but your witnessing consciousness is like an axle, it remains always the same, never changing. It is on that axle that the mind-and-the-body wheel moves. They are not against each other; they are supporting each other, they are complementary to each other. This high synthesis is the message of the Upanishads.
For It is other than the relative,
It is other than the Absolute.
Because it is beyond both and more.
This we have heard from the enlightened ones.
The disciple again and again repeats it so that you don’t forget that he is not speaking on his own authority, he is simply recording the words of the master. This sincerity is part of disciplehood, and only through this sincerity can a disciple one day become enlightened.
Enlightenment happens only if you become more and more sincere and authentic. And you have to be very alert because the ways of the ego are very subtle, it would like to claim that which you don’t have. Beware of the ego!
Om
purnam adaha
purnam idam
purnat purnam udachyate
purnasya purnam adaya purnam evavashishyate

Om
That is the whole.
This is the whole.
From wholeness emerges wholeness.
Wholeness coming from wholeness,
wholeness still remains.
Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
We Indians know that we have been caught in serious diseases for centuries, but when such a great doctor like you refuses us, what will become of us?
I am not refusing anybody, but I certainly have to refuse your diseases. I cannot accept your diseases, no physician can do that. Those who accept your diseases are your enemies. Your diseases have to be mercilessly destroyed, whoever you are: Indian, German, English. Diseases come in all forms, sizes and shapes. You may be a Hindu or a Christian or a Jew, it does not matter.
The whole past of humanity has been full of many fundamental errors, but they have existed for so long that they have almost become part of you, hence the feeling that I reject you. I am simply rejecting the disease, but you are identified with the disease. You think your diseases, the sum total of your diseases, is what you are. That’s not true, you are not just your diseases, you are something beyond all that has happened to you in the whole past. All that has happened is only a conditioning; it can be dropped, it has to be dropped. Hence I condemn it, but your ego feels hurt. I cannot help… I cannot have any compassion for any kind of disease.
When diseases exist for a long time, and they are given from one generation to another generation, they become very respectable. You forget that they are diseases, you start thinking that they are specialties to you.
For example, T. M. Ramachandran has asked, “Osho, why do you say that nothing has been happening in the East? Great, great things have been happening in the East as well. Is not Hinduism and its way of life the greatest religion in the world?”
What is this Hindu way of life? It is utterly life-negative. Even to call it a way of life is not right. It can be called a way of death, but not a way of life. How can anything life-negative become a philosophy of life?
Hinduism teaches you to reject life, to renounce life. You worship the escapist people; you call them saints, mahatmas. Those who have gone against the world, those who have rejected the world, those who have condemned the world and all that it contains, they are thought to be people of God.
God exists in the manifest world as the unmanifest center of it all. The moment you reject the flower you also reject its fragrance; if you escape from the flower you are escaping from the fragrance too – and God is the fragrance of existence. Those who go against life are basically going against God.
You have heard the proverb: Man proposes and God disposes. Hinduism does just the opposite: God proposes, man disposes. It is God’s proposition – this existence, this life, but man disposes it.
George Gurdjieff, one of the greatest masters of this century, used to say, “Your mahatmas are all against God.” He is absolutely right, one hundred percent right because your mahatmas are denouncers. They negate. They make you feel guilty of love, of life, of laughter. They make you feel guilty if you are joyous, if you are cheerful. They make you feel guilty if you enjoy food, if you enjoy friendship, if you enjoy any kind of relationship. They make you feel guilty for all that you enjoy and they impose things upon you for which there is no enjoyment in you.
All that you can do with these negative attitudes is nourish your ego. Hence your mahatmas are the most egoistic people in the world. But when one starts thinking of diseases as if they are something great, then it becomes very difficult for you to listen to the physician.
I don’t reject anybody. To me it is all the same whether you are a Hindu or a Mohammedan or a Christian. Your diseases are a little bit different, but not basically because all the religions that have existed in the past have used a similar strategy and that is to create guilt. That has been the technique of the priest to dominate you, make people feel guilty of small joys – and of course those joys are natural and spontaneous.
When a person becomes guilty of his own nature he starts rejecting himself, he starts dying. It is a slow kind of suicide. He becomes sad, he becomes drained off, his life loses flavor. And then of course, trembling, he has to go to the priest because the priest knows the way, how to go beyond this guilt. The priest creates the guilt in the first place – it is his trade secret – and then you have to go to the priest because there is nobody else who can guide you. That is the business of the priest, to guide you about spiritual affairs. And you are feeling so sad, so miserable; you need help, you need somebody to support you. You need somebody to teach you ways, means, methods, so that you can get rid of your guilt.
But the priest goes on creating more guilt in you. He creates so much fear of life in you that Hinduism became obsessed with the idea of how to get rid of birth and death, how to get rid of avagaman – coming and going into existence.
Life is so beautiful!

Rabindranath, one of the great poets of all time, was on his deathbed. A friend – a very religious friend, of course – told him, “Pray to God that this should be your last life, you should be freed.”
Rabindranath opened his eyes – his last moments, but he became angry and he said, “Shut up! I am praying to God, ‘your life has been such a beautiful gift to me, give it to me again and again. I would like to come back to see the sunrise, the sunset, the starry night, the flowers, a bird on the wing, the green trees, your rivers, your mountains, your people. I would like to come again and again and again! It is so vast and inexhaustible, and it has not been a misery to me.’”
Rabindranath is against your whole tradition of the so-called Hinduism. He is one of the most insightful persons that was born into this unfortunate country. He lived joyously, he lived a life of celebration: he loved poetry, created poetry; he loved painting, he created many paintings – he sang, he danced.
This is true prayer! And because of this I say Rabindranath is not a Hindu. He was so much against renunciation that he dared even to write a poem against Gautam the Buddha. The poem is of immense beauty and of great meaning too.

Buddha had left his young wife and a child who was just one day old. Buddha was only twenty-nine years of age and he escaped – that was the ancient Hindu way. He escaped into the forest to find God.
Rabindranath describes Buddha’s renunciation and describes that when he became enlightened he came back home to share his experience.
Yashodhara, his wife, asked him one question that he could not answer. He stood before Yashodhara with his eyes looking at the earth, ashamed. Only Rabindranath could have dared such a poem. What was the question that Yashodhara had asked? She had asked a very simple question, “Now that you have become enlightened, please answer one of my questions that has been haunting my days and my nights for all these years that you have been away. Since you left I have been tortured by this question and I have been waiting because only you can answer it.”
The question was, “Whatsoever you have found in the deep silence of the forest, was it not possible to find it here in the palace with me, with your child, with your old father who has almost gone blind crying and weeping for you? And just look at me! I have become so old within these six years, just waiting every moment for you, waking up in the night again and again, maybe – you had left in the night, you may have come again. Dreaming about you. Ask your son, he has been continuously asking me, ‘Where is my father?’ The whole kingdom is sad, the palace is sad, it has become a cemetery. Just answer one of my questions. Whatsoever you have found in the forest, was it not possible to find it here?”
And Buddha stood ashamed. He could not answer.

This is a parable invented by Rabindranath, but it has great significance. Rabindranath is saying God can be found now and here. There is no need to go into the forest; there is no need to renounce the wife, the children, the old parents. There is no need to go against life. Going against life is like trying to go upstream, fighting with the river – an unnecessary fight. Relax, rest, enjoy and God can be found anywhere because he is everywhere.
Hinduism is life-negative, that’s why it has respected the ascetics. Now, the ascetics are nothing but masochist people, absolutely ill, psychologically ill. The ascetic is the person who enjoys torturing himself, and Hindus have respected the ascetics. The more you torture yourself, the greater a saint you are. So if you lie down on a bed of thorns, thousands will gather to worship you. If you fast for months, then your name and fame will spread to all the corners of the country.
And one of the strangest things is that nobody ever asks, “What has this man contributed to life?” Lying on the bed of thorns is not a contribution; it does not make life more beautiful, it does not enrich existence in any way. Just fasting for months is not a creative act – it is destructive, it is really suicidal.
Hinduism is suicidal. That’s why it was possible for this country to remain in slavery for twenty-two centuries – for the simple reason that nobody is interested in life, so what does it matter who rules it? It is all a dream, it is all maya. Let anybody rule it.
This country has lost its soul because only people who love freedom can have souls. This country only talks about the soul, but slaves can’t have souls. But slaves can always rationalize, in fact they have to rationalize, just to console themselves.
Hindus have become great rationalizers, they rationalize everything: “It is fate, nothing can be done about it. God has decided so. Not even a leaf falls from a tree without the will of God, so how can the country be a slave without the will of God? He must have chosen, we have simply to accept the fate.”
When one starts accepting the fate one becomes lazy, sloppy, lousy because then nothing is left for you to do.

It was the morning after, and he sat groaning and holding his head.
“Well, if you hadn’t drunk so much last night you wouldn’t feel so bad now,” said his wife tartly.
“My drinking had nothing to do with it,” he answered. “I went to bed feeling wonderful and woke up feeling awful. It was the sleep that did it!”

You can always rationalize. You are not responsible – whatsoever had to happen, had to happen. What can you do about it?
India has remained the poorest country in the world, and nobody thinks that Hinduism is the cause of it. If you believe in fate you will not endeavor to become rich, you will not make any effort to be scientific, you will not create technology, industry. You will simply wait. Whenever God changes his will, things will change. As far as you are concerned, nothing can be done about it.

A newly rich dame had bought a summer place in the Himalayas and hired a village woman to do the housework.
“I am a person of few words,” she haughtily told the old woman. “If I beckon with my finger, that means ‘come.’”
“Very well, madam,” replied the old Indian woman. “I am a person of few words myself. If I shake my head from side to side, that means ‘I am not coming.’”

Just watch what you are talking about. A great religion, the greatest religion, and what has it given to you: poverty, starvation, illness. The whole country is living undernourished, sixty percent of people are starving, and nothing is being done. Problems go on increasing and Hindus simply go on sitting, worshipping the elephant god Ganesh, or the monkey god Hanuman, or the holy mother cow, and hoping that these elephants, monkeys and cows are going to help! It has now become so deep rooted that something drastic is needed.
That’s what I am trying to do. Naturally I will offend the unintelligent crowds, I can only be understood by the very intelligent few.

Barfly: “What’s that drink you are mixing?”
Bartender: “I call it a rum overture.”
Barfly: “What’s in it?”
Bartender: “Sugar, a dash of clam juice, and rum.”
Barfly: “How is it?”
Bartender: “Stimulating. The sugar gives you energy and the clam juice gives you drive.”
Barfly: “And the rum?”
Bartender: “Ah, that! That gives you ideas about what to do with all that energy and drive.”

I am mixing a rum overture! You need some drive and you need some ideas what to do with that drive and energy.
I am not rejecting anyone, but I have to reject all these life-negative attitudes. India has become a country of hypocrites for the simple reason that whenever you deny nature that is bound to happen. Nature will assert, is bound to assert. You can repress it for the time being, but not for ever, and whatsoever is repressed will take revenge on you, it will come back with vengeance, it will come back.
So on the one hand you will see Hinduist morality, puritanism, and on the other hand you will see the Hindu obscenity.
The Kama Sutra of Vatsyayana was the first book on obscenity in the whole world. Only in this century Havelock Ellis, Sigmund Freud, Kinsey, Masters and Johnson, these people have started thinking about sexual postures, sex energy and what it is all about and what can be done about it. But Vatsyayana’s Kama Sutras are three thousand years old. Vatsyayana was a Hindu, and Hindus have respected him. They have called him maharishi, the great seer. On the one hand the so-called moralists and on the other hand The Kama Sutras of Vatsyayana and the Koka Shastra of Pundit Koka. Pundit Koka was a Kashmiri Hindu brahmin of the highest caste and his book is fifteen hundred years old, and one of the ugliest in the world. And he was an ordained Hindu.
Who has created the temples of Konarak, Puri, and Khajuraho? On the one hand Hindus have been teaching brahmacharya, celibacy, as the highest goal for humanity; on the other hand they were making sculpture so obscene that it is incomparable. Nowhere else in the world exists any temple like the Khajuraho temples. And it was not only one temple, it was a whole city of temples. At least one hundred temples still survive; there must have been a thousand temples – the ruins are there – and each temple has thousands of obscene postures. They must have taken hundreds of years to make. And if you see Khajuraho you will not believe!
These people who publish magazines like Playboy and Playgirl should come and learn from Khajuraho. Whatsoever they are doing is just ordinary. They cannot compete with Hindu fantasy for the simple reason that they cannot compete with Hindu repression! Once you repress something natural, it starts coming into your mind, it starts moving toward your head. It may disappear from the sex center, which was a natural phenomenon, but now it enters your head.
This has driven the whole Hindu culture toward a very schizophrenic existence. It seems almost impossible how to relate these two phenomena going together.
Pundit Koka of Kashmir – and he is not alone. In the name of Tantra almost ninety-nine charlatans have been bringing sex from the back door. In the tradition of Tantra you will find only one percent authentic masters; ninety-nine percent are just pseudo, tricky people. In the name of Tantra they are bringing the whole sexuality from the back door.
Pundit Koka says that if you really want to move deep into the phenomenon of sex then you have to find a woman of the lowest caste. She has not to be your wife because with your wife you will not be able to enter a really fantastic world of sexuality. Her topography is known to you, her geography is known to you, there is nothing to explore. So find a woman who is not your wife.
Secondly, the woman has to come from the lowest caste because they are more alive people. The higher the caste, the people are more and more bloodless. If you go to the lower castes then people are more alive, more wild. Hence I say to you that Coca-Cola must have originated with Pundit Koka – Cola must have been his girlfriend. That’s why it is so juicy, it is a discovery of the great tantrikas – Coca-Cola!
I am not rejecting Hindus, Jews, Jains or anybody. I have no antagonism with anybody. I don’t belong to any tradition, hence for me all the traditions are the same, but because I don’t belong to any tradition I can see the diseases clearly. When you belong to a tradition you cannot see, your eyes are clouded, you are prejudiced.
Repression brings hypocrisy, and you can see it in India everywhere. People will say that the world is illusory and at the same time they will be as greedy about money as nobody else in the world is. This is strange, but not really if you go deeply into it because they are denying something natural – the world is given to you by God. If you deny it you will have to become obsessed with it, every denial becomes obsession.
“Renounce money!” these people go on saying. If you go to Vinoba Bhave, who represents Hindu tradition, and you take a few notes in your hand, he will immediately close his eyes – he does not see money. Now poor paper, just printed, and makes the Hindu mahatma so afraid that he closes his eyes! It cannot be the currency notes; it must be some deep fear, some greed. He does not touch money.
On the one hand these people go on saying that gold is nothing but dust, but they will not touch gold.
I had asked Vinoba when I met him – he was very eager to meet me, so I said, “Okay now it is your responsibility. If you want to meet me, then I am no longer responsible. Whatsoever happens, transpires, transpires!”
I asked him, “If you say that gold is just dust, why don’t you touch gold? You touch dust!”
In fact, Vinoba Bhave believes in naturopathy – mud packs, mud baths. He is very at ease with mud, enjoys it. Then what is wrong with gold? I take gold baths, gold packs! If it is the same, why bother? But it is not the same. If he is afraid of touching gold and is not afraid of touching dust, then he is being cunning, deceptive – not only to others but to himself too. Then don’t call gold just dust, then gold has some speciality which dust has not got.
You will find Hindus more greedy than anybody else, more full of sexuality than anybody else, more full of sexual fantasies than anybody else, more full of attachment than anybody else. And still you go on saying that Hinduism is the greatest religion in the world? What nonsense are you talking about? Hindus are the most dishonest people for the simple reason that they have not been honest to accept the realities of life.

A man met a friend he had not seen for years and asked him how he was feeling.
“Awful,” replied the friend. “In addition to my high blood pressure I have got arthritis and bronchitis.”
“I am sorry to hear it. What about your job?”
“Oh, I’m still at the same thing I’ve been doing for the past twenty years – I’m selling health foods.”

This man must have been a Hindu! Selling health foods and suffering from high blood pressure, arthritis and bronchitis!

We all know the legend how Diogenes, the great Greek mystic, used to go about with a lantern looking for an honest man, even in the bright daylight. Some modern cynics ask why the cynic philosopher didn’t go about in broad daylight without his lantern. Others ask why he didn’t look in a mirror. Naturally enough, the legend appears in joke-lore. One story tells how Diogenes had spent several hours after dark searching crime-ridden New Delhi for an honest man, and was very weary. A passerby, recognizing him, asked, “What luck?”
“Everything considered, not so bad,” reported Diogenes. “I still have my lantern!”

In Delhi that is really lucky if you can save your lantern, even in the bright day! Some politician is bound to grab it!
The Indian politician is the worst kind of politician in the world, for the simple reason that he belongs to a very ugly, ill, canceric civilization. Hinduism is on its deathbed, or maybe it is already dead and people are worshipping a corpse because it stinks.
I would like to change this whole situation. Hindus, if they are courageous enough, will disconnect themselves from their past, that will be a resurrection. And they can prove, certainly, a great blessing to the whole world because for centuries they have not worked, their potential has remained unactualized. It is like a farm that has not been cultivated for centuries. If you cultivate it right now it will give you the best crop possible because for centuries it has been accumulating potential.
Hindus can assert a new era in the world: if they resurrect, if they drop out of their old past, if they disconnect themselves from their tradition, if they can have a new birth, they may prove the most intelligent people in the world. Their contribution can not only transform this country, it can be a boon, a blessing to the whole life on the earth because they have genius gone wrong; they have intelligence gone astray. If it comes to the right dimension it will be good for their own health, it will be good for the health of the whole world.
The same is true about other races too. Any race that remains clinging with the past remains clinging with corpses. One has to live in the present because the future is born out of the present. And India is living in the past. Out of the past nothing is born, clinging to the past is wasting your time.
Everything in India is past-oriented. People are reading the story of Rama, and these are the days all over the country when they will be playing the drama of Rama. Every year they go on playing the same drama, for thousands of years they have been doing it. They are not even bored by it! It seems they have lost all intelligence. They go on seeing the same thing, repeating the same thing, as if there is nothing else to do. And they go on talking about the golden age – in the past, it is always in the past.
Remember this, a child always thinks good days are to come; the old man always thinks good days, golden days are past. The child is future-oriented, the old man is past-oriented, and the young man, if he is really young – which is very rarely so… Physically there are so many young people in the world, they constitute the majority. But many of them are still in their childhood psychologically, and many of them have already passed into old age psychologically.
If somebody is really young he lives in the present. Now is the only time for him and here is the only place for him. He does not waver between past and future because both are nonexistential. That which exists is the present. The young person lives in the present, and the same is true about civilizations.
The young civilization lives in the present, and if a civilization continuously lives in the present it remains young. That is the whole secret of remaining young. The new civilization, just born, immature, childish, lives in the future; and the old civilization lives in the past. You can immediately see and decide and categorize any civilization, to what category it belongs.
India lives in the past; it is getting old, shrinking. It has lost the joy of life, the youthfulness, the freshness. Countries like Russia, China live in the future. Their golden age is to come, when the classless society, the utopia conceived by Karl Marx will happen, when there will be no class, no poor, no rich, no one dominated and no one dominating, no bourgeoisie, no proletariat. When the classless society and the stateless society are born, somewhere far away in the future, then humanity will have a golden age.
Countries like India live in the past, the golden age has passed long before. Man is falling down. There is great enthusiasm in China because the future seems to be very alluring; there is no enthusiasm in India. India became free before China, but China has been able to solve many problems that are of a vaster dimension than Indian problems because China has the greatest population in the world. But it has been able to solve those problems, it has been able to become a strong country.
India has remained poor; its problems have increased, and there seems to be no possibility that it can solve its problems the way it is moving. Its golden age has passed; there is no enthusiasm, there is no spirit. People are simply dragging.
America is young, lives in the moment, hence there is great exploration going on about everything: science, religion, philosophy, art – new forms of art; new methods, new ways to reach the moon, to Mars and finally to the stars; new methods, quicker methods to enter meditation, samadhi. In every dimension America is interested to explore, the young man’s adventurous spirit is there. They are going to the farthest corners of the world to explore all possibilities.
India is old, dying. China is still being born, just now growing toward a future. America is young.
The future can give you better possibilities than the past, but still the future is nonexistential; sooner or later you will get tired of it. Russia is more tired than China because for sixty years they have been waiting and waiting, and now the hope is turning into a hopelessness. Now it is becoming more and more clear that that stateless society is never going to happen. In fact, the state has become more powerful than ever before. Even the czar was not so powerful as Joseph Stalin was. The czar was thrown by revolution, but in Russia now there is no possibility of any revolution. The state has become such a vast, powerful, technically equipped organization that nobody can revolt against it, nobody can organize any revolution against it. Even to talk anything against it is dangerous, even to think may be dangerous in a few years because now they are discovering that every child can be fixed with an electrode in the head and that electrode will go on informing the government computer what the person is thinking, what he is trying to do in his brain. Even brain waves can be traced, subtle indications can be discovered, and before the man has even uttered a single word he will disappear.
And those electrodes can also do another work: they can implant any idea in the person and you will never be aware that you are carrying an electrode inside your brain because within your skull there is no sensitivity. If a stone is inserted inside your skull you will not feel that there is a stone. There are no sensitive nerves in the brain.
A person carried a bullet in his brain for nine years, absolutely unaware. It was discovered by accident through x-ray, that in the First World War he had been hit by a bullet, and then the wound healed and the bullet remained inside for nine years, and he was not aware at all.
Electrodes are very small things, they can be inserted when the child is born in the hospital. And of course in Russia every child is born in the hospital, so every child can be inserted with an electrode and that electrode will function in two ways – it will inform the government what the person is thinking, and it can do one more thing: the government can manipulate the person through the electrode; it can insert ideas through radio waves, through remote control. And the person will think, “These are my ideas,” he will never think that these ideas are coming from some other source.
In Russia, a revolution is absolutely impossible, hence people are becoming more and more hopeless seeing that Marx had said the state will wither away – once capitalism is gone there will be no need for the state – but the state has become stronger and stronger. Marx’s prediction has gone absolutely wrong, just the opposite has happened.
The same is going to happen to China. Right now they are very enthusiastic, but soon they will settle into the same slavery as Russia has settled into.
The people who are past-oriented, like the Hindus, are living with a long, long dead past – and carrying it. It is a mountainous weight, they are crushed under it. There is no hope in the future. The Hindus think that the best days were in the beginning; they don’t believe in evolution, remember – they believe in involution. Evolution means we are reaching higher peaks. Hindus believe we are deteriorating, coming lower, every day, the highest age was in the beginning; now we are at the lowest, Kaliyuga, the last. This is the very low state of humanity and there is no hope.
For a country to be really alive, to be really adventurous, exploring, enjoying, celebrating, it has to be constantly young, neither in the past nor in the future. I am against both the Hindu approach and the communist approach. I would like the whole humanity to be young and to remain young forever, and the way to remain young is to go on dying to the past and not bother too much about the future. The future will take its own course. When it comes, if we are here we will respond to it, otherwise our children will respond to it. Why bother about it too much?
Live right now. Live as deeply and passionately as you can because that is the only way to discover God. That’s the only source to uncover the hidden secrets of life. God is not against life, God is the innermost core of life. Hence I teach a life-affirmative religion. I don’t teach Hinduism, Mohammedanism, Christianity; I only teach a kind of religiousness. The world is fed up with all these “isms.”
There are three hundred religions and at least three thousand sub-sects of those religions. The world needs one universal religiousness.
My sannyasins don’t belong to any religion at all, they simply belong to a new phenomenon – a religionless religiousness. The essential of religion, of all the religions, will be saved, but the peripheral will have to be dropped, the nonessential will have to be simply burned.
The nonessential has grown too much in Hinduism, it is ninety-nine percent nonessential. And the same is true about other religions too, more or less, because Hinduism is the oldest one. Christianity is only two thousand years old, Mohammedanism only fourteen hundred years old, Sikhism only five hundred years old – of course, they are not that old so they have a little more life. But Hinduism, Jainism are very ancient – Jainism perhaps even older than Hinduism, hence more dead, hence more in the grave, not even on the deathbed, Hinduism is on the deathbed, at least Jainism is already in the grave!
We need a rejuvenation, not of something old but of the essential which is eternal. I call that eternal religiousness, sanatan dharma. Aes dhammo sanantano – the eternal religion. It has nothing to do with Hinduism, it is nontemporal. Meditation is the most significant part of it, and out of meditation, the transformation of your whole character.
I am not against anybody, but I have to say the truth as it is. I cannot compromise – truth is always uncompromising. I cannot be polite either because that politeness will not help. I have to be mercilessly hammering continuously on all that is wrong and all that is ill. Chunk by chunk all the nonessential, ritualistic religion has to be destroyed. When only the essential is left you will see the youngness of it, the freshness of it, the fragrance of it.
And the world is now in a great need because man as he exists now, cannot exist any more. Either he has to commit a global suicide or he has to come out of the past like a snake moving out of the old skin. He has to be reborn.
Only a new man can survive, the old man is incapable of survival in the future. Science has grown so much that unless we bring religion also to the same par, there will be no balance. Religion is lagging far behind and science is growing so speedily every day that if we don’t also bring religion to the present, science and religion cannot meet. And in that meeting is the only hope.
The meeting of science and religion will create the new man, the new synthesis.

The second question:
Osho,
You have spoken many times about Zen masters, and today you said that J. Krishnamurti is Zen and Zen means no teaching. Can you explain this point?
Zen certainly means no teaching at all, no doctrine. That’s what J. Krishnamurti has been saying for fifty years or more. He never mentions the name Zen, but that does not make any difference; what he says is exactly, essentially the same.
But on one point there is a great difference. Zen says there is no teaching, truth cannot be taught. Nobody can give you the truth, truth has to be discovered within your own soul. It cannot be borrowed from the scriptures. It is not possible even to communicate it, it is inexpressible; by its very nature, intrinsically, it is indefinable. Truth happens to you in a wordless silence, in deep, deep meditation. When there is no thought, no desire, no ambition, in that state of no-mind truth descends in you – or ascends in you. As far as the dimension of truth is concerned both are the same because in the world of the innermost subjectivity, height and depth mean the same. It is one dimension, the vertical dimension.
The mind moves horizontally, no-mind exists vertically. The moment the mind ceases to function – that’s what meditation is all about, cessation of the mind; total cessation of the mind – your consciousness becomes vertical, depth and height are yours.
So either you can say truth descends, as many mystics like Patanjali, Badarayana, Kapil and Kanad have said. It is avataran – coming from the heights to you. Hence whenever a person becomes self-realized he is called an avatar. Avatar means truth has descended in him. The word avatar simply means descending from the above, from the beyond.
But the other expression is as valid. Adinatha, Neminatha, Mahavira, Gautam Buddha, these mystics have said that truth does not come from the beyond, it arises from the deepest source of your being. It is not something coming down but something rising up, welling up.
Both expressions are valid to me, two ways of saying the same thing – that the dimension is vertical. Either you can talk in terms of height, or in terms of depth. But truth never comes from the outside, so nobody can teach you.
As far as this point is concerned, Krishnamurti is absolutely Zen. Truth cannot be taught, cannot be transmitted. Zen masters – Bodhidharma, Lin Chi, Bokuju, Basho – they have all been emphasizing one point, that Zen is transmission beyond scriptures, beyond words. On this point J. Krishnamurti is in absolute agreement with Zen.
But there is one more thing in Zen which is missing in J. Krishnamurti, and because of that he has utterly failed. He could have been of great help and upliftment to humanity, but he has utterly failed. In fact, I don’t know another name in the whole history of humanity who has so utterly failed as J. Krishnamurti. No other enlightened person has been such a failure. The other thing that is missing is the cause. It is a little bit delicate and you will have to be very attentive about it.
Zen says truth cannot be transmitted, hence it can only happen in a master–disciple relationship. It cannot be taught so there is no question of a relationship between the teacher and the taught – because there is no teaching so there is no teacher and no taught. But it is a transmission. Transmission means heart to heart: teaching means head to head.
When the disciple and the master meet, merge, melt into each other, it is a love affair. It is a deep, orgasmic experience, far deeper than any love because even lovers go on carrying their egos and egos are bound to clash, conflict. The master and the disciple exist without egos. The master’s ego has evaporated – that’s why he is a master – and the disciple surrenders his ego to the master.
Remember, by surrendering the ego, the disciple is not surrendering anything in particular because the ego is just an idea and nothing else. It has no substance, it is made of the same stuff dreams are made of. When you surrender your dreams, what are you surrendering?
If you come to me and you say, “I offer all my dreams to you,” you are offering, but I am not getting anything. You may be thinking that you are offering great dreams of golden palaces and beautiful women and great treasures; you are offering great dreams, but I am not getting anything.
When you offer your ego to the master you are offering something as far as you are concerned because you think it is very substantial, very significant. When you surrender you think you are doing something great. As far as the master is concerned he is simply laughing at the whole thing because he knows what your ego is – just hot air, nothing much to brag about!
But a device, a simple device, can help immensely. It is a device. The master says, “Surrender the ego.” When he says, “Surrender the ego,” he is saying, “Give me that which you don’t have at all, but you believe that you have. Give me your belief – I am ready to take it. Let this excuse help you.” You may not be able to drop it on your own, but in love with the master you may be able, you may gather courage to risk. Love encourages you to risk. In love you can go to any lengths. When you are in love with the master and he says, “Give me your ego,” how can you say no?
To be with a master means in a state of saying yes, yes, and again yes! It is an absolute yes, unconditional yes. So when he says, “Give me your ego,” you simply give your ego to the master. To you it is very important; to him it has no meaning, no substance, no existence, but he accepts it.
The moment you drop your ego, the meeting starts happening. Now two zeros start moving into each other. Two lovers enter each other’s bodies, that is a physical phenomenon and the orgasm that happens is a physical thing. The master and the disciple are lovers of the spiritual plane: two zeros, two egoless beings enter each other. In that merger something is transpired. Not that the master gives you something, not that you take something, but because of the meeting something happens, out of the meeting something happens – something which is greater than the master and greater than the disciple, something more than the meeting of these two, something transcendental.
That part is missing in Krishnamurti. He says truth cannot be taught, but he has missed the other point. Yes, it cannot be taught, but he is a logical person and that is his problem. He is trying to put his enlightenment very logically, he does not want to bring any illogicality in it, any paradox in it.
Now, Zen people don’t bother about logic, they live the ultimate paradox. They go on saying there is no teaching, and truth cannot be taught. And still Zen masters are there, and Zen disciples are there. People have raised questions, skeptical people have always raised questions: “What is this? On the one hand you say truth cannot be taught, and on the other hand why do you initiate, why do you accept people?”
The Zen masters have always laughed because this paradox cannot be explained. If you want to really know it, you have to become a disciple, you have to become a participant, you have to become part of the mystery; only then will you have the taste of it. It is a taste, no explanation can help. If you have tasted sugar you know it is sweet, but no explanation can give you the idea of sweetness. If you have seen light you know what it is, but to the blind man you cannot explain, it is utterly futile.
Zen masters have never bothered, hence their statements are very paradoxical.

One Zen master, Ikkyu, was staying in a temple, just an overnight stay, but it was a cold night and he was shivering. In the middle of the night he got up and found one of Buddha’s statues, a wooden statue, and burned it, and was very happy with the fire and the warmth.
The priest of the temple, seeing the light and the fire inside the temple, could not believe what was happening. He was a little suspicious when he had allowed this Ikkyu to stay for the night in the temple, but he had not thought that he would do such a thing. “He will set the whole temple on fire!” He rushed in and he found he had burned one of the most beautiful statues of the Buddha. And he was of course angry, and he shouted at Ikkyu, “What you have done? And you think you are a Buddhist? And you are wearing the yellow robes of the Buddhist monk! And I have even heard that not only are you a Buddhist monk, you are a great master and you have many followers! And what have you done?” The statue was completely burned.
Ikkyu took his staff and started searching in the ashes for something. The priest asked, “What are you looking for?”
He said, “I am looking for Buddha’s bones.”
In the East we call the bones flowers. When a man dies we collect his bones after the body is completely burned. Those bones are called flowers.
So he said, “I am looking for Buddha’s flowers.”
Even the priest could not resist laughing. He said, “You are crazy! How can you find flowers in a wooden statue?”
Now it was the turn of Ikkyu to laugh, and he laughed and he said, “Then you are not so stupid as I thought! Bring… There are two more statues in the temple and it is still a long night. Why don’t you also join? It is so warm, and we will also burn those two other statues; when there are no bones in it, certainly it is not a real Buddha – just wood.”
The priest became so afraid of this madman he threw him out. It was dangerous to keep him inside the temple – he may burn the other two statues! The temple only had three statues.
In the morning when the priest opened the doors he saw Ikkyu bowing down in front of the temple before a milestone. He had put a few flowers – must have gathered some wild flowers – he had put those flowers on the milestone and was doing his morning prayers and meditations. He was repeating the famous Buddhist mantra: “Buddham sharanam gachchhami – I go to the feet of the master, Buddha. Sangham sharanam gachchhami – I go to the feet of the commune of my master. Dhammam sharanam gachchhami – I go to the feet of the ultimate truth that my master realized.”
The priest came, shook him and said, “What are you doing? You are really absolutely mad! This is a milestone, this is not Buddha! You have burned a Buddha statue in the night, and now before a milestone you are doing your prayers and saying, ‘Buddham sharanam gachchhami, sangham sharanam gachchhami, dhammam sharanam gachchhami?’”
Ikkyu said, “It is not a question whether it is a statue or not, the question is my heart. It is morning time. I am doing my prayer. Any excuse will do. In the night I burned one excuse – that was only an excuse, it was not Buddha. This is another excuse, and this is far simpler because I can find the milestone anywhere. I need not be dependent on any temple, on any statue.”
The priest said, “You are very illogical!”

And that’s what has been told to the Zen masters down the ages – since the days of Mahakashyap, the first Zen master, the first Patriarch, it has been again and again said that, “You are paradoxical. On the one hand you deny that there is no teaching, on the other hand you become disciples, masters. On the one hand you say there is no prayer, on the other hand you pray to Buddha.”
You have to be very, very alert to understand the paradox. The prayer has to be out of your overflowing love, it has nothing to do with the statue or the stone. Those are just excuses. Buddha is everywhere – to Buddhists, Buddha means God. The stone is as much Buddha as the statue. The whole existence is full of buddhahood, godliness, and the master has experienced it.
The disciple accepts the master so that he can come closer to him. In saying yes to the master he becomes attuned with the master. The word attunement is beautiful it means at-onement. He becomes one with the master. In that oneness something that cannot be given through words is transpired through the being – something like bringing an unlit candle close to a lit candle. There is a certain point when the unlit candle comes within that limit – suddenly the flame from the lit candle jumps into the unlit candle. The lit candle loses nothing at all, but the unlit candle gains infinitely.
Now the reverse process is happening, when the disciple comes to the master he gives his ego and thinks he is losing much – and the master gets nothing. When the master gives something he gives infinitely, he gives his light, but he loses nothing, his light remains the same. From one lit candle you can light millions of candles, and the lit candle loses nothing at all, although the unlit candles gain infinitely.
This point is missing in J. Krishnamurti, hence whatsoever he is saying is Zen, but he is not doing Zen – saying but not doing.
I am saying and doing both, and only doing can bring fulfillment, flowering. Just saying is not going to help. Whether you say positively something about truth, or you say something negative about truth, it is useless. Even saying that truth cannot be told is meaningless. What is the point saying again and again for fifty years that truth cannot be told? Then why bother? Say once, “Truth cannot be told,” and every day repeat “Ditto!” That’s enough! And go home. There is no point in saying it again and again, unless by saying it you are encouraging the people toward some other phenomenon.
Truth cannot be said – this is one part. The second part is: but truth can be transpired. It can be shared, not told but shared. And for that sharing the love affair of the disciple and the master is a must; without it, it is not possible.

The last question:
Osho,
What do you have up your sleeve?
Nothing much, just few jokes for you! The first:

A man who had lost all his money at the gambling tables in Las Vegas begged a dime from another patron to use the men’s room. One of the stalls was not locked, so he saved the dime, and then used it to play a slot machine. Luckily he hit the jackpot.
With the money he tried another machine, and again he won. Fortune continued to smile on him as he went and played the crap tables and roulette wheels, running his winnings up to a million dollars.
He told his extraordinary story all over Las Vegas – at bars and parties. Always expressing gratitude to his benefactor, he said he would split the million with him. After several weeks, among a group of men at a bar, one of them exclaimed, “I am the man who gave you the dime!”
“I am not looking for you,” the lucky man answered. “I am looking for the guy who left the door open!”

The second:

Jim Smith ran into an old friend on the street who was sporting two black eyes. After greeting each other, Jim asked, “Say, where did you get those shiners?”
“At church,” was his friend’s reply.
“How?” Jim asked, somewhat astonished.
“Well,” began his friend, “I was sitting behind a big fat lady in church. When she stood up I noticed her dress was caught in the crack of her butt. I reached over and pulled it out and she turned around and socked me in the eye!”
“Wow!” said Jim, amazed. “But how did the other eye get black?”
Sighing, his friend said, “When I realized that she did not like what I had done, I put it back!”

And the third:

Johnny the Sperm and all his little friends were preparing for their big thrust out into the world. They were exercising and building up their strength. Johnny said to the other sperms, “Listen, fellows, I want to be number one – I want to be the first to become a human being!”
They were all hanging around when suddenly the bells of Jerusalem rang, “Gong! Gong! Gong!” Johnny took the lead – he was number one, but suddenly all the other sperms saw him turn around and start racing back toward them.
‘Hey, Johnny!” they yelled. “What’s wrong?”
“False alarm, boys,” Johnny called out to them. “It’s a blow job!”

Enough for today.