---
title: Light on the Path 02
series: Light on the Path 01-38
talk_number: 1
url: https://oshoworld.com/light-on-the-path-01
language: English
duration: 01:41:59
author: THE WORLD TOUR
scraped_at: 2026-01-03T09:17:16.722251+00:00
---
Osho,
Greetings from the Indian “Rajneesh Times” family and everyone at the Rajneeshdham Neo-Sannyas Commune. There are many sannyasins both in India and abroad who have never seen you, but their love for you and their commitment to your vision is awe-inspiring. How exactly does this happen – this much love, this much trust?
It is in fact easier if you have not seen me, and yet the love has happened, the commitment. It will be far more pure, far more unconditional, far more impersonal. Seeing me, being with me, and yet loving me totally, is more difficult.
The reasons are that our minds are brought up in such a way that we are always full of expectations. If I fulfill your expectation, it is good; but if I don’t fulfill your expectation, then your dedication, your trust, start wavering. And as far as I am concerned, I cannot fulfill your expectation. If I fulfill your expectation, then I will not be the person to help you grow. Your expectation fulfilled, you remain as you are – no new openings.
I am not here to support your mind.
I am here to take it to ultimate heights.
But your expectations are a problem. In small things, unconsciously, throughout your whole life you are expecting. And whenever something goes against your idea, you never think that your idea can be wrong; then certainly the person is wrong.

It happened in one Jaina family I used to stay with…. It must have been six in the evening. A very old man, the father of the woman in whose house I was staying, came to see me. Now, in Jaina families, six is almost the last limit for the evening supper. As the sun sets, you cannot eat.
I was just going to take my bath and then to take my supper, but because the old man had come from far away and he must have been almost ninety-five, I said, “Wait, there is no hurry. I can take my bath a little later on and the supper can wait – there is no problem in it. First, let me talk to him about why he has come.”
He was a ninety-five-year-old man and he had been living in a Jaina monastery for thirty years: he had renounced the world. He was recognized as a saint, but just to come to see me was still to be in the Jaina community, so many Jainas had come following him. He told me…the first thing, he touched my feet. I said, “This is not right, because you are ninety-five; even my grandfather is not ninety-five.”
He said, “I have wanted to touch your feet for so long. I was afraid that death might spoil everything, and I might not be able to touch your feet. I have read only one of your books – Path To Self-Realization, and that was it. It changed my whole life. Since then, you have been my master. If it was in my power….”
Jainas have twenty-four tirthankaras, twenty-four prophets, in one period of creation. That means that after millions of years, when this creation dissolves and a new creation starts, then again there will be twenty-four teachers.
He said to me, “We already have twenty-four tirthankaras, but if it was in my power, I would have declared you the twenty-fifth, because what the twenty-four have not been able to do for me, you have done.” He was just all praise.
Just then, a servant came and said, “Your bath is ready and the supper will become cold.”
The old man was in a shock. He said, “What? In the evening you take a bath?”
The Jaina tirthankara does not bathe at all because that is decorating the body, making it non-smelly. It is in the service of something that is lower than you; it has to be sacrificed for the higher. So Jaina tirthankaras don’t bathe.
I said to him, “Yes – one in the morning, one in the evening. I take two baths.”
He said, “Moreover, the sun has set, and you have not taken your supper yet?” In the first place, the Jaina tirthankara eats only once – there is no question of supper. And even if you are eating twice, at least you should be understanding enough to see that it has to be before sunset.
He forgot all his praise – I was no longer a tirthankara. I had been for years, and just because of a single expectation which I had never promised him I would fulfill…. That was his mind.
But he said, “Then I have been completely wrong. For all these years I have praised you, I have read your books – but you are not the right man to follow.”
I said to him, “Understand a small thing. I never told you to follow me, I never said to read my books. I never told you to make me a tirthankara. I never asked you to have any expectations of me. It was easy because you had not seen me, you had not known me. A book is dead, and the book you are reading is my first book; and I have gone far. If you had started reading my second and third and fourth books, they would have spoiled all your admiration.”
But he was so angry that when he left, I said, “Won’t you touch my feet again? – because you are so old, and next time…we may meet, we may not meet.”
He said, “I have made the mistake once, I cannot make it twice.”

So it is not a problem for people who have come to me through books, tapes, videos, films. It is easy for them to carry on in their old mind. I don’t disturb their old mind: they can interpret my books according to their expectations.
The real difficulty is to be with me.
Every day you will find me saying things which are inconsistent. You will see me doing things which I should not be doing, behaving in a way which is not suitable for a prophet, for a messiah, for an incarnation.
So the real problem is for those who have been living with me, because they have had to drop, chunk by chunk, their minds, their conditionings – themselves. They have to choose continuously every moment between me and themselves: either I exist or they exist; both cannot exist at once. Otherwise, they will be in constant trouble, anxiety. So either they will have to leave me just to protect themselves, or if they are courageous, they will pass through a process which is almost like death, and they will be reborn.
The people who have not come to me are having a very fancy trip, imaginary. Their trust, their love, their commitment is to their own minds. I am only a figment in their minds, not a reality outside, not a reality with which they will have to shatter themselves the way the ocean shatters itself continuously on the rocks. And that will be the only test.
But ordinarily we think it very strange that people who have only heard my voice on the tape or have only seen me on video, have fallen in love. This is one of the reasons why people love dead saints – why they are ready to die for Jesus Christ, not even knowing whether he ever existed or not.
There are people who think that Jesus Christ never existed, that it was a Jewish drama that was played every year – just like, in India, every year we play Rama’s life. Nobody knows whether Rama really existed. All that we know is the drama which we have been playing for five thousand years. Our playing the drama for five thousand years continually has given Rama a certain reality.
And it is easier to devote yourself, dedicate yourself to Rama because Rama is only a figment of your mind. You can shape him; you can make him the way you want. You can interpret according to your own thought processes, and he cannot interfere.
It is a known fact that all the religions that you see in the world were born after their founders were dead. Strange! Then why do you call them “founders”? They never founded anything. They were hunted, tortured – you did everything nasty to them – and when they died, a great religion arose; and great admiration, because now you could manage them. It is all a game of your imagination.
To accept any man who is contemporary with so much love that your commitment becomes total is a superhuman task. But it transforms.
To recognize Buddha, Mahavira, Jesus Christ changes nobody. Half of the population of the world is Christian, but we don’t see anything that can make us feel that Jesus is alive in half of humanity. Millions of churches, millions of priests, but you cannot see in a single priest the glimmer, the shine, the authority that come from one’s own experience. All that they can have is an imaginative dedication.
Gods are made by man. But when somebody is alive, it is very difficult to make him a god because he will continuously disturb your idea of a god.
For example, Jainas think that Mahavira never perspired. Now, I cannot manage that, and I know that neither could Mahavira manage it, because perspiration is a natural process – without perspiration the person will die.
Perspiration keeps you at a constant inner temperature. When it is too hot you perspire. The glands all over your body are full of water. In the case of it being too hot, they will release the water. They will deceive the sun. The water is released, and the sun starts evaporating it. The sun does not penetrate inside you; it has been prevented by the perspiration – completely befooled. It becomes engaged in evaporation and your inner temperature remains exactly the same.
If it is cold you don’t perspire; if it is cold you shiver. Shivering makes you hot – it is a movement against the cold. Shivering keeps you at the same temperature. So whether it is hot or cold, your body is capable of maintaining the same temperature, because its life is very limited: it can survive only within twelve degrees of temperature, from 98 to 110. Below 98 you die, above 110 you are finished. The temperature has to be kept constant – it is immensely necessary for the life process.
But if you are writing a story or creating an imaginary idea, you can put anything in it – like Mahavira never perspires. And then that becomes the criterion for the Jainas. They cannot accept anybody as really realized unless they see that, standing naked, he is not perspiring in the hot sun.
It is very easy to create gods out of the past. There was a time when Mahavira was a contemporary man. His contemporaries never recognized him as a god. Buddha and Mahavira were contemporaries. Neither of them recognized the other as a god – what to say of other people? They had their definitions, and no living being can remain limited within your definitions.
So it is easier for people who are far away, for whom I am almost not a contemporary. They can create any kind of qualities they want in me; they can hallucinate any ideas around me. They have a free choice to dream about me. Their dedication and their love and their commitment is a dream phenomenon. And they will feel very good, very centered, very happy that they have found a man who fits absolutely with their idea of how a man should be. They have not found him; they have created, they have invented him.
But to be near to me, you will have to drop your expectations – which everybody has in very subtle ways – and particularly with me because I am persistent that I should not fulfill anybody’s expectation; because that would mean I am against him, I am helping his poisonous mind. I have to shatter it, even at the cost of making him my enemy – but I have to shatter it and I have to live in a way, speak in a way, say things which he has to accept, understand, even against his whole mind.
It is a struggle to be with a master: the struggle between your mind and the master.
And if the master is a real master, he will not allow your mind to win. Either the master wins or you are free to leave, but you cannot be allowed to win in the game.
This is a very strange game in which the master always has to win. And to be constantly defeated – and yet be in love with the same man who is defeating you, and yet be committed to the same man who is destroying you – needs guts. Ordinarily, people can’t understand it, but this is the reality.

Osho,
The mediocre people create much fuss and fervor, misinterpreting the loving, silent, soft and meditating sannyasins as brainwashed. What do you say about this state of affairs?
In fact, tell those mediocre people that it is not only a brainwash, it is a mindwash – far deeper, from the very roots. Brainwashing is just pruning the leaves, which will come again. In fact, if you cut one leaf, three leaves will replace it. The tree is not going to be defeated so soon.
Tell them, “It is a mindwash. And you are on the right path; whatever you are saying is right, but not the total truth, only a fragment. The total truth is, that we have decided to drop the mind completely because the mind has given nothing but misery, suffering, torture and nightmares. You can have it.
“You can see our people – they are simple, they are innocent, they are rejoicing, they are loving. If brainwashing can give you this much, it is worth it. What is wrong in it?”
And tell them, “Our master does not stop at brainwashing because that is just superficial. He wants to destroy the mind completely and make us no-minds. That’s what he calls meditation.
“But what is the problem for you? You remain happy in your misery, you remain happy in your suffering, you remain happy in all your tortures that you are giving to yourself and others. Why can’t you leave a few people who don’t want to be miserable and who want to rejoice in life?”
In fact, we should learn to face the mediocre people exactly on their own ground. They say it is mindwashing, they say it is brainwashing. Tell them, “It is. Why are you waiting – not being washed? It is absolutely dry cleaning. What have you got to save? For what are you afraid?”
Take them – whatever they say, take them at their own word. If they say it is hypnosis, accept that it is. “But what is wrong in it? You are not happy, you are not rejoicing in your life. You are suffering. You are waiting for a paradise after death – we have found it here. And if you want to label it as hypnosis, we have no objection. But it is worth it. Come and try! Perhaps you may also like the taste.
“We have tried both: your life we have lived and we know it is hell; and our life, which you call hypnosis, we have also lived. We choose hypnosis against hell.”
Those people simply throw words at you. They think just by throwing words they can condemn a certain phenomenon. They are stupid. And rather than fighting about words – that it is not brainwashing, it is not hypnosis…. You are getting caught by those idiots in their trap.
It is better to shock them and say, “It is.” But make it clear: “We know both – we know your life, we have lived it; and we know this life, we are living it. You don’t know both so you cannot say anything about our life.
“Have a little courage. Experience our life too, then you will be able to compare. And if you find that the brainwashed life of a sannyasin, the hypnotized life of a sannyasin is not so great as the old hell was, you can always go back to your hell. We will all support you – we will throw you out of the ashram!”
I have found that it is easier to accept their label and not to make any unnecessary argument about the label – the label does not matter. On the contrary, make it a point: “You should experience it – you are talking without experience. You don’t have any way to compare. We can compare, and still we are not coming to your hell.”

Osho,
It seems that the US authorities and government – and the governments around the world – are more shocked by your sannyasins' togetherness and courage than we ourselves were by their brutal mistreatment of you. Osho, do you feel we have missed something; or what else may we learn from such extreme situations?
No, you have not missed anything. It was so new for you that you could not figure out what was happening; you were in a state of confusion. But you showed your strength perfectly well, and you made the American government aware that they cannot do anything to me without destroying their own image of democracy. It was a high-risk thing.
One of the sheriffs of a jail I was in – the first jail I was in – became very friendly and he told me, “I should not tell you, but thousands of telegrams, thousands of phone calls, thousands of flowers from all over the world, thousands of protests…the government is shaken.
“They had not expected that, in touching a single man, they were playing with fire. So one thing I can tell you – they cannot harm you. They will not even touch your body. On the contrary, instructions are that you should be given absolute security, that nothing should happen to you; otherwise we will not be able to show our face to the world.”
And it was strange that they had to give me the same kind of security as they give to the president of America: five cars following me, five motorcycles following, and the roads blocked. They were afraid that anybody could do any harm to me under their protection – they would be responsible for it.
This man said to me, “This is for the first time in my life that we are not concerned about your escaping. We are concerned that nobody harms you, otherwise that harm will be on our heads.”
On the first day – just two or three hours after I had arrived – somebody from Australia called him: “You must be worried because so many phone calls will be coming, telegrams coming.”
The sheriff said to the man, “No, we are accustomed…this is a very special jail and we have had people of importance, of cabinet standing – that is, from the highest political structure. So there is not much of problem.”
But after three days, with tears, he apologized to me. He said, “What I said to that man will remain heavy on my heart. I don’t know his number; otherwise I would have apologized to him. You had been here only two or three hours, so I did not know about you. But now, after three days, I can say with absolute certainty that we have never had such a man in the jail. The whole jail is for you! Five hundred inmates are for you, the whole hospital department is for you – I am for you. And the whole world is focused on you. If something happens to you it will be really dangerous for America’s image.
“So I want you to forgive me for telling that man that we have had many very important people. That was wrong. We have never had such a person, about whom the whole world is concerned. We have had people of cabinet standing; they were, at the most, of national importance, but nobody who had any international importance, and so much love.”
The second day he asked me, “What are we going to do with the flowers? So many flowers are coming, and in this big jail, we don’t have space.”
So I told him, “Send the flowers to all the schools, colleges and universities, from me.” He did that, and the response was immense. When I was taken from the jail to the airport again, all along the way were students throwing flowers.
In fact, the government must have been repenting that they made a stupid mistake. They unnecessarily made our silent movement a world-famous phenomenon. Now it is a household name around the world, in all the languages.
Those twelve days in jail have been of immense help to the movement. They could not do anything because there was nothing that was in their hands to do; they simply became fools. What have they gained?
We had changed their desert into an oasis; again it will be a desert – that is their gain. But we have gained much. Those four years will now become the foundation of a new commune – naturally, far superior, far better. Then, we were not so expert, and it gave us many ideas….
For example, now I am not going to make a commune in a country under any government. I am trying for an absolutely independent island, so you don’t need any visa, you don’t need anybody to tell you how long you can stay.
We are not going to create a government there, we are not going to make it a nation – because I am against nations and against governments. And we have to prove in that commune something more now: that people can live without government, and people can live without a nation, and people can live without armies; that people need not have jails, they don’t have to have the police, they don’t need any judges.
So, it has been tremendously helpful, and to the whole community of sannyasins around the world it has brought life. They started realizing that they were doing something significant which could disturb the greatest power of the world.
It is not without reason that America was disturbed. It was disturbed because we were creating something that would disturb every government and every politician.
So now sannyas is no longer just your meditation, your peace, your silence, your life. Now we have become involved, in a very strange way, in the destiny of the whole world. They have forced us. We were going silently on our own; we were not troubling them.
They have provoked us, so now it is for us to prove that they were right!
Now it is not only going to be an individual revolution in a person’s life. We will create a place which will become a model for the whole world – if this can happen with five or ten thousand or more people, why can’t it happen everywhere? We, for the first time, are entering into problems which the world leaders have failed to solve in thousands of years; we can solve them within five years. And the spirit is high.
Certainly sannyasins suffered because I was in jail, and they felt helpless that they could not do anything. But they should not feel that way. They did everything that was needed. All that was needed was the world opinion, and they changed the world opinion. We have now more sympathy than we ever had. More of the intelligentsia than ever is now interested. All the news media of the world…we have been covered for almost two months continuously, and still there is a demand from every country: they want to come and want to know more about it.
In the light of all that has happened, we have been immensely victorious. Who cares if they destroy the houses and the streets? We are not houses and we are not streets. And if we could create that commune, then we can create many communes anywhere.
And this time it will be the focus of the world. It will not be just for the people who want to separate from the ordinary world, recluses. This time we are going to make it a point that it remains the focus of the world, that the whole world has to learn something from it. They have provoked us – now we have to take the challenge. And I love challenges. And I love changes – so there is nothing to be worried about.
We are in a far better condition than we have ever been. It is always difficult situations which bring out the best in you. When the situations are not difficult, the human tendency is to relax, to be lazy. If the house is on fire, immediately you will see everybody at his best. Nobody will bother about the snow or the cold or anything.
America has provoked its own death by attacking us. It will take a little time, but that’s how I see it.

Osho,
Once you said that two hundred enlightened people would create an energy that could nullify the forces that can start a third world war. How close are you to finding the two hundred?
I am very close. But many things have changed in the meantime.
One thing is certain, that we will be able to produce two hundred enlightened people and prevent the third world war. The question which has arisen in the meantime – that is where I become unpredictable – is whether we would like to prevent the third world war. Is it worth preventing these idiots continuing? Will it not be better that the idiots fight and destroy each other and very few people are left in the world to start from scratch?
Nobody has thought about it, but my feeling is that it may be an existential necessity: humanity has arrived at such ugly, inhuman, and poisonous ways that it is better then to let it be finished. Why bother to protect Ronald Reagan? I don’t see the point.
So this is something of great importance – why not start afresh? Humanity is so much burdened with old, rotten stuff, that to go on protecting it and protecting it…. That rotten stuff is also protected, those conditionings are also protected. It will be good that Islam is gone, Hinduism is gone, Christianity is gone, the pope is gone, the Vatican is gone.
Certainly a few people will remain. Those people will be the aboriginals who had no religion, who had no politics, who had no education, who are living as naturally as possible. It will be far better, once this Soviet Union and USA are gone, to begin the new man – because he will not have any past. All past will be gone. The new, the remaining few, will have only a future and the experience of what happened to the past; not to repeat it…to find out new ways of living.
So I am trying to search for an island so far off that it will remain unaffected by any war that happens between America and Russia – let them have it, they deserve it – and we can create a society there. If the world is finished, then we can spread around the world the people that we have saved, to start absolutely fresh. Perhaps existence is tired of man and the ways he has turned to.
So those two hundred people are close by, but I may prevent…I may tell them just to wait a little. First let the third world war happen and then you can become enlightened and go around the world finding people, because then there will be no passports needed, no visas needed and the whole world will be available to everybody for the first time.
It looks dangerous, the idea….
But I like dangerous ideas.

Osho,
Why do Indian journalists only record and publish your critiques of India? I never remember reading about your beautiful discourses on the real India.
The reason is simple: there is no such thing as free Indian journalism. Either the government is keeping a hold on the latest news media, television, radio, directly…and particularly in a country like India, where most of the people cannot read – but they can see, they can hear. So the government is being really cunning in keeping the radio and television in their own hands to approach eighty percent of India and just fill those minds with their own ideas.
Only the newspapers are there. They look free, but they are not. The government has indirectly curtailed their freedom as much as possible. Any newspaper that goes against the directions given to it has its quota for newsprint cut.
Newsprint paper is not available on the market, it is in the government’s hands. Now, this is a subtle strategy; “You write what we want; otherwise you don’t have anything to write upon.”
The Indian newspapers live mostly on government advertisement. The moment they start writing anything that the government does not want, those advertisements are removed. Those newspapers die automatically without anybody directly killing them. All the newspapers belong to a few super-rich people – just four or five families.
Those four or five families are basically for the government because they need licenses; they need every kind of support from the government, and it is a deal that their papers should remain according to the government policy. So in fact, looking at the whole picture, India has no free journalism. They write only what their owners want them to write.
Now as far as I am concerned, they have to write only things which create antagonism against me in the Indian mind. To me, life is both day and night, life and death, and I have spoken on it from all possible angles. But a paper which is owned by a Hindu owner will not publish anything that creates sympathy towards me in the masses.
I have spoken on so much that no Hindu has ever spoken on. If they choose to, they could convert the whole of India for me. But that is what they are afraid of, so they choose only those parts where I have criticized.
And I am not a politician. My whole life, politicians have been advising me, “You could become an immense phenomenon in the country, millions of people could stand with you; you just have to be a little careful. You speak so beautifully about Hinduism – then why do you sometimes start criticizing it! You speak so beautiful about Jainism; then on some small point you criticize it.
“You have spoken so much on Buddhism – nobody has spoken so much – and still no Buddhist is sympathetic to you because you go on criticizing it. Ninety percent of your talks explain to them the beauties of Gautam Buddha and his teachings, so if you can avoid the ten percent….”
I said, “That is impossible. That will be cheating people. I know that that ten percent is there; it will be cheating the people not to say anything about it. And it will be a heavy burden on my heart that I have not been completely open: that I have been looking at the people and saying to them what they want to listen to, rather than talking to people about what I have to say.”
So I told them, “I have decided to remain alone – I don’t want your millions of people with me. But I will say the whole thing. I will bring out the beauty but I will not neglect the ugliness that is there, because the beauty is something that only a few, rare, intelligent people can understand. So even Buddha has talked about it, but it has gone over people’s heads. But the ugliness, which is only ten percent, has affected people’s lives.
“The ninety percent has not affected people’s lives at all, but the ten percent has. Now you are telling me not to also talk about that ten percent which has caused all the misery, all the poverty, and all kinds of stupidities in the country. I cannot accept your advice.”
For example, it is beautiful that Buddha talked about nonviolence, but then who is going to be responsible for the two-thousand-years’ slavery of the country? His teaching of nonviolence is incomplete. People accepted it, that it is perfectly good; and the teaching made people not brave but cowards. They were talking about not killing people, but basically what was in their minds was that they should not be killed. So if you are not to kill, you will be saved also.
That is not necessary. Buddha never told them, “Your not killing others does not mean that they will not kill you.” Nor did Mahavira tell them that. Then what will you do when people want to invade your country, take your possessions, take your wives, kill your children, rape your women, burn your houses and cities? Then what is the nonviolence going to do?
According to me, a really nonviolent person is one who does not kill anybody, does not harm anybody, because he is against killing and against harming; but if somebody starts harming him, then too, he is against killing; he won’t allow it.
He will never initiate any violence, but if violence is initiated against him, then he’s going to fight tooth and nail. Only then can the nonviolent people remain independent; otherwise they will be slaves, and poor, and continually robbed.
For two thousand years, how many people have been robbed in India? Who is responsible for it? Buddha and Mahavira are both responsible for it. Now, to say that will mean that immediately the Jaina newspapers will take it, the Buddhist newspapers will take it and antagonize the Buddhists and the Jainas. But I cannot prevent myself from saying the whole truth.
So it will take a little time.
In fact, the way our movement has spread is phenomenal. None of Jesus’ disciples were educated, none of them were cultured, civilized. They were fishermen, farmers, woodcutters – of the same category as Jesus himself was. He was uneducated, he could not read or write. All that he could manage, altogether, was twelve disciples. Not a single rabbi was his follower, not a single professor was his follower. Not a single man of culture, understanding, intelligence, was his follower.
Our movement is phenomenal. Just within fifteen years it has already taken over the world. Just ten years more and there will be no problem: all these idiots who are trying to provoke antagonism – they will all be running after you.
This happened when I was in jail. The whole American news media turned immediately sympathetic, because they could see that America was torturing an innocent man who has done no harm, who has not committed any crime. His only crime is that he has created a beautiful commune, a lovely place: whoever visits it comes out dreaming, “Someday I would like to join.” This was my only crime.
We have the most intelligent people around the world as sannyasins. So all these mediocre people and journalists don’t matter at all. And these are slaves. You will see: as the Western press and news media are turning sympathetic towards me, these idiots will follow them. They have that mentality, of slaves.
It happened that when Rabindranath Tagore was given a Nobel Prize, only then did India come to know that they had a great poet. And universities started inviting him to accept doctorates. The first was Calcutta University – and he had lived in Calcutta his whole life, and he has written his best things in Bengali. He got the Nobel Prize for a small book which he himself translated. The major part of his literature, which remains untranslated, is far more important.
But Calcutta University had not bothered to give him a doctorate, and now, because he had gotten the Nobel Prize, all Indian universities…. But Rabindranath was a man I love. He refused Calcutta University. He said, “You are giving a doctorate to the Nobel Prize, not to me. I have been here my whole life; you have never even asked me to come to the university to recite my poetry to people. Why should I accept your doctorate? It is an insult.”
But this is how this country is. For remaining slaves for two thousand years you cannot condemn them. They just look towards the West – whatever happens there, soon they are bound to follow. And the West – its press, its news media – is becoming very friendly and very loving. So these people should be following soon. There is nothing to be worried about.
And what harm can they do? My experience is that nobody harms me, whether he writes for me or against me. He should just go on writing.
I will use both ways. You can’t have the whole world as your friend – and it would be monotonous. Enemies add some spice.

============================================================

Osho,
These questions are from a center in America, and they say, “We are starting a new newspaper in America dedicated to your vision for humanity. We would like to call it, ‘Vision International.'“ Their first question is: Do you like the name?
Yes, absolutely yes.

The second question: Do you have any message for us in this new beginning?
Just remember one thing: the sannyas movement has entered a critical stage. It is a good sign; it will bring maturity, strength, togetherness.
What is to be remembered is that this strength, this togetherness does not become an organization. It remains the movement of individuals who are together because their experience is similar. They are not part of a religion, they are not a church; their individuality is absolutely intact….
Because that is one of the most difficult things: in times of difficulty one tends to become organized because that way you can fight better, you can oppose the enemy better. But my emphasis is that in opposing the enemy you create a bigger enemy within yourself: the organization, the church, the religion. The whole thing is defeated.
So remain continuously aware and make your readers remember in different ways in different times, that my message is for the individual, and I stand for absolute freedom, individuality. If we are together and if we are fighting together our aim is to fight for individuality and freedom. We are not going to become unconsciously a church, an organization.
That has happened to all the religions in the past. It was a calamity. Avoid the calamity.

Almost two years ago Sheela told us you wanted your sannyasins to leave California and close the centers there. But now that the ranch is ending, thousands of sannyasins have gone there to live. Would you like to say something to them?
It was simply a device to call people to the commune in Oregon. Now that the commune exists no more, the sannyasins in California should start their centers – if possible, communes. But remember that Oregon’s commune was the model, and in California no compromise should be made.
California is in a strange kind of mind – everything there is fashion. So within four, five years, it dies; a newer fashion takes place. Within the last thirty years many things have happened in California with a predictably great future, but they all died within two, three years. So make centers and communes in California, but avoid the Californian tendency of taking everything as a fashion.
Sannyas is not a fashion – it is one of the most eternal things in existence. It will be there always, it has been there always – because it is the search for the truth, it cannot be reduced to a fashion.

Osho,
When we are scattered throughout the world, most of us far from you and living in small groups. Then what is the meaning of the second gachchhami: Sangham sharanam gachchhami?
Now it has more meaning than it had before. Let me tell you about all the gachchhamis.
The first is: Buddham sharanam gachchhami: “I go to the feet of the awakened one.” It is an approach of humbleness, openness, non-resistance. Without such an approach no master can function. The disciple has to give way for the master to enter the innermost core of his being. And that’s what he is saying: Buddham sharanam gachchhami – “I go to the feet of the awakened one.” He is saying, “I am no more.” He is saying, “Now you can do anything you want to do with me. I am absent and I want your presence in me.”
The second gachchhami is Sangham sharanam gachchhami – “I go to the feet of the commune of the awakened one.” The question has arisen about the second because now the commune in America is no more – but there are sannyasins all around the world. In a very subtle way, now our commune exists all over the world.
So don’t take it that the Oregon commune’s disappearance is just a disappearance; it has appeared everywhere where a sannyasin is alive and breathing. So the second gachchhami does not lose any meaning, it gains more meaning. It becomes universal.
It is easy to go to a master and to surrender. It is the simplest thing to do because the awakened person functions almost like a magnet. You are not doing anything, you are simply being pulled by the magnet. The second gachchhami is difficult, and hence more important than the first.
Now you are not only magnetically attracted by the charisma of the master…. You have tasted his love, his compassion, his awareness, his being. In his disciples it will not be so strong, it will not be a magnetic force…. But you have tasted the very being of the master in your surrender: you can recognize that anybody who has surrendered to the master has become in a very deep sense your brother or your sister. A love, because of the master, has arisen amongst the disciples. I call it love, I don’t want to call it any kind of organization. And to surrender to these simple people who have not yet arrived will make you more humble, will take your ego completely away from you.
The commune is now all over the world. Wherever a sannyasin exists, the commune exists. And when you are saying, “I go to the feet of the commune,” you are surrendering to millions of people. It is a tremendous experience of being egoless.
With a master there is a difficulty: you may surrender to a master because he is worthy of that – it is almost a demand from his very being. He is not saying anything to you, but his every breath is a demand. And the height of the man and the flight of his consciousness, on the one hand will help you to go to his feet; but on the other hand it may give rise to a subtle ego, that you have found a great master. In finding a great master, unconsciously you think you have become a great disciple.
But when you are doing the second gachchhami that possibility does not exist at all. You are simply being humble, you are simply showing your love – through the disciples – to the master.
The third gachchhami is Dhammam sharanam gachchhami: “I go to the feet of the ultimate realization of the master.” It is possible only after these first two gachchhamis that you can meaningfully say, “I go to the feet of the ultimate experience” – because it is abstract. The master was very tangible. The commune was not so tangible. And now particularly when you say, “I go to the feet of the commune,” you cannot even visualize or imagine it, because there is no commune as such, but individual sannyasins all over the world. But the third is the most difficult in the sense that you are entering abstraction – the religious experience, the experience of truth. You don’t know anything about it.
You have seen the man who has visited the land, you have felt his vibe, you have smelled the fragrance that he has brought, you have seen the light that is still lingering around him. In your deep surrender you have felt that this man is not what he looks; he is much more. He is carrying something invisible within himself.
This has been only a vague feeling, but it gives you an impetus to surrender yourself to the ultimate experience that has created the master, that has created the commune and that has become a star of attraction for you, a deep inspiration for you.
In the beginning the third gachchhami will be vague, abstract, but as you go on deeper in your surrender, with the first two gachchhamis, the third starts taking on more of a reality. It is not a dream, it starts becoming a truth.
All those three gachchhamis are deeply interconnected so none of them can be dropped at any point.

Osho,
If national boundaries and visa restrictions continue to separate us from you and from each other, what is best for us to do about it?
They will not. It is for me to find a way that they don’t restrict you from seeing me, from being with me. I am working on it, and I don’t think it will take a long time to find a way; perhaps a month at the most. So nobody need worry about it. We will soon have our own place which will not be under any country’s rule.
And I want a totally new experiment that has not happened in history. There have been anarchists – their philosophy is one of the best. But it is so good that it becomes impossible to make it real; it remains utopian. Prince Kropotkin, Tolstoy – these people dreamed of a humanity which one day would drop all governments.
They thought that governments are the causes of all the evil that exists on the earth. To some extent they are right, but only to some extent. I cannot agree with them totally, because I know that if governments are removed, it will not be a beautiful world; it will be simply a chaos, full of evil – and much more than it was before, because all restrictions will have been removed, and all ugly instincts in man will still be there.
Just by removing a government you cannot change a murderer, and you cannot change a thief, and you cannot change a rapist. The government is not the cause but the effect. That’s where I differ from Prince Kropotkin, who has the clearest vision of anarchism. The government is there because man is not able to remain ungoverned. He needs somebody to keep him in control; otherwise he will be violent and he will do every nasty thing that is possible. The government exists because man needs it. The government is ugly; it should not exist, but what can be done?
If you have cancer then somebody has to do the surgery. We don’t want surgeons in the world, but if cancer continues to exist, we will need surgeons for it. The surgeons are not creating the cancer, the cancer is creating the surgeons.
This is one philosophy which has for centuries dominated the most highly intelligent people – the idea of absolute freedom, no restriction, no nation, no government. The other idea that has dominated human mind – and which has already tried to become a reality – is also very important. That is communism – that all men should be equal, there should be equality.
Inequality is ugly. Some people have all the riches, some people have nothing. In America, thirty million people are dying because they don’t have any food. And exactly the same number – thirty million people – are dying because of overeating.
Now, this must be a mad world! Things can be figured out very easily: these people should not overeat. They are eating those thirty million people’s lives, and they are destroying themselves in that effort. They can all live – sixty million people can live peacefully, but the second thirty million are eating the food of the first thirty million. These will die of starvation and the other people will die of obesity.
Communism has a tremendous appeal, but to me there is a very basic flaw in it. That is, that men basically and psychologically are not equal, neither physically nor mentally nor…in any way. Equality can be forced, but anything forced cannot remain forever. The moment the force is removed the equality will disappear.
In Russia now seventy years have passed since the revolution and they go on increasing the force to keep people equal. Now what kind of equality is this? The whole country has become a concentration camp. And whenever you try to make people equal by force, a strange thing is bound to happen: the lowest denominator will be the determining factor. You cannot make an idiot Albert Einstein, but you can make Albert Einstein an idiot. If you want equality then the lowest will be the norm – and that is absolutely unacceptable. So to me equality is not a value.
But I understand communism in a totally different way. I think of communism as an equal opportunity for everybody to be himself – not to be equal but to be unique. Equal opportunity to be unequal – that is my definition of communism. And I want, in the place that I am searching for – and I am very close to finding it – that we create a small commune for the first time in history, which has no government and which has no classes like the rich and the poor; still, equal opportunity for everybody to be himself.
Somebody is going to be Yehudi Menuhin and somebody is going to be Rabindranath Tagore and somebody is going to be Albert Einstein. And it will be ugly to destroy these people – because they are the very salt of the earth – just to create a society of idiots, retarded people. They may be equal but that society will not be worth living in.
And in the commune in Oregon I became aware of a simple method to do it: just remove money from the commune. Anybody can donate to the commune but nobody can purchase anything with money. Yes, whatever is anybody’s need, the commune should fulfill it: each according to his need. And if you just remove money as a method of exchange, a miracle happens. You may have millions of dollars, and I may not have a single dollar; but you are not richer and I am not poorer – because you cannot use your millions of dollars. In fact I am freer than you. You are carrying a load, a burden, unnecessarily; and I am not carrying the load of a single dollar. And my needs are fulfilled by the commune as much as your needs are.
There are still islands which are absolutely without any control by any government. A few are very undeveloped, so it will be a difficult job to develop them. But there are three islands which are fully developed; one has even an airport – it belongs to an individual who is willing to sell it.
The situation is such – there are five miles of land which is lush green with big trees…immense beauty. It is almost an oval-shaped island. One part is above sea level. It has the greenery and on it the owner has made small houses.
From the outside they look like the houses ancient, primitive people used to live in, so they do not stand apart from the trees and from the greenery; they are part of it. But from inside they are air-conditioned and with all modern equipment. The island has twelve bungalows, one hotel for eighty persons, one airport where, morning and evening, the plane comes; we can have our own planes.
And the other part of the island is five, six feet under the sea. The owner has not done anything on that part, and to me that part seems to be the most important, because we can make a five-mile row of houseboats – like Kashmir – on that. And it will look far better than Kashmir because on Kashmir you can see the land; the boat is attached to the land, the land is underneath the boat.
You can see water all around and there can be boats for five miles. We can accommodate thousands of sannyasins in those houses. They are beautiful houses, and we can improve upon them. And between the two – the forest in front, the houseboats at the back – between the two is a big lake. So small boats can move in the lake to provide small things for people on the boats. It is something absolutely ideal.
And the person is in a hurry to sell it. Perhaps he is financially broke, perhaps he is too old and now he has no energy for it. So most probably we will get it.
And the most historical thing will be…. Communism and anarchism have remained enemies, because anarchism says no government, and communism says a very strict government is needed; otherwise you cannot destroy the divisions between classes of the rich and the poor.
So communism says, “We need a dictatorship; even democracy will not do. We need an absolute totalitarian dictatorship.” On this point these two beautiful philosophies have such a disagreement that there is no possibility of agreement: “Government is the evil and you are making the evil more evil – you are making it a dictatorship. Even democracy is an evil. No government is the only way for humanity,” according to the anarchist.
But we can manage very easily because for seventy years, although communism has tried, it has failed: it has not been able to create a classless society. Yes, the rich have disappeared – they destroyed them. They killed one million people after the revolution, so the rich have disappeared. Only the poor are still poor. But the poor feel a certain satisfaction because now there is nobody to compare themselves with. There is nobody who is richer than them: everybody is equally poor.
This was not the idea; everybody should be equally rich. Then only there is some point; otherwise this is sheer stupidity. These people were poor before; a few people were rich and were enjoying the riches. You have not evolved the society; you have destroyed those people – their culture, their music, their literature, their dances – and you have created a society which is equally poor. And to keep them equally poor…because there are people who are creative, and if the government pressure is removed, soon you will see, within four years, there will be richer people and there will be poor people in Russia.
For seventy years they have been repressing and within four years all their repression will be gone: the rich will be rich and the poor will be poor…. Because richness is also an art. For example, you can see in America – before three hundred years ago, American Indians had lived for millions of years, poor. The same country, the same land, the same potentiality of the country, and for millions of years they have been the most poor on the earth.
And then three hundred years ago, as Columbus discovered America and the people from the West reached there, America became the richest country. Strange! The American Indians could not make anything out of America, and these people made it the richest country in the whole history.
So there are people…and there is an art how to create wealth. Russia is poor, and it will remain poor because it is not allowing its creative people, who can manage, to create wealth. It is repressing them and keeping them equal.
In my conception we can, for the first time, manage anarchism and communism both together. Just remove currency within the commune, and without any enforcement, without forcing people to be equal, we have brought a classless society. They will remain unequal; they will remain unique; they will remain themselves. And the commune’s function is to fulfill their needs. Their needs are different: somebody who plays on a flute needs a flute, and somebody who wants to play on a guitar needs a guitar.
In every dimension people should remain themselves, but the dignity of humanity will be equal because they have equal opportunity – and no government, because government is not needed.
There can be only a functional organization, just like the post office. Nobody knows who is the head postmaster of India – there is no need and the post office is working perfectly well. It is a functional organization. The railways – now, who knows who is the chief of the board of the railways? It is a functional organization. So we can have functional organizations without having any government.
There will be no need for any visas for anybody to come for as long as he wants to stay; there will be no need for any passport. At least we can create one place in the world where no nationality is recognized, no religion is recognized, no political boundaries are recognized. And perhaps that may give the idea to other people, that it is possible – and these are the same human beings, they have come from us. Just an absolutely clear-cut model is needed.
So there is no need to be worried. It is only a question of a few weeks…. And soon we will have our own place, and I will call all my people to start working. And we can absorb as many people as we want, because we are not thinking of making houses, we are thinking of making houseboats. Then the ocean is unlimited; then there is no problem about it. Why bother about land? Just a small piece of land will be enough for the functional things – the hotel, the airport. Otherwise we can go on spreading on the ocean.
And about the ocean the laws are such that around any island or land, two hundred miles of ocean is yours. So around the island for two hundred miles we can spread as much as…. And it will be a more mobile society. All those boats can move, all those houses can move. It will be more alive; it will not be a dead society, fixed, where everything remains where it is.
Man has not tried to live…otherwise water can be a far more beautiful place to live. Freedom to move – otherwise you become attached to the house, to the land. And I know of methods in Japan: they float gardens on the water. They mix straw with earth and float it, and then you can put any seeds on it; you can have roses and you can have all kinds of flowers. Japan has tried floating gardens for thousands of years; it is a perfect science.
And we have our sannyasins who can come and make floating gardens all around, so you don’t miss anything. One sannyasin has reported that one of his friends, a scientist, has made a house under water, fully air-conditioned with everything palatial, and on top he has made a beautiful garden. So you see only the garden; the house is underwater. And from the garden is the door to enter into the house. And he has found a special glue to mix with cement so that water cannot disturb it.
And he has succeeded in it. He has made it – it is now a successful experiment. We can call that man and we can give him all the opportunity to make houses underwater. An underwater house has a totally different beauty. You can make it in glass all around. Just as you can see the sky, you can see the ocean and the fish. And they are so colorful and they have such a beauty. Many of them have their own torches. In the night it is a procession of torches – those fishes flash light.
I have been reading about one man who has made a small experiment, which is successful, so that houses…. If the earth is shrinking because of the population…he has made houses in the air. It used to be just a proverb, “Castles in the air,” things to be rejected; but now he is ready to make real castles in the air. Just a big balloon, and inside you can make a whole city – and it will be floating. You can direct it in any direction, and you can send people from it to the earth.
Just, people remain orthodox about everything, so whatsoever has been done, they go on doing it. My hope is that in our commune we will try everything new; and drop the whole idea of how people have lived. And we will start not only on the economic, the psychological, the spiritual, but on the physical – on everything…fresh and new, and make it a model for the whole universe. You will have so many tourists that it will be enough to feed your whole commune.
And these Japanese who float pieces of earth on the ocean, on the river, on the lake – they grow flowers; they can grow food also. It is only a question of accepting the unknown and exploring it.
So no sannyasin has to be worried about it. Within a month we will have our place, and within a year people will start coming. And my idea is: perhaps on earth we cannot make a commune of one hundred thousand sannyasins, but on the ocean we can. And we are going to do it!

Osho,
Can you say something to us to help us remember you as our friend, and not get caught up in our conditioning which tries to make you an authority figure?
Everything that I am saying to you is the answer to your question. Why the fear? – I am not an authoritarian figure. I don’t claim to be the only begotten son of God, an incarnation of God, a messiah, a prophet. How can you make me an authoritarian figure?
These people who have become authoritarian figures – they themselves were responsible; nobody made them. In fact the whole of Judea was trying to convince Jesus Christ: “You are not the only son of God – drop this nonsense!” But he was insistent. He was so insistent that they got fed up with the man and crucified him.
All these people were trying to become authoritarian figures. But a small distinction has to be understood: to be an authoritarian figure is one thing, and to be an authority is a different thing.
The authoritarian says, “Whatever I say, you believe, because it comes directly from God and I have a direct communication line – which you don’t have. It is none of your business to doubt. Doubt will be punished – faith will be rewarded.”
But to be an authority is a totally different thing. It means that whatever I am saying, I am saying on my own authority; it is not within quotation marks. It is not that I am representing God, that I am representing Jesus Christ, or Krishna, or Buddha. It is not that I am simply a successor to any authority figure.
To be an authority simply means that it is my own experience, and I am speaking out of my own authority. It does not require you to believe, it requires you to inquire. But I can say authoritatively that you will find it, because I have found it. There is no reason why you cannot find it.
So anybody who speaks on his own experience is an authority, but he is not an authority figure. He is not authoritarian; he is simply an authority. You can doubt what I say – you will not be punished. You can believe what I say – you will not be rewarded. All that you have to do is to inquire and follow the path and find it out yourself. One thing is certain, that when I am saying it to you, it is not borrowed, it is my own experience.

Osho,
Will you describe for us what your daily life is like?
It is the same as it has always been! – and it will be the same always. I never miss anything. Even in jail I enjoyed it; although it was absolutely a different world. In twelve days I took only one shower! – and that too because Vivek persisted. She used to meet me in court and her only insistence was, “You should take a shower!”
And I told her, “I am enjoying resting in my bed twenty-four hours a day. And when I come out I can take a good shower for all the twelve days – don’t be worried!”
In the jail they were asking me…because as I was being moved from one jail to another the press would ask many questions. One question was: “How are you feeling?”
I said, “Great – as I have always felt.”
They said, “This is a jail!”
I said, “This may be a jail but you cannot imprison me. Yes, my hands are chained, my legs are chained, but that does not imprison me; I am simply watching the whole scene. And for years I have not rested twenty-four hours a day with closed eyes.”
Even the inmates would come and say, “Bhagwan, are you sick or something?”
“I am not sick, I am really feeling very good!”
And exactly that’s what happened: when I left the jail the jailer told me, “You are the first person in my life who is leaving jail better than he had come in! You look so rested.”
I said, “What else to do in a jail!” And this is my whole philosophy: to make the best out of the worst.

Osho,
Indian people particularly ask the question again and again, that just as you have dropped the religion of Rajneeshism – freed the sannyasins from the mala and red clothes – are you one day going to drop the title of “Bhagwan” too? It prevents many people from coming to you.
It has been raised in many articles and many books written against me, so it is good to go into it in a little detail.
First, “Bhagwan” is not a title. Nobody can give that title. Nor is “Bhagwan” a degree, that you can pass an examination and the degree can be conferred on you. Nor is “Bhagwan” some position that can be appointed by a committee or by some people. Nor is “Bhagwan” an elected post, that you fight an election and whosoever has the majority of votes becomes Bhagwan.
The critics who have been writing against me, they have always made it a point that I am “self-appointed” Bhagwan. And I have always wondered, do they have anybody – Rama, Krishna, Buddha, Mohammed – appointed by somebody else?
If Rama is appointed by somebody else as Bhagwan, then certainly the appointing authority is higher – and if you can be appointed, you can be dis-appointed too.
This is absolutely stupid! Basically, they have not understood the idea: “Bhagwan” is a state of experience – nothing to do with an appointment, an election, a title or degree. It is the experience of bhagwata, of godliness, that the whole existence is full of godliness, that there is nothing other than godliness.
There is no God, but in every flower and in every tree, in every stone, there is something which can only be called godliness. But you can see it only when you have seen it within yourself; otherwise you don’t know the language.
“Bhagwan” is simply a state of being, the highest state of being; you cannot go beyond it.
The second confusion in the critics has been because they don’t understand that in India there are three religions. Hinduism uses “Bhagwan” for God. Buddhism uses “Bhagwan” for godliness, Jainism uses “Bhagwan” for godliness – they don’t have any God, both the religions are godless.
But Buddhists for centuries have been calling Gautam Buddha “Bhagwan,” and Jainas have been calling Mahavira “Bhagwan.” And very strange – nobody has objected that “you don’t have a god in your philosophy, then how can you call Buddha a god, or Mahavira a god? It has not been raised because neither Buddha nor Mahavira ever claimed themselves to be God; they simply said that they have experienced godliness.
Now, it is a state – and even if I want to drop it, I cannot drop it. It is me.
I dissolved the organization that was becoming a religion. I allowed my sannyasins the freedom to choose their clothes, to have a mala or not to have a mala; and now it is more beautiful. If you have a mala, it is your choice; if you are using red clothes, it is your choice. It is nothing imposed on you, it is not against your will.
It was easy to drop the organization because I have always been against organizations. It was created while I was in silence, it was not created by me. I told you to burn the book of Rajneeshism because it was not written by me; I have never written anything.
It was in my silence that people collected my sayings from here and there according to their understanding, and mixed them with their own ideas to create something equal to other religions’ holy books.
I told you to burn all the books.
Red clothes don’t mean anything – they were used as a device. I wanted my people to be courageous enough to stand in society – aloof, alone. I had given them the mala so that they become associated with me, they become associated with all my ideas, which are against all religions, all political ideologies. That point has been made. Now my sannyasins are around the world.
It is perfectly easy to drop the color, the mala – there is no problem. Now you have to be more…
I have not made things easier for you, remember – I have made things difficult. Now only meditation remains for you.
And now, only through meditation will you be recognized as sannyasins.
Meditation has to change you so much that you become a different species, that even in a crowd my sannyasins can be picked out. They will have a radiation of their own, a silence of their own, a peace of their own. Their eyes will show it, their bodies will show it, their gestures will show it.
Meditation I cannot drop because that is what is going to transform you and bring you one day to bhagwata, godliness. Meditation is the way to godliness.
It is impossible for me to drop “Bhagwan.” If it was a title it would be very easy to drop it. If it was anything other than an experience, an existential state, it would be possible to drop it. It is impossible to drop it because now there is no distinction between me and it, so who is going to drop whom?
Secondly, even if it was possible to drop, I would not drop it. In your question you say, “because many people are prevented because of it.” That is the reason why I will not drop it: I don’t want those people to come to me who cannot come to me just because of a word. And for what do they need to come to me? In India there are nine hundred million people who are not Bhagwan – they can go to them.
Why do they come, or think of coming, to me? It is strange that they can go anywhere – everywhere they will find millions of people who are not Bhagwan and they can enjoy meeting them. If they want to meet me, they want to meet me because of “Bhagwan.”
But their ego is hurt. I will not drop it because I want them to understand that it is their ego that is hurt. If they want to come; they will have to drop their ego.
They will have to drop their ego. I have not to change myself for them to come to me – they will have to change themselves if they want to come to me. I don’t need them to come to me, I have no necessity. It is their desire to come to me, so they should pay for it.
It is a very strange demand, that I should change myself because they want to meet me; they should change themselves if they want to meet me.

============================================================

Osho,
What do you have to say about darkness?
I have much to say about darkness, because nobody has taken notice of the mystery that darkness is.
Much has been said about light, almost nothing about darkness. But darkness is a much deeper phenomenon than light is. Light comes and goes – darkness remains; it never comes, it never goes. Light is not eternal, because it needs fuel, some kind of fuel, and the fuel will be exhausted sooner or later. Darkness needs no fuel, no cause; hence darkness is not an effect and can remain eternally there.
In the morning, you see the sun arises and there is light; in the evening the sun sets, the light disappears, and suddenly all over there is darkness. It does not mean that when the sun disappears, darkness comes in. It has been there all the time; just because of the light you could not see it. How can one see darkness while light is there? The light prevented your vision.
So anytime just close your eyes and darkness is there. Anytime just blow out the candle and darkness is there.
Gautam Buddha is perhaps the only man who, for the ultimate state of consciousness, has chosen a word which can be interpreted as darkness; otherwise all the religions have talked about light, forgetting completely that light is not eternal, and if you are light, you are also not eternal. Light is dependent on something, it is caused by something.
Gautam Buddha has called his ultimate state of being, nirvana. Even Buddhists have not thought of it as darkness, because the very word produces bad associations in us. But nirvana means exactly “darkness”; literally it means blowing out the candle. So for twenty-five centuries Buddhists have been using the literal meaning “blowing out the candle.” But what does it mean? Blowing out the candle, what remains then? Eternal, deathless, abysmal darkness.
Feeling yourself full of light may be again an ego trip. Feeling yourself identified with light, you may be simply changing your identity – but the ego remains. But blowing out the candle is blowing away the ego; and the vast darkness is bound to create in you a similar vastness of humility, humbleness, egolessness. So I love the word.
I always see light as a disturbance, and darkness as silence. But centuries of continuously fearing darkness…because it became associated with the time when man was living in jungles. The night was the most dangerous time. In the day somehow he managed to protect himself from the wild animals; he managed to kill them for his own food. But in the night he was absolutely helpless. Darkness all around, he was a victim. Any animal was capable of destroying him. In the day he could have managed to escape, to climb a tree or do something, but in darkness he was simply in the hands of wild death. So it was very easy to get a deep association between darkness and death.
All the religions depict death as darkness and life as light. It is simply the experience of man in the past when he lived in the jungles. That experience has molded his language, given it meanings. And he has not yet been able to clean those words again – because now he is not living in jungles, but still there is a certain reason why he continues to be afraid of darkness.
When there is light you are not alone, you can see everybody else. If suddenly the light goes off, the others may be there still, may not be; one thing is certain, you feel lonely. You are no more associated with the crowd. The crowd gives you a certain security, safety, a certain warmth, and you feel that you are not alone. Any danger – so many people are with you. But in darkness suddenly you are lonely, nobody is with you.
And man has not learned yet to know the beauties of his loneliness. He is always hankering for some relationship, to be with someone – with a friend, with a father, with a wife, with a husband, with a child…with someone.
He has created societies, he has created clubs – the Lion’s Club, the Rotary Club. He has created parties – political, ideological. He has created religions, churches. But the basic need of all is to forget somehow that you are alone. Being associated with so many crowds, you are trying to forget something which in darkness suddenly is remembered – that you were born alone, that you will die alone, that whatever you do, you live alone. Aloneness is something so essential to your being, there is no way to avoid it.
You can befool yourself and deceive yourself; you can pretend that you are not alone – you have a wife, you have children, you have friends – but it is all pretension. You know and everybody knows that the wife is alone as much as you are alone, and two alonenesses joined together do not change the situation; instead they make it worse.
As I see it, why lovers are continuously fighting – there may be thousand other reasons, but those reasons are superficial. The basic reason is that they had chosen the other as a beloved, as a lover, to destroy their loneliness – and it has not happened. On the contrary, the presence of the other makes them more aware of their loneliness.
I used to have a very rich friend – he had a beautiful wife, children…all that one needs, perfectly comfortable, so much so that when I asked him, “Now you are fifty, and you have enough money – retire from the businesses,” he did not hesitate for a single moment. He just informed people that he is no more an active participant in any businesses, he has retired.
I was going to Mount Abu; I told him, “It is a beautiful place – “sometime you and your wife should go there. And now you are retired, you have enough time. Be there for a few weeks or months.”
He said, “You are right, we have time, but you don’t know what you have done to me. I was also thinking that when I am retired I will feel relaxed for the first time in my life. My father died when I was young, and since then I have been working continuously, becoming richer and richer. And I had a hope that one day I will retire and relax and will not have any worries of the world. And when you told me, ‘Now it is time – you have enough…. What more do you need? Your girls are married, you don’t have a son – for whom are you earning now? You may live twenty years, thirty years – for that you have too much. You could live with what you have for three hundred years. You retire!’”
He said, “I understood, because I have been deep down always hoping to retire, and when it came from you, I said, ‘This is the moment to take the jump.’ But you have created a trouble; now I am lonely. I have never felt it before. And I am so utterly lonely that I am angry at you. How can I relax in such loneliness? And if this loneliness continues, I don’t think I can survive twenty or thirty years. It is becoming colder and colder, and darker and darker. And I am feeling absolutely cut off from the world.”
“But,” I said, “you have your wife.”
He said, “That is another trouble. I had never felt so lonely in her presence as I feel now. I was so busy in my businesses that I would come home late and she was always quarreling, nagging, asking for this and asking for that. There was no time to feel each other. Now the whole day I am sitting at home, and when I see her I know: just as I am alone, she is alone. And two alonenesses do not help in any way; on the contrary they make each other more clear.”
He said, “I will come to Mount Abu, but I would like some friend to be with us; otherwise three weeks or three months, just living with my wife” – and he loved the woman – “will be too much, intolerable.”
I realized his situation and I told him, “Now, you have listened to my first advice which has created the trouble for you; but it has not created the trouble – the trouble was already there. Your businesses were just keeping you occupied so you were not aware of it – now you are aware of it. Now take my other advice: go deeper into it rather than escaping. It is your reality – there is no way to escape from it.
“It is just like your shadow – the faster you run, the faster your shadow runs. Wherever you go, the shadow goes. It is simply stupid to fight with the shadow. Rather, sit silently and let the whole feel of being alone envelop you. In the beginning it may be fearsome. You may feel you are falling into an abysmal depth. It will be dark, and you may feel that it may become darker if you go deeper into it.
“But I say from my own experience that the more you know it, the more you love it. It is your privacy, it is your individuality. It is something which cannot be trespassed by anyone. It is your privilege. And there is nothing wrong in being alone.
“But never use the word lonely because lonely automatically suggests the need for somebody else. Lonely is a sick word. Use the word alone; alone has a health of its own.” I told the man, “And if you can do that then there is no need for any other meditation, this will be your meditation – just be alone. Even in the crowd remember that you are alone, don’t forget it. Your whole life you have tried to forget it; now remember it.”
The man was immensely courageous. He tried it – he succeeded, and he was immensely grateful to me…because the moment you feel you are absolutely alone, that is the time you start feeling that you are not the body, it is only a cover; that you are not the mind, it is only a mechanism; that you are not even the heart – that too is a mechanism of a different sort for different purposes.
Behind all these layers there is a space, crystal clear – nobody else has ever passed through it; its purity is absolute. To enter that space is to enter in meditation. Feeling that aloneness, you will feel the whole existence is alone.
There is no God – that was the need of the lonely people. Those who have tasted aloneness have discarded God, hell, heaven, and every other nonsense. You are alone, the whole existence is alone: aloneness is the only reality.
Yes, it is immensely dark, but darkness has a silence and darkness has a depth. And darkness has peace, and darkness takes away all your knowledge, takes away everything that you thought belonged to you. It leads you absolutely into the unknown and into the mysterious. So to me, darkness is one of the greatest mysteries in existence – far greater than light.
And those who are afraid of darkness will never be able to enter into their own being. They will go round and round, they will never reach themselves.
And it has to be darkness, not light, because light comes and goes; once you have discovered the spot of darkness in you, you have discovered something that is eternal, something indestructible, something which is more than what you know of life. It is the basic substance existence is made of. But they are just two names of one thing – aloneness or darkness.

Osho,
More than anything else I want your vision to happen. When I am not with you, and I am out in the world, alone, what part can I play in helping your vision to happen?
Just be yourself, utterly yourself.
And never think in terms of how you can help my vision to happen in the world, because that’s what makes a missionary – and I am against missionaries. They are the poisoners. Their intention is good, they want to spread something which they feel is immensely valuable, but a missionary does not know that what he is trying to spread is not his own experience.
So I would like to make it clear that you just be yourself, and that will be the way of spreading my message to people, because that’s my message – to be yourself authentically, sincerely. It is not a question of saying something to somebody; it is a question of being somebody in a way that the vision radiates from you…that the people feel that something has happened to you that has not happened to them…that there is something in you that they are missing…that you are full and they are empty…that you can give and yet you will not be losing anything. And they are only beggars; they cannot give, they can only take. And whatsoever they take also disappears soon because it is not their own.
I would not like my people to be like Christian missionaries.
I was in an American jail one morning…the jailer must have been a very fanatic Christian, and he came with a Bible, thinking that I am a religious man. And he said, “I would like to pray for you and I would like to present God’s word to you.” And before I could say anything, he started praying for me loudly, with closed eyes: “Jesus loves Bhagwan, Jesus will help Bhagwan. Jesus will save Bhagwan.”
I said, “Wait! You have gone too far!”
He opened his eyes; and he said, “Have I said anything wrong?”
I said, “Everything wrong…because Jesus could not save himself! And you are putting everything wrong: ‘Jesus loves Bhagwan.’ That’s not right. Put it: ‘Bhagwan loves Jesus, and Bhagwan will save Jesus.’”
He said, “I have prayed for many prisoners – what are you saying? You are in jail, you need to be saved.”
I said, “I am not in any difficulty. This whole world is a jail, so what difference does it make whether you are outside or inside? And you don’t understand anything of religiousness – you did not even ask my permission to pray for me.
“A prayer is trespassing my being. And to whom are you praying? I don’t have any god, so all your prayers are just stupid. And I don’t think that Jesus or anybody else can save anybody else. It is enough if you can save yourself. Without asking me you started praying! And who told you that this book is the word of God?”
He said, “It is written in the book itself.”
I said, “But it is written in so many other books too. It is written in the Vedas, and Hindus believe the Vedas are written by God. It is written in the Gita because Hindus believe it is spoken by the perfect incarnation of God himself. Mohammedans believe the Koran is the word of God.
“What criterion have you got to choose which one is right? And I can write a book in which I can say, ‘These are the words spoken by God.’ Just because it’s printed, will you believe it?”
He was silent for a moment, and then he said, “I will think it over and I will come back to you. Because I used to think…I am a missionary and I always have five hundred prisoners in the jail, changing every day. So I have been preaching and helping them becoming real Christians.”
I said, “Are you a real Christian? Was Jesus Christ himself a real Christian? What do you mean by ‘real Christian’? Jesus never behaved like a Christian. He was a very angry man. He teaches to love your enemy – and he curses a fig tree which is out of season. And it is not the fault of fig tree that it has no fruits! And he curses it in a very ugly way because it has not welcomed him and his disciples with fruits.
“Now, what can the fig tree do about it? And this man you think is a Christian, and this man you think can love his enemies! He cannot even be loving to a fig tree which has not done any harm to anybody. And the fruits come only in the season and it is not the season, so it is not the tree’s fault. This man is insane!
“And you are spreading his word. Have you tried to live his word? That would be the right way – live it! When somebody hits you on one cheek, give him the other cheek. Should I try,” I asked him, “hitting you on one cheek, and will you give me the other cheek? And I would like to do it before all five hundred prisoners.”
He said, “You are a dangerous man!”
I said, “I am not a dangerous man, I am simply saying that to be a missionary is something ugly. You are trying to interfere in somebody’s being, his thought processes, his existence, without ever trying all that you want others to be on yourself. And my feeling is, if you try it on yourself, there is no need to spread it – it will spread on its own.”
So I would like to say: Just be yourself. Be meditative, be loving, be human, be respectful, be accepting of everybody; don’t be judgmental. And something will start radiating from you, and that will be my word. And it will not be just an empty word, it will be full of meaning and full of fragrance.

Osho,
When I am far away from you, I often feel very close. And when I see you again, I am sometimes startled to find us almost strangers. How can this be?
It is very simple to feel close when you are far away, because then I am not present to you; it is only your own imagination about me. And naturally you are very close to your imagination, and you can make that imagination the way you want. You can make it according to your ideas – it is your imagination – and you are bound to be very close.
But when you come to me, you will have to drop your imagination. And the moment you drop your imagination immediately the second feeling will arise: “Perhaps we are strangers.” You were not a stranger to your imagination; it was yours. To me you are a stranger. We are all strangers to each other.
We try in every way to drop this strangeness; that’s how we have created all kinds of rituals. One man gets married to a woman…. What is marriage? – just a ritual. But why? – because they want to drop that strangeness and somehow create a bridge. The bridge is never created; they only imagine…now that one is husband, the other is wife. But they remain strangers. Their whole life they will live together but they will not be anything else than strangers, because nobody can penetrate into the other’s aloneness.
You can be not a stranger only if you can penetrate into my aloneness or I can penetrate into your aloneness – which is not possible, not existentially possible. We can come as close as possible; but the closer we come, the more we will become aware of the strangeness, because the better we will be able to see, that “The other is unknown to me – and perhaps unknowable.”
It is a known fact: you fall in love with a man; you don’t fall in love with the real man, you fall in love with the man of your imagination. And while you are not together, and you see the man from your balcony, or you meet the man on the sea beach for a few minutes, or you hold hands in a movie, you start feeling, “We are made for each other.”
But nobody is made for each other. You go on putting more and more imagination on the man – unconsciously. You create a certain aura around the man; he creates a certain aura around you. Everything seems to be beautiful because you are making it beautiful, because you are dreaming it, avoiding the reality. And you both are trying in every possible way not to disturb the other’s imagination.
So the woman is behaving the way the man wants her to behave; the man is behaving the way the woman wants him to behave. But this you can do only for few minutes or few hours at the most. Once you get married and you have to live together twenty-four hours a day, it becomes a heavy burden to go on pretending something that you are not.
Just to fulfill the imagination of the man or the woman, how long can you go on acting? Sooner or later it becomes a burden and you start taking revenge. You start destroying all that imagination that the man has created around you because you don’t want to be imprisoned in it; you want to be free and just yourself.
And the same is the situation with the man: he wants to be free and just himself. And this is the constant conflict between all lovers, all relations.
The reality is, we are alone, we are strangers, and the world will be far better if we accept the basic truth that we are strangers.
And what is wrong in falling in love with a stranger? What is the need that before you fall in love with a stranger, the strangeness should be destroyed? His caste should be known, his nationality should be known, his religion should be known, his astrology should be known – when he was born, the date of birth, the time of his birth. All these are efforts to destroy the strangeness, and to create some kind of illusion that you are not strangers.
But no illusion can stand against reality. The reality is going to crush it sooner or later.
So remember: away, you can think about me the way you want, because my reality is not going to give any trouble to you – your imagination is free. But when you are with me, then you have to put your imagination away, and without imagination, immediately we are strangers.
We may have known each other’s name, we may have seen each other’s face many times – that does not matter. Our beings are so hidden and so deep that there is no way that I can touch anybody’s being, or can see anybody’s being – and that is where the whole strangeness is. But I don’t feel that it is a catastrophe; on the contrary I feel it is a blessing.
If we were not strangers we would have been just robots, just machines. Our strangeness gives us individuality, uniqueness. And because it is impenetrable it gives you your strength, your dignity.
But humanity has lived with illusions of all kinds in every sphere.
My effort is to help you to live without illusions, to live with reality as it is.
Then you will not be frustrated, then you will not be miserable, then you will not be tense and worried, because you had from the very beginning accepted the fact that everybody is a stranger.
The society does not like strangers. The society wants everybody to be just like everybody else, because the society is afraid of the stranger. Even people casually meeting – for example in a train.
I was traveling for twenty years continuously; once in a while there was another passenger in the coupe. The first thing the person will start asking, “What is your name, where are you coming from, where are you going, what is your business?” I was surprised: why should one bother about these things? So I started…before the person will ask. I will enter, I will say, “This is my name and this is my father’s name and this is my father’s father’s name, and this is my business, and this is where I am coming from and this is where I am going…” And the man will feel a little afraid.
He will say, “But why you are telling me?”
I will say, “Because you will ask sooner or later. Let it be finished. Have you any more questions? – because after this I am going to remain silent. For twenty-four hours we will be together, so I have said everything that you wanted to know.”
And then I will be silent, just watching the man. And it would be such a beautiful experience! He will be fidgety, tossing and turning, opening the suitcase – for no reason. He would know, I would know, that there is no reason. Then closing it, then trying to read a book – which he is not reading, just looking. Then putting it away, then calling the servant, then going to the bathroom, then coming up….
Just something is disturbing him: a very strange man has entered. You had not asked his name, and he tells all the names of his fathers and grandfathers and what they did and how many brothers they have and how many brothers he has and how many sisters, and who is married and who is not married….
The stranger has become more strange by this introduction. And now he is sitting silently watching you and you have to do something; otherwise it looks stupid – just sitting there and…. I would go out and tell the conductor, “Soon that other person will call you and say that he wants to change the seat to another compartment. You have to tell him that no seat is vacant.”
And I was traveling so much that almost all conductors knew me. They said, “But why again and again do you disturb people so much? Now we know that for twenty-four hours he is in trouble. He cannot sleep, he cannot sit, he cannot do anything!”
I said, “Let him learn something.” And actually that is what he will do. He will ring the bell, call the conductor, and tell him that he wants to change the room. And the conductor will say, “There is no other seat vacant, this is the only seat. But why do you want to change?” That he cannot say: why he wants to change.
“Has the other passenger disturbed you? Or has he done anything to you, touched your body or anything?”
He said, “He has not done anything, but just to be here feels very strange.”
People meeting each other try to make some bridges; otherwise it is difficult.
Once it happened in Bombay, I entered the compartment – one man was there already and he saw that hundreds of people had come to see me off, so I must be a Hindu saint, because those people outside all look like Hindus. So he simply fell at my feet.
I helped him to stand up and I said, “You have done something wrong. I am a Mohammedan.”
He said, “Mohammedan? And I have touched your feet!”
I said, “You didn’t give me any chance – you immediately jumped and touched my feet!”
“No,” he said. “No, you are not a Mohammedan, you must be joking!”
“Why should I be joking? Do you think religion is a joke? It is not a joke, it is a serious affair. This is a serious affair.”
He said, “But the people who had come to see you were all Hindus.”
I said, “Yes, I have a great Hindu following too. But you can see my face is Mohammedan.”
He said, “Perhaps. But now I will have to take a bath, because I am a brahmin, Bengali brahmin; and I have not even touched a Mohammedan in my life – and I have touched your feet!”
I said, “If a bath is needed, you take a bath.” And he took a bath and he came out. And I said, “I was just joking! – I am really a Hindu saint. But what kind of brahmin are you that you cannot recognize a Hindu saint?” And he touched my feet again, and I told him, “Now you will have to take the bath again!”
And the man said, “You will drive me crazy. Why don’t you say who you really are?”
I said, “Really if you ask, I don’t know, because when I was born I had not come with any identification – whether I am Hindu or Mohammedan or Christian – so as far as reality is concerned, I don’t know. But as far as social conditionings are concerned, I am a Mohammedan.” And it was a cold night, and he had to go and take another bath!
And the conductor came to me and said, “This is too much! That man will die. You will have to keep him taking baths the whole night….”
And I said, “I will not keep him, I will do many other things. But why, in the first place, should he bother to touch my feet? – I had not asked him.”
And he came back, repeating a mantra and trying to avoid looking at me. I said, “Don’t avoid! I had to force you to take two baths, because I allow people only to touch my feet after two baths. I am not an ordinary saint.”
He said, “My God! Then why did you not tell me before? I would have taken two baths before and would not have gone into such agony that I had been touching the feet of a Mohammedan!”
I said, “Now you can touch them.” But he was hesitant. I said, “If you are hesitant, don’t touch because it is a question of faith. If you have real faith, and you are a real brahmin, only then can you touch.”
He said, “I am a real brahmin and I have faith, and I had faith in you from the very beginning; I had touched your feet, and I am going to touch – and he touched my feet.
And I laughed. He said, “Why are you laughing?”
I said, “Don’t ask; otherwise you will have to take a third bath, and the night is too cold. You just cover yourself with a blanket and go to sleep.”
He said, “You will kill me!”
I said, “I am not doing anything; I am simply sitting here. It is you who are doing all these things – touching my feet, taking a bath. Why are you bothered with me?”

I have experienced thousands of times that people are trying to figure out who you are. That gives them a certain kind of solace that you are not a stranger: you are a Hindu, you are a Mohammedan, you are a brahmin…. That gives a certain consolation that something is known about you. But the reality is that nobody is a brahmin, and nobody is a Mohammedan, nobody is a Hindu. And it is not that I am a stranger to you; everybody is a stranger to everybody else.
It is our imagination that creates all kinds of ideas about people. Sooner or later they are disturbed. Against the reality, they cannot stand.
So your question is exactly the description of reality. Far away you can feel me very close, very much known, because that is just the figment of your imagination. Close to me it is impossible. You will have to be absolutely certain that all imagination is dropped and you look at me, whatever the case – whether it turns out to be a stranger…. It is going to turn out to be a stranger.
But my experience is, it is one of the beauties of life that we are all strangers and there is no way to change this reality. It is beautiful to have strangers love you, to have strangers your friends, to have strangers all around the world. Then the whole world becomes a mystery – it is a mystery. Our mind is continuously trying to demystify it, but the mind cannot succeed. Against reality there is no way to succeed. And it is good that the mind’s failure is recognized, so even when you are far away, you don’t allow your imagination and mind to play games with you. You don’t start dreaming, you remain clear that strangeness is nature. All that we can do is apply labels.
There was one very famous man in India, Mahatma Bhagwandin. There were only two people in India who were called mahatmas; Gandhi and Bhagwandin. Mahatma means the great soul.
He loved me very much. He used to stay with me whenever he passed my town. He was a very knowledgeable man. He was very old, must be seventy-five, eighty…very knowledgeable – a great scholar in many ways about strange things you would never think….
I would take him for a morning walk, and he would start describing every flower – its name, its Latin name, its qualities, its medicinal use…anything. And he was so full of all these things that he would destroy my morning walk.
So I told him, “Do you think by knowing the Latin name of the flower you know the flower? Do you think by knowing its medicinal use you know the flower? Do you think a poet looking at this flower will think of the Latin name and its medicinal use? Do you think a painter looking at this flower will think of anything other than colors? And even if you know the Latin name and you know the colors, and you know the medicinal use and you know everything possible about the flower, still the flower remains an unknown reality; it is mysterious.
“Just its being there is mysterious. Its fragrance is mysterious. Why it exists, why existence needs it, we don’t know. There must be some necessity it fulfills; without it, existence will be a little less, incomplete. We can never know the relationship of the flower with existence, and that is its reality. That will always remain a strange phenomenon. But why not leave it as strange?”
It is said that once Picasso was painting on the seashore. For two hours a man was watching him paint – two hours is a long time to watch somebody paint. Finally he ran out of patience; he asked Picasso, “I did not mean to disturb you – for two hours I have been waiting for the moment when you will put the brush down for a moment, and I can ask just one question: ‘What is it that you are painting?’ In two hours I have not been able to figure it out.”
Picasso said, “This is strange! Nobody asks nature, ‘Why did you make these mountains, why did you make this ocean? What does it mean? Why do you go on making so many birds, so many flowers, so many people? What it is all about?’ And I am a poor painter – just on a small canvas I am doing my own thing, and the whole world is on my head asking, ‘What does it mean?’ Why should it mean anything?”
The man said, “I did not want to offend you.”
Picasso said, “I don’t feel offended, I simply feel that people think everything has a meaning, everything has to be known. I don’t know what it is, but I loved painting it. I still don’t know what it is, but I am immensely happy that I have painted it. It was within me for days; all these colors that I have spread on the canvas have been in me. I don’t know why, but I don’t want to know either.”
And that is a significant point to understand: why should we be concerned about knowing each other?
When I was in the university they used to have ‘Getting-to-know-you’ meetings once or twice a year. I never went there. The vice-chancellor said to me, “You never come to the ‘Getting-to-know-you’ meetings.” I said, “Because one thing is certain for me, that nothing can be known. So all that nonsense that you call ‘Getting-to-know-you’ is just a waste of time. I go into the hills, I go to the river – which is far better. What is this need to know each other? What are you going to know?”
In this sense I respect the poets, the painters, the musicians, the dancers. You cannot ask a dancer, “What does it mean?” You can enjoy it, you can love it, you may start dancing with him, but you cannot ask, “What does it mean?”
It remains a mystery, and the best in art, the best in music, the best in literature, the best in philosophy, the best in religion – all are mysteries.
And I want to bring to my sannyasins all of life’s mysteries.

============================================================

Osho,
You are at once such an incredible strength and sweetness seeping through me. Why do I feel there is a need to protect you?
It is one of the fundamental laws of life that everything that is higher is very vulnerable. The roots of a tree are very strong, but not the flowers. The flowers are very vulnerable – just a strong breeze and the flower may be destroyed.
The same is true about human consciousness. Hate is very strong, but love is not. Love is just like a flower – easily crushed by any stone, destroyed by any animal. And as you reach higher into consciousness, the ultimate blossoming which we call enlightenment is the most vulnerable thing in the whole of existence.
So you will feel love, you will feel my compassion, and you will feel behind each of my words and gestures, strength. That strength is coming because whatever I am saying and whatever I am, it is my own experience. I am my own authority; I am not within quotation marks.
The strength that you feel is the strength of truth.
The flower dancing in the wind does not look weak. In the sun, in the rain, it looks immensely strong. So these two sides which seem contradictory to each other are not contradictory to each other. The strength comes to the flower because it has roots in the earth, its own roots. The strength comes to the flower because the juice that is flowing in it is its own juice. The flower has not borrowed it from anybody, it is authentically itself.
And it can dance in the wind, in the rain, in the sun; but on the other hand, because the flower is the highest expression of the tree, it is vulnerable. Even with all its strength, you can destroy it very easily.
Just imagine Socrates speaking to the people of Athens. His strength behind each word is tremendous: a man alone against the whole world. But there is no weakness. He is not afraid. Even the judges are affected by the strength, because anybody who is speaking a borrowed truth cannot have such authority.
To the chief judge Socrates says, “You can kill me, but remember one thing: your name will be remembered in history for just one thing – that you decided to kill Socrates; otherwise you have nothing to contribute. And all these judges and all these people who are going to decide about me will be forgotten as if they had never existed. You can kill me, but you cannot kill my spirit.”
They decided to kill him, but they were certainly impressed because they could not give any counter-argument; and whatever he said was so clear, so truthful, there was no way to put him in the wrong – he remained always in the right in court. Still, it was a democracy – truth was being decided by a majority. And the idiots who made the majority may not have even understood what Socrates was saying; it may have gone above their heads.
Perhaps because of that reason itself, they decided that he should be killed by giving poison, as was the custom in Greece. They could not tolerate such a man, who was so far above them and so much higher than themselves. His beauty, his truth, his sincerity – all were making them feel inferior. He was stronger than the whole crowd that was going to decide his fate.
You can see the strength. The judges were affected by the strength. They had to concede to the majority but they made a few conditions, just to help Socrates. They said, “If the majority decides to kill you by giving poison, we cannot do anything. But we can suggest a few alternatives – that is within our powers. One is that you can leave Athens and promise that you will not return.”
Socrates says, “That is impossible, because wherever I am, I will be faced with the same situation.” And Athens in those days was at the peak of culture, education, civilization. Perhaps no city has ever been at such a peak. “If Athens cannot tolerate me, I don’t think there is another city which is ready to tolerate me.
“If you are throwing me out, who is going to welcome me? And I don’t want to leave Athens – I love it, and I love its youth, and I love the few intelligent people in this city who have been able to understand me. I don’t care about the crowd, I care about those selected people with whom I have a certain heart-to-heart communion. No, I cannot leave Athens. That will be worse than death.”
The judges said, “The second alternative is that you can remain in Athens, but you stop speaking, you stop teaching.”
Socrates, for the first time in the whole trial, laughed. He said, “You are asking more and more absurd things. What is Socrates without his teaching? What is Socrates without his truth? That’s my life and my being. Please don’t try to be kind to me – death is more respectful than to concede to, and compromise with, anything that goes against my heart.” He accepted death. The alternatives were available.
Certainly there is a strength, a tremendous strength in the man. But just a glass of poison kills the man, because the poison does not take any note of who you are – an idiot or a Socrates. Faced with poison he proves to be very vulnerable.
So these two things are not contradictory.
You feel my love, you feel my strength – it is there. I can stand against the whole world…in fact that’s what I have been doing my whole life. But those who have hearts will certainly feel my vulnerability. Just a bullet is enough. It won’t see whether it is killing an animal, an idiot, or a buddha.
So the idea to protect me arises in your heart from the second possibility. All my sannyasins feel exactly the same. They feel both – they feel my strength and they feel my vulnerability. And all my sannyasins around the earth are in the same dilemma you are: “When there is so much strength in the man, what is the need for us to be worried about protecting him?”
The strength is coming from one source, and the danger of destroying such a man is coming from a different source. There is no contradiction in it.
And it is natural for the sannyasins to feel immensely protective towards me, for the simple reason that they know the light of a candle is strong enough to fill the whole room with light, but it is so vulnerable: just a small breeze from the window may put it out.
There is no contradiction in it. Both are coming from different sources.

Osho,
Washing your clothes, cooking your food, helping those who come to you with questions, spreading your words to the far corners of the world, yearning from thousands of miles away for just a glimpse of you – why are these things so dear?
Why is the mystery of this night sky filled with you so precious?
The moment you feel something authentic in a world which is absolutely insincere; the moment you feel something as pure love in a world where even love is polluted, where you cannot find anything that is worthy for human beings…. And suddenly you come across a man who seems to be coming from another world, talking another language, showing ways to reach to faraway stars, making every effort to help you for no motivation, just because he enjoys helping people to reach the stars.
Naturally to do any small thing for such a man makes you feel a great joy. What you are doing does not matter.

I am reminded of an incident in Gautam Buddha’s life. His cousin-brother who was older than him wanted to be initiated, but he said to Gautam Buddha, “Listen Siddhartha” – that was his family name – “before I take initiation I want to put a few conditions on you, because once I am initiated, then I cannot say anything to you: then you are the master and I am simply a shadow. So it has to be decided before initiation because right now I am your elder brother, and you are my younger brother.” And traditionally in India the elder should be respected.
So Buddha asked, “What are your conditions?”
He said, “Not very big…very small. One, that I will be always with you. So you will not be able to tell me after initiation that, ‘Ananda, you go to a certain place to spread the word – travel.’ No, I am going to be with you, so you have to remember it after initiation.
“This is absolute…because I want to wash your clothes, I want to take care of your body, I want to massage your feet after the whole day’s walking from one village to another. I want to take care that you are getting the right food, enough food. I want to take care that on cold nights you are not cold; that on hot days you are not in a space which is hot. Just small things…. I am not asking this for me.
“Secondly, whenever I want somebody to meet you, you cannot refuse. It may be in the middle of the night…and that too is not for me, because I know there are people who come from thousands of miles with great love just to touch your feet, just to listen to a word from you, just to see you to believe that such a man really exists. I cannot refuse. Your guardians look very cruel to me.
“And thirdly, whenever you are talking with somebody I will be constantly present there. Nobody can say that he wants to meet you alone. And this is also not for me, because I know that the more you become known to the world – the more you are gathering friends and lovers – you are also creating enemies.
“I don’t want to leave you alone, because who knows? – the man may not be a friend. And you are so vulnerable that anybody can kill you very easily. To follow you is very difficult, to kill you is very easy; because in following you one has to kill one’s own ego – which is a difficult task – but to kill you…a fragile man, so delicate: I will not leave you alone in privacy with anybody, without exception.”
When an elder brother asks these things – or anything – in India, the younger simply accepts. And a man like Buddha simply laughed. He said, “That’s perfectly okay. Your conditions are accepted.”
Only once, just one time in his whole life of forty-two years with Ananda, Buddha had to ask him to relax just a little bit about one condition, because he had gone back to the palace which he had left twelve years before, and he wanted to see his wife.
“And I know her – she is a very proud woman. In front of you not even a single tear will come from her eyes. And she will welcome me as if I had just gone the other day for some business. But for twelve years she must have been boiling, angry. Not that I left her…because I know her perfectly. Her anger is not that, it cannot be.
“I know her quality. She comes from a warrior family where every girl is taught that one day the husband has to go to war: then tears should not come to your eyes; then you should not be a hindrance. Then you should touch his feet and help him to go completely at ease that he is not leaving behind a weeping, crying wife.
“So it is not a question that I left her, the question, I know perfectly well, is that I did not say it to her, that I did not trust her. That will be her wound; and your presence will not allow her to open up whatsoever in twelve years, she has gathered about me.”
Ananda said, “I can understand – and I can make an exception.”
And actually that’s what happened. The moment Buddha went in to see his wife, the first thing she said was, “I am not disturbed by your search for truth – it is really my pride that my husband is a seeker of truth, that he has dedicated his whole life to it. But one thing hurts: why did you not tell me? Do you think I would have prevented you?
“Do you think me so uncultured that I will prevent my own husband who is going on a pilgrimage in search of truth? That’s the only thing I cannot forgive and cannot forget. These twelve years that wound has been there, that you did not trust me. And I was worried that Ananda, your constant companion, would be with you, and I may not be able to say this – because he is not only your elder brother, he is also my elder brother because of your relationship. I could not have said it. It is very compassionate of you that you have come alone.”
The day Buddha left, his son was only one day old. He was born just twenty-four hours before. The wife brought the son – now he was twelve years old – and said, “He consistently insists on seeing his father, how he looks, why the whole world is mad about him – either for or against – and why he does not come home. Now, this is your son, and I want you to give him an inheritance. What inheritance have you to give to your son?”
Buddha had only his begging bowl. And he gave it to his son, whose name was Rahul, and initiated him into sannyas.
His wife finally burst into tears, fell at his feet, and she said, “Only you can do it. What strength you have! You left me without saying a word, you left me with a child who was only twenty-four hours old. And now as an inheritance you are giving your begging bowl to the child! No father has done this ever. You are making him a beggar! But it makes me happy to have such a strong man.
“Please initiate me also, and initiate your father also – he is old and for twelve years he has been waiting for you. He is very angry. You are his only son. Who is going to take over the throne after him? So please don’t take any note of what he says – he loves you. But he will be angry, he will shout at you.”
Buddha said, “Don’t be worried about that. I know him.” And his father shouted and was very angry, and he said, “You betrayed us!”
And Buddha listened silently. When his father was finished, Buddha said only one thing: “Please just look into my eyes, into my face. Do you think I am the same man who left this palace? You are angry with somebody else! And you are unnecessarily throwing all your anger on me. I am not the same man – that man is dead long ago.”
The father looked at his face, in his eyes. There was great silence for a moment. Then the father said, “Certainly you are right. You have changed. You are a new man, you are completely transformed. I am on the point of death; is it possible for me also to have the same eyes you have, the same strength you have? Help me, an old man who is just going to the grave any moment.” The father was also initiated into sannyas.

All the people who lived near Buddha knew his strength and at the same time they were all very protective of him. For an outsider it becomes very difficult to understand.
And this has been the case with me and with you. For the outsider it becomes very difficult – almost impossible – to understand why you are so protective of me. They cannot understand; it is not their fault. They have not known in their life a man who has a strength which transcends the strongest powers in the world – and yet who is so vulnerable. Just a little poison, a bullet, a cross, and he is gone.
The higher values of life have to be protected. The lower values have a certain protection of themselves. A stone need not be protected, but just by the side of it the rose in the bush has to be protected. The stone is dead, it cannot be more dead. It does not need protection.
But the rose is so alive, so beautiful, so colorful, so attractive. That is the danger – it is its strength, but it is inviting danger. Somebody may pluck it. Nobody will take up the stone, but the flower can be plucked.
So it is very natural – don’t feel any contradiction in it. And the people who see the contradiction, let them understand the situation. They have never come in contact in such a way with a person whom they love because of his strength; and yet because of his strength and his truth, they feel very protective because he is constantly in danger – every moment the whole world wants to destroy him.
And it does not need you to take guns to protect me; just your desire to protect me is enough.

The US marshal in America, in the first jail, told me, “You have been an experience for us, because the whole world seems to be protective of you! We have become enemies of the whole world. We are receiving threatening phone calls: if anything happens to you, America’s whole image will be damaged.
“For us there are only threatening calls, and for you they are sending flowers and telegrams and phone calls, and all the news media are surrounding every jail, wherever you are.”
They had to change jails – five jails in twelve days. It was absolutely unnecessary; every jail was the same. Why unnecessarily take me to five jails? They wanted to avoid the news media people – people who had never known me but who had come to know me for the first time – because America had illegally, undemocratically attacked an innocent man without any reason, without even an arrest warrant.
In those twelve days, not a single man I came across was against me. Even the criminals in the jails were very protective. Wherever I went they were protective. They said, “We have seen you, Bhagwan, on the television, but don’t be worried about those dogs – you are going to win because they are wrong.”
And this US marshal told me, “This is for the first time in my life…thousands of people from almost every country are watching what is happening to you.”
Finally they decided to use a device: in the middle of the night they brought me to a jail so that nobody would know where I was. They told me that I should not write my name on their form, I should write “David Washington.”
I said, “This is absolutely illegal. And you are forcing me to do something criminal. But what is the reason for it? – just so that nobody knows that I am here in this jail; so that whatever you want to do to me…. You can do any harm, you can even kill me. And there will be no trace where I disappeared because there is no entry for me – in this jail I never entered – and you can just fill out a bogus form that David Washington is released.”
So I told them, “You write – I cannot write with my own hand anything illegal. You fill in the form, I will simply sign it.” He filled the form, and I signed my own name.
He looked at it and said, “What is this?”
I said, “It must be David Washington.” And I told him, “You should remember that this is my name and it is known worldwide. Tomorrow morning you will have to face the press: ‘Where is David Washington?’ Produce him and let him sign my signature, or produce the man who can make the signature.”
Already, at five o’clock in the morning, they changed me again to another jail. I was only three or four hours in the previous jail because they understood that they had done a stupid thing; they would be caught at it. And I had told them, “Tomorrow morning it will be shown on every television.”
Coming from the airport there was one young woman who was going to be released. I told her, “You just do me a little favor.”
She said, “Bhagwan, I will do anything you want.”
I said, “I don’t want anything – you simply sit in the corner, because they will process me first. You just listen to the whole talk and release it to the press who are waiting outside the door. The moment you are released, just tell all the television and radio and the newspapers whatever transpires in the talk between me and the marshal.”
And that’s what she did. With the six o’clock news it was all over America. And they were so ashamed; the whole of America was ashamed of this bureaucracy. And strangely, people who were not concerned with me, who had not even heard my name, were immensely protective – everywhere.

My feeling is that if you have something which authenticates you and makes you an embodiment of truth, people are going to be protective towards you.
And certainly those who are close, they are going to be very protective, too protective. In fact Vivek had made it so difficult – I realized in these twelve days – because she has been so protective about everything, I had completely forgotten how to do anything.
Even putting toothpaste on the brush I had not done for years…or changing the bed sheet, or carrying a towel to the bathroom. In twelve days I took only one shower – and that too because Vivek was continually insisting in court when she met me, “Have you taken a shower?” That was her first question.
And I said, “I will take one, but it looks so strange to carry my own towel, my soap, that it is better for twelve days that I simply lie down with closed eyes.” For twelve days I didn’t change the sheet or the pillow cover. Even the nurses became protective!
They said, “Your blanket has to be changed; your clothes have to go for washing.”
I said, “Forget all about it. It is only a question of a few days, then I can have as many baths, and as many new robes and new sheets…don’t be worried.” But they really became protective, seeing me, that I am almost like a child. The head nurse started forcing me to go in the morning to brush my teeth!
She would say, “I will not give you your breakfast! If you want your breakfast, first you have to brush your teeth!” And she would stand there!
And I said, “I will do it.”
She said, “You are a strange man – people are harassing us that, ‘we need this, we need that.’ You are the only man who has no complaint, who has not asked for anything. On the contrary, we are worried that you don’t do anything. You simply lie down with closed eyes!
“Perhaps the bathroom is not clean, so you can come to our bathroom; and we will not let anybody know because it is not allowed. No prisoner can come to the doctor’s bathroom, but you take it for granted, that it is yours. You just use it – but don’t lock it from the inside. We will not allow anybody to enter.”
I said, “Why?”
They said, “We don’t trust you. You may lock it and if something happens to you, if you fall down or anything happens to you, how are we going to enter? And then the whole thing will be exposed, that we were allowing you in our bathroom – which is against the rules.”
And they were bringing fresh clothes every day. They were trying in every possible way. And the day I left, all the nurses – there were five – they were all crying.
I said, “This is strange! Why are you crying?”
They said, “We don’t want you to go.”
I said, “This is something! But my people are waiting there; otherwise I would have remained here.”
They said, “We can understand. Just in these few days you have become so much part of this institution that we can understand how much your people, who have lived for years with you, must be feeling. But we will never forget these days.” And they had all the pictures from the newspapers. Because they had no other way but from newspapers…they asked me to just sign my name.
I said, “You could have found a photographer.”
They said, “It is not allowed – even this is not allowed. Just sign silently so we can keep it as a memory.”
You just have to be yourself, and you will find protection from every source. Because the more you are yourself, the danger to your life becomes more, but in the same proportion the protective forces, the loving forces, the friendly forces also increase. It is always balanced.

============================================================

Osho,
Is there any relationship between gnosticism and anarchy?
The word anarchism has tremendous implications.
It means that the people are so inwardly disciplined that they don’t need any government. They are so deeply in order within themselves that no order outside is needed.
Anarchism is basically the transformation of the individual in such a way that the government becomes superfluous. He lives in the light of his consciousness, fully aware of what he is doing, fully aware of its consequences, aware that it is not his right to interfere with any individual’s life, or to trespass – even in very subtle matters like conversion. Making an effort to convert somebody to your ideology is a trespass of that individual’s consciousness. Unless he invites you, it is aggression.
So individuals have to be so conscious that no aggressive activity on any level – bodily, mental, emotional – is possible for them. Then the government is absolutely useless, a burden. And certainly the idea is that, if people can live without a government, then only are they people. If they need a government that means they are still coming out of animality. They have not yet become human. They need masters, governors, they are not capable of being on their own. They are basically asking to be slaves. The existence of a government of any kind means that the people are asking for slavery; and to ask for slavery and then to ask for democracy, freedom, freedom of expression, and individuality, becomes contradictory.
So the governments go on promising all these things but in the very existence of the government they are denied. Hence all governments are frauds. They can only promise but they cannot perform. It is existentially impossible. If they can perform then they are not needed. If they cannot perform that is why they are needed. So every government is more or less symbolic of the fact that human beings have not grown up to their full height, to their full potential.
You are asking, “Are gnosticism and anarchy in some way related?” They are…because gnosticism means knowledge of your own. There are two kinds of knowledge. One is borrowed, either from books or from teachers, or from parents, or from the environment, the society in which you live. Unconsciously you go on absorbing so many things.
This is not knowledge in the sense of gnosticism. This is a false substitute for true knowledge, and it is a hindrance. True knowledge is the discovery of truth, of love, of compassion, of all that is great in human life – by yourself.
Every Buddhist scripture begins: “I have heard Gautam the Buddha say….” It is a hearsay, it is not knowledge. You may have heard Gautam the Buddha say something – that does not mean that you have come to know it. It may become part of your memory, you may be able to repeat it like a parrot…. That’s all that your priests, your pundits, are doing all over the world – simply repeating exactly the way the parrot repeats, without knowing what he is saying.
The pundits don’t know what they are saying. They have heard, they have memorized; their memory is good, but their intelligence does not exist.
True knowledge means your own experience, your own search – and when you know yourself there is no need to believe in anything. Every belief is poisonous because every belief will hinder you in searching for the truth.
Now the whole world believes in something or other. You ask anybody about God – either he believes that God exists…and there are a few who believe that God does not exist; but both are beliefs. The communist believes that God does not exist, but he has not explored, he has not gone into his own consciousness – what to say about the whole existence? He has not explored his own small being.
And there are millions who say, “We believe in the existence of God.” But your belief cannot create a God – if he does not exist your belief makes no difference. And if you believe in a God, naturally your seeking stops. Why should one seek and search when he believes? That’s why all the religions emphasize faith, so that they can stop your search.
Faith is a block.
Search means you are still doubting, you are still not certain. Faith means you are absolutely certain that God exists. Now there is no question of inquiring. And if man goes on believing in such things which imply many absurdities….

For example. Galileo was told by the pope, “In your book you have to change the statement that the earth moves around the sun, because it goes against The Bible”. The Bible says that the sun goes around the earth, and that’s everybody’s experience too. Certainly it appears so. In the morning it rises, in the evening it goes down – it looks as if it is going around the earth.
Galileo was seventy-five years old – he was almost dragged from his deathbed to the court to give an apology, because anything that is said in The Bible cannot be disbelieved. It is the word of God; no inquiry is possible.
Galileo said, “Such a small thing which has nothing to do with religion at all…. What does it matter whether the sun moves around the earth or the earth moves around the sun? It has no religious significance.”
The pope said, “It is not a question of religious significance. The question is that if one thing is wrong in The Bible, then the faith is shaken – perhaps other things may be also wrong. If God has some stupid idea, then what is the guarantee that other things that are said are not of the same quality? So not a single word can be questioned.”
Galileo must have been a man with a great sense of humor. He said, “To me it makes no difference. I will change it in the book, I will write that the sun moves around the earth, but my statement will not make any difference at all. The earth will go on moving around the sun, in spite of my statement. How can my statement make any difference to the earth?”
And that’s what he did. He changed his statement and in a note, a footnote, he wrote: “It makes no difference to the earth or to the sun – they go on their way. I am changing it because I don’t want to be unnecessarily harassed in my old age.”

And it has been so continuously since Galileo: everything that science comes to discover goes against The Bible. Again and again the same problem arises. Because science has been progressing in the West, the struggle has been between science and Christianity.
But if we look, the same question is valid about every religion. Hinduism believes that the earth is flat, not round. But no Hindu makes a point of saying that the idea should be discarded, it goes against our researches. In the Hindu scriptures it says that the sun is smaller than the earth, which is absolutely nonsense – the sun is sixty thousand times bigger than the earth. But no Hindu even bothers.
And most fundamentally, in the first place these things should not be in the religious scriptures, because religion has nothing to do with the size of the sun or the size of the earth. We should take out everything that is not religious from the religious scriptures.
Religious scriptures will need, every ten years, a new edition, because science will go on progressing, inquiring. And the way science inquires and progresses is exactly the way of man’s inner search. He also doubts, questions, is skeptical, tries to find the truth himself. He becomes a lab unto himself.
Gautam Buddha could not find any God within himself. He searched to the very ultimate core of his being and he found no God. And if God is not existent in human consciousness, then God cannot be existent in the mountains, in the trees, which are far lower.
And the people who have come to the idea of God and have been preaching it, how have they found it? Where have they found it, and what is their method of finding it? Nothing is said about it in any scripture – you simply have faith. But why should one have faith in anybody else, who may be lying, who may be disillusioned himself, who may be insane?
I cannot conceive that Moses encountered God, because God is not a person. So if anything happened, it must have been an illusion, it must have been a projection. And projections are very easy. Just go on a three-week fast, and your mind starts losing the capacity to ask questions. Your mind starts coming to a point where you cannot divide what is dream and what is real.
It is just as it happens to small children. They were dreaming of a beautiful toy and they wake up: the toy is not there and they are crying – “Where is my toy?” And you cannot convince them, “You were dreaming, and this is reality. You have changed the whole dimension. That was your fiction, your idea, your mind and your imagination, and this is reality. It has nothing to do with your mind and your imagination.”
All the religions have been teaching fasting. Nobody has bothered to ask why all the religions are agreed on fasting. My own understanding is that the reason is that after a certain time of fasting…. Your intelligence needs protein continuously to remain functioning. After three weeks the reservoir of protein in your brain is exhausted – then you are again in the state of a child. You don’t know what is dream and what is real.
It is those moments when people have realized Jesus Christ, Krishna, Gautam Buddha, Mahavira, or whatever has been always conditioned in their mind; it becomes projected. And they don’t now have intelligence enough to feel the distinction between the real and the unreal.
The people like Moses or Jesus who have said that they have encountered God face to face must have been in such a state – which can be experimentally created. And things are very clear: a Christian never comes to see Krishna; a Hindu never comes to see Christ because a Hindu mind is not being continuously conditioned to Christ – he sees Krishna. The Buddhist never sees Krishna, the Jaina never sees Krishna.

You will be surprised that according to Jaina scriptures, Krishna is suffering in the seventh hell because he was the cause of the greatest war this country has suffered, of the whole violence. And in fact there is some truth in it.
Arjuna was not willing to fight. He wanted to retire from fighting; he wanted to go to the Himalayas to meditate. He said, “It is better – the others can keep the throne. Anyway they are my brothers. And what is the point of killing all these people?” – because it was a family struggle and both parties were connected in many ways.
Arjuna’s own master, who had made him the best archer in the world, was on the other side because he was also the master of his brothers.
Krishna was fighting on the side of Arjuna, and his own army was fighting on the other side because both parties had approached Krishna to join them.
He said, “Now this is difficult. I am alone – how can I join two parties? You are both friends so you can choose: I will fight from one side and my army will fight from the other side.”
It was a very strange war in which everybody was related. The grandfather of Arjuna, whom he loved and respected, was on the other side. The people with whom he was fighting were his cousin-brothers – whom he had played and grown up with. Millions of people would be killed.
And his argument was absolutely valid: “After killing all these people, sitting on the throne on all these corpses is absolutely meaningless. I will not be happy, I will be miserable my whole life. What will I gain? I won’t even have people to celebrate with. Killing my own people with my own hands does not seem worthwhile. It gives me a clear idea that it is better to go to the mountains and to meditate and to forget all about this.”
But Krishna persisted. When he could not continue to argue he brought in the last argument: “It is God’s will. Now you cannot disbelieve in God’s will, and it is God’s will that you should fight.”
Now this has been the strategy of all the priests all over the world – “God’s will.” But I am surprised that a man of the intelligence of Arjuna did not ask, “If you know God’s will, why is he not speaking directly to me? If it is God’s will, you fight. But as far as I am concerned, I feel this is God’s will – that I drop out of this chariot and go to the mountains.”
In his place, that’s what I would have done. “Then that’s perfectly good: if that is God’s will for you…to me this is God’s will. And if I have to choose I will choose my own rather than choosing yours.”
But it has been used to simply destroy your arguments, your intelligence, and create fear. If you don’t believe in God then there is hell. If you believe, then you have paradise and all the pleasures.
The Christian goes on seeing Christ, the Hindu goes on seeing Krishna, the Buddhist goes on seeing Buddha. And to see these people, simple psychological methods have been used: you should continuously pray. That makes you gullible.
A man waking up in the morning starts praying to Krishna the first thing – or to Christ; goes to the church, listens to the priest, reads The Bible or the Gita, which all preach, “Have faith.” And it is repeated thousands of times his whole life.
There are people who become monks and move to a monastery – they are the most prone to experience God because twenty-four hours a day they have nothing else to do except go on repeating a certain mantra, a certain name. They become hypnotized with the name, with the figure.
And all the religions teach that fasting purifies you. I don’t understand how hunger can purify. If hunger purifies people then why should we try to destroy poverty? We are destroying pure people, spiritual people! We should make everybody hungry!
Hunger cannot purify. And look deeply into it: while you are hungry you think that you are not eating, but your body is absorbing your own flesh. That’s why you go on losing weight; otherwise where does your weight go?
I have been condemned by Jainas because I said, at their conferences, “To fast is almost equal to meat-eating – and you pretend to be nonviolent people, vegetarians. But fasting means non-vegetarianism – you are eating yourself.”
A very healthy man can live through a fast of three months; but after three months he will be just a skeleton, and then death is certain because now he has no more reserve to absorb. He cannot absorb bones.
But all these people have stopped their following from thinking. I said, “My challenge is, that it is a simple fact that you lose weight – I simply ask where your weight disappears. You absorb it.
“Your body needs some energy every day. Working, walking, sitting – whatever you are doing, your body needs energy, and food is simply fuel. If you are not giving it fuel, then the body starts eating itself – it has a dual system just for emergency purposes. There may be a time when food is not available, you may be lost in a forest; the body accumulates some flesh for such times.”
But you cannot raise such questions.
And secondly, if you fast you are depriving your intelligence.
There is a hierarchy – just as in every household there is a certain division; that if you are hungry you won’t purchase a television, you will purchase food which is a more basic necessity. But if you have enough food you are not going to go on purchasing food. You will start thinking of purchasing something else – better furniture, a better house, a television, or radio or literature or music. You will start, but if suddenly your money is gone then the first things to go will be the higher things. The television will go first, the radio will go. You will retain your basic needs to the very last.
And that’s how it happens when you fast. The first attack is on intelligence because that is the highest in you, and not a basic factor – for life can exist without it; all the animals exist without it. So your intelligence starts disappearing.
If you remain hungry your love, which you have always thought such a great quality, will start disappearing. A hungry man cannot be loving. To a hungry man you cannot give beautiful literature to read, or beautiful music to listen to. That will simply be an ugly joke. He needs food.
So if you fast for three weeks – I have fasted, and I talk only about things which I have tried – after three weeks it becomes difficult to figure out whether you are dreaming or whether it is a reality. You just cannot make the distinction. The faculty that used to make the distinction is no longer there.
That is the reason that all the religions insist on fasting. They disagree on everything else, but they don’t disagree on basic elements – fasting, praying, continuous chanting, going to the church or the temple or the mosque, remaining absolutely faithful to the holy book – it may be the Koran, it may be the Gita, it may be The Bible, it does not matter. But if you see, then the basic things are similar and their function is similar.
Gnosticism is a very revolutionary concept, and it never became a mass phenomenon. It always remained a very small stream of chosen people who had dropped all the nonsense the masses had been following, and who had tried on their own to reach into the inner core of their being.
Faith does not change you, you remain the same, but a Gnostic experience transforms you. And that is the only criterion to be used – whether your knowledge is true or your knowledge is borrowed, whether it changes you or it simply becomes accumulated in your memory. You can become a good teacher, a good priest, a good leader, but you cannot become a good man.
It happened that just in the last part of the last century, Rani Rasmani built a temple in Calcutta, in Dakshineshwar on the bank of the Ganges. But Rani Rasmani was not a high-caste Hindu, she was a sudra, she was untouchable. So no brahmin was ready to worship in her temple, although she was immensely rich and she was ready to give as much money as you wanted. And she explained to the brahmins, “I have not even entered the temple; I simply go up to the steps and bow down from there. I have not entered the inner shrine; I have not even seen the statue of Krishna that is inside the temple. It is made with my money, but money cannot be sudra because money is continuously changing hands from sudra to brahmin, from brahmin to chhatriya. So you cannot call the temple a sudra temple.” But no brahmin was ready to be a priest in her temple – all over Bengal she searched.
Ramakrishna agreed. He was uneducated. There are only two classes of Bengali, and he was very poor. The whole village tried to prevent him but they all knew he was a little eccentric: if he decides, then he decides.
They talked much about it, that it was built by a sudra. He said, “All the temples are made by sudras because the labor, the craftsmen – they all belong to the sudra. Every temple is made by sudras. Can you show me a temple which is made by brahmins?” Not only are they made by sudras, but the most beautiful parts are made by Mohammedans because they have a traditional craftsmanship in marble. What they can do nobody else can do.
So Ramakrishna said, “All temples are made by sudras, there is no question about it. And money does not matter – money goes on moving. And I cannot refuse her because it is a question of Krishna being there, unworshipped. You have made Krishna also a sudra, an untouchable. The rani herself cannot enter. I am going.”
He went. The rani was happy but alerted because the man looked a little eccentric. But someone was better than no one, so she accepted Ramakrishna. And then complaints started coming about Ramakrishna.
The complaints were that sometimes he fights with Krishna. Rather than worshipping him, he shouts at him, fights with him. He uses vulgar language before him – he came from a village. Sometimes just to punish him he does not give Krishna food. And sometimes he dances the whole day from morning to evening, praying to Krishna.
The rani asked Ramakrishna, “What is going on?”
He said, “Everything is going well. When he is good to me I am good to him, and when he is nasty to me I am nasty to him. Sometimes I am praying for hours and he does not appear; then I punish him the next day: I don’t give him food. That brings him to his senses. Certainly I also don’t eat that day. I cry the whole day because I have not given food to him, I have not even opened the door – I have let it remain locked.”

One experience of Ramakrishna will show you how illusions can be created. In the beginning – it was the birthday of Krishna – he told him, “You have to appear today. It is no ordinary day, it is your birthday. I will dance and sing the whole day and the whole night. And if you don’t appear” – a sword used to hang there in the temple – he said, “I will take the sword and cut off my head.”
He danced the whole day; the evening came, the night came. It was in the middle of the night – everything was silent. The temple is in a lonely place on the Ganges. Hungry the whole day, dancing the whole day, tired, utterly tired, he was continuously singing and praying, “Appear to me!” Then he pulled out the sword and was going to cut off his head when, at that moment, Krishna appeared. The sword fell from Ramakrishna’s hand when he saw Krishna.
Now, it is so simple – a psychological matter. If you do such things you lose the balance of your mind. And Ramakrishna was childish in his behavior, in his living. He was praised as a saint because he was childlike, but because he was childlike he was experiencing Krishna face to face.
One of the great masters was passing through India…. There is a tradition of many masters: they go around the Ganges, all the way to the source, and then back along the other bank to where it falls into the ocean. One master was simply passing by and he came to know about Ramakrishna – that he sees Krishna. He laughed. He said, “The man must be innocent but gullible. He must be innocent but childlike.”
He remained in the temple; he talked to Ramakrishna. He explained to him what was happening: “What you are doing is all your creation. It is your imagination. Rama does not appear to you, Vishnu does not appear to you, Shiva does not appear to you. There is no question of Christ and Moses and others. Why does only Krishna appear to you? It is your imagination. And if you put so much pressure on your mind that you are going to cut off your head, naturally the mind is going to do anything to save your life.”
Ramakrishna said, “Then you help me to get rid of this illusion.”
The master said, “I can help, but the real thing has to be done by you. You sit silently, close your eyes, and when Krishna appears before your eyes, just cut him into two pieces and he will fall apart. There is nothing in it.”
Ramakrishna asked, “From where do I bring a sword to cut him?”
And the master said, “From wherever you have brought this Krishna! If you can bring Krishna, from the same imagination you can bring a sword and cut him in two.”
Ramakrishna tried three or four times, but the moment he saw Krishna he would start swaying and he would forget the sword and the cutting and the master and all his teaching.
The master said, “You are impossible! I am wasting my time. When you see Krishna appear in your mind you don’t cut him; rather you start swaying. And I can see on your face that you are enjoying the experience.”
Ramakrishna said, “I know that I am wasting your time, but what am I to do, because when he appears I simply forget myself.”
So the master said, “I will bring a piece of glass, and when I see that you have started swaying and your face is looking ecstatic, I will cut exactly in the middle of your forehead with the glass to remind you that this is the time. You do the same: take the sword and cut Krishna in two.”
He actually cut the forehead of Ramakrishna, and Ramakrishna gathered courage and cut Krishna inside. He remained for six hours in absolute silence, and when he opened his eyes, his first words were, “The last barrier has fallen…the last barrier has fallen.”

Our own imagination is our last barrier. Once we are without imagination then reality is there face to face. It is not Christian, it is not Hindu, it is not Mohammedan.
Gnosticism simply says this much: Each individual should follow his own inner being, dropping thoughts, imagination, emotions, sentiments – anything that comes in the way. It is not you. The simple principle of gnosticism is that anything that you can see as an object is not you. You are the seer, so you cannot be the seen. “I can see the furniture, then I am not the furniture. Whatever I can see, I am not it.”
So go on dropping all that you can see inside yourself until you come to a space where you cannot see anything. Just the seer remains in its utter purity, innocence. And that is the moment of a great revolution – perhaps the only revolution there is, because the seer cannot see anything, there is nothing to obstruct it.
That is the meaning of the word object. Object means “that which obstructs you.” There is no object there – all is empty. It can go as far as…but there is nothing. Then it turns upon itself, then it becomes its own object.
When the subject itself becomes its own object – in other words when the observer is the observed too, when the knower is the known too – you have arrived home. And that is the meaning of gnosticism.
There is a certain relationship between anarchism and gnosticism because both depend on the individual. And anarchism will be impossible without gnosticism, because only gnosticism can transform people and can bring such quality and energy in them that they don’t need any government at all.
A man of awareness does not need anybody else to tell him what to do, what not to do. He does not need the moral teacher, the priest, the policeman, the judge. They all become meaningless.
And it will become one of the greatest days in the history of man when government becomes useless and is to be dropped. That means man has transcended all animality in him – violence, anger, hatred – all that needs a government to control people; otherwise there will be so many rapes, and there will be so many murders. There will be so many thefts, and nobody will be safe.
The government is simply an agreement of the society. “We are not capable of controlling ourselves – we need a central control, powerful enough so that individuals cannot dare…or if they dare to do something, then they can be punished.” Even with the government crime goes on growing, the jails go on growing, the judges go on growing, the criminals go on growing, the laws go on growing.
So if you simply remove the government, there will be chaos, and all that is repressed in man out of fear…because both government and religion, the two powerful institutions, use fear and greed to repress your animal. They don’t change it. If you are caught the government will send you to jail to be punished. If you are not caught, then the religions will send you to hell to suffer.
It is a basic agreement that if your action is found out, it becomes a crime; if it is not found out, it remains a sin. But on both bases the fear is there that you will have to suffer. And on the other hand, if you remain good the government has rewards. You become padmashri, you become bharat bhushan, you have a Nobel Prize, and so many awards around the world for people who have proved…who have repressed everything that can be objectionable – they are rewarded. And if they are not rewarded here, they will be rewarded in paradise with all the pleasures of the world.
But this is only a strategy to keep man’s animality somehow repressed. It does not bring any change.
Gnosticism means a change in your very being.
Then you don’t need any fear; you don’t need any hell, and you don’t need any awards. You don’t need any heaven, because to transcend your animality is the greatest reward possible. It is so blissful and so ecstatic to become really human that there is no need for anything else to be added to it. So gnosticism has no God, has no heaven, no hell – those are religious types of government.
So I can see a relationship between anarchism and gnosticism. But gnosticism is more fundamental, has to happen first; only then can anarchism have a chance. Up to now it has remained a utopia.
To single individuals it has happened, but it has to happen to the whole of humanity. And when it happens to single individuals, it is very strange: the governments are not happy. And now you can understand why they are not happy.
The very happening of the transformation of the human being so that he has no animality in him, creates a fear in government and in the religious hierarchy because that man shows that it can happen to all. And the moment it happens to all, governments and religions both will be useless, discarded. And nobody who has so much power would like to be discarded. No government wants to be discarded, no religion wants to be discarded.
So a very strange thing – they go on teaching people to be good, but deep down they want you to remain the same because their whole existence is dependent on your being they way you are.
I have been talking to politicians, to religious leaders, and I have pointed it out: “Are you really interested in man becoming absolutely good? Then the saint will not be a saint, because everybody will be so good. What is the point of somebody being a saint?
“We remember Gautam Buddha as a great saint because the whole society was not good. So he stands out. But if the whole society was good he would be lost in the crowd – there would be no need to remember him. Why do we go on remembering only a few names in the whole of history? For the simple reason that they stood out.
“Everybody has the capacity to stand in the same position as Gautam Buddha. The governments, the politicians, want people the way they are. They may talk about change, but nobody wants any change because change in the people means change in the vested interests.
“Now, if nobody commits a crime what will happen to all your courts? What will happen to all your jails and your police and all your law-enforcement agencies? They will simply be out of employment.
“And if people are good and nobody wants to fight, nobody wants to kill anybody – if people refuse, and say, ‘Why should we kill any Pakistani or any Chinese?’…Or a Pakistani refuses to kill, and says, ‘Why should we kill a Hindustani? There is no reason, because this man has done nothing to me. He has children and he has a wife and he may have an old mother, a father to look after. I am not going to kill him. There is no reason for me to kill.’
“What will happen to your governments, your armies?”
They are all against me because I have been saying things like this which can cut them from their very roots. They have no arguments against me – then the only way is to create any lies, any allegations and anything they want to say about me. But nobody answers the question.
So it is a very strange state. The government exists to keep people good – but that is not true. It exists to keep people as they are, not to allow them to go through a revolution.
A better kind of people will need a better kind of government, a better kind of religion. And if people are really perfect they don’t need any government, they don’t need any religion. They are their own government and they are their own religion.
So the perfect man is continuously being killed.
You killed Socrates because he was a perfect man. That was his only crime. He has not done anything wrong in his whole life, and he asked the court, “Why are you going to kill me? What crime have I committed except that I have not committed any crime?”
But he was dangerous. A simple man, a very perfect man, is looked on as dangerous by the society, by the religious people, by the government, by all the authorities, because he creates a situation in which every man can think, “If it can happen to Socrates, why can’t it happen to me?” He can become an example. He can trigger a certain consciousness in the whole of humanity.
He has to be destroyed before he becomes a wildfire and people start being just like him.
Socrates was blamed by the court; they said, “You have been corrupting human beings” – a strange allegation. “Corrupting human beings, particularly the youth.” To teach the youth to become perfect human beings is seen by the authorities to be corrupting them, because it means death to the authorities; whether they are religious or secular, it does not matter.
So on the one hand these people go on trying to make a show that they are trying to create a better society. On the other hand they go on killing the examples of perfection.

============================================================

Osho,
Everything in life is so extraordinary, so beautiful – snow crystals, a bird, the movement of my own hand. Why then do I lose myself in idiotic things?
One of the most difficult things, but one of the most fundamental things in life, is not to divide life into beautiful and idiotic things – not to divide life at all. They are all part of one whole.
It needs just a little sense of humor. And to me the sense of humor is very essential for a person to be whole.
What is wrong in some small idiotic things? Why can’t you laugh and enjoy them? All the time you are judging what is right, what is wrong. All the time you are sitting in the seat of a judge, and that makes you serious. Then flowers are beautiful, but what about the thorns?
They are part of the existence of flowers. The flowers will not exist without the thorns. The thorns are protective; they have a function, a purpose, a meaning. But you divide: then flowers are beautiful and thorns become ugly. But in the tree itself it is the same juice that goes into the flower and into the thorn. In the existence of the tree there is no division, no judgment.
The flower is not favored, the thorn is not tolerated. They are both accepted totally.
And this should be our approach in our own life.
There are things, small things, which if you judge, look stupid, idiotic. But it is because of your judgment; otherwise they also fulfill something essential.
For example, many people have asked me, “Why do we go on smoking cigarettes, cigars, when we know perfectly well that they are dangerous to our health, that they will reduce our life span, that we will suffer. The doctors are telling us…but we are so idiotic that we go on smoking.”
And I have asked those people, “Have you observed your doctors?”
They said, “That too is true – they all go on smoking!”
Nobody looks into small things very deeply without any judgment. If you observe…that is not judgment; you are simply a witness while smoking – if you observe, you can see a few things: What are the situations when you smoke? What are the situations when the urge comes to you? And you will be surprised that those are the situations when you are tense, worried, nervous…you don’t have anything to do. And we have been brought up by the society to believe that the empty mind is the devil’s workshop.
Something has to be done – you are not to be empty. You have to fill yourself. A cigarette comes in handy: it gives you something to do, and something really significant – because it relaxes you. It has nicotine in it which helps you to become non-tense. It helps you for the moment to forget your worries.
For the moment, the cigarette gives to a simple, ordinary person a little space you can only call contemplative. He knows it harms, so later on he judges, then condemns it, condemns himself: “I am stupid, doing something that is not good for me.”
But he never observes the whole process. If he observes the whole process then he should not condemn it; rather he should learn how to relax, how not to be nervous, how not to be tense. And he will find fewer and fewer opportunities for smoking. And when these superficial opportunities are dissolved, he will come to the rock bottom of the fact: smoking is some kind of substitute. It is the mother’s breast.
Every child has been taken away from the mother before he wanted to be taken away. For example, in aboriginal tribes, smoking is not a problem because children go on using the mother’s breast for feeding themselves as long as they want. It is only up to them to decide when they want to change and go to solid food.
But in civilized societies…the more civilized a society, the more there will be smoking – for the simple reason that every child is taken away from the breast too early. The reason is clear: if the child goes on feeding from the mother’s breast, the breast loses its shape, the woman loses some beauty; she starts looking older before she is old.
The very modern women simply never feed the child from the breast. Now, the breast is not only just giving milk – because milk can be given by a bottle. It is also giving warmth, love, concern for the child.
Humanity has forgotten a few very basic things; for example, touching and its tremendous importance in your life.
If the mother has not taken you close to her body, to her warmth, you will remain cold your whole life; you will not be able to give love and warmth to any woman, because you never received any. You don’t know that anything like that even exists. The breast keeps you close to the mother’s warmth, makes you feel one with the mother’s body.
In nature, the break between the mother and the child does not come drastically-the child is not taken away from the mother when it is born. No, the break comes very slowly and very naturally; it comes only in its own time. When the child is mature enough he will not be interested in smoking.
Smoking is very similar to breast-feeding. The cigarette represents the nipple of the mother, and the warm smoke represents the warm milk flowing through the mother’s breast. So you may be even fifty, or sixty, or seventy, but somewhere, in some corner of your being, you have remained retarded. The day you were taken away from the mother’s breast…something in you is still ungrown and wants to be fulfilled.
To many sannyasins I have suggested that whenever you feel like smoking, just try a bottle of milk, warm milk. They laughed at the idea. I said, “You can laugh at the idea, but just try and enjoy it.”
They said, “But what will people say? In the office we cannot use a small child’s bottle.”
I said, “You can start trying it at night, in your bed. But give it a try and see how it changes your smoking pattern.”
And they were surprised, they loved it! And their smoking was reduced; slowly, slowly it disappeared. A certain need – -but you judge it as idiotic. It looks idiotic on the surface, but nothing is idiotic. Somewhere there must be some existential reason for it.
So don’t judge anything; rather, change your approach from judgment to observation. Howsoever stupid a thing it may be, just observe it without any prejudice. Not with the idea that it is stupid – then you cannot observe. Without any judgment and without any prejudice, simply observe it. Go deeper into it, find reasons why it is there. You will find one day the rock bottom, and the whole thing will disappear.
Awareness is magic. It can make things disappear – you just have to be very persistent in not judging but just being aware. Go deeper and deeper into it, whatever it brings, and then things will be clear to you, what has to be done.
The doctor is not telling you how you can drop your smoking, he simply goes on telling you to drop smoking, otherwise you will suffer. You know it, everybody is saying it – in the magazines, in the papers, on the radio, everywhere you are hearing it. Now even governments have passed resolutions around the world that on every cigarette packet there should be a warning that it is dangerous to health.
In the beginning, the manufacturers of cigarettes around the world were naturally against it. This is a strange thing, that you are selling something, and rather than advertising it, you are putting a label on it saying that it is dangerous to your health. But you will be surprised: it has not affected the sales of cigarettes at all. People read it, but it is not new; they have heard it so many times before. It is the same old stuff.
Take any small thing that you go on doing, approach it with awareness to its very roots, and it starts disappearing. The basic thing is learning not to judge, because the moment you judge, your observation is clouded. Then you can never see clearly; you have already concluded. You have not been scientific, you have been already carrying a belief.
In my childhood I asked my father – that was my way – “You have to give me money because now I am going to smoke.”
He said, “This is strange. No boy of your age can have the courage to ask his own father for money, and that too for smoking.”
I said, “It is up to you; otherwise I will steal, and it will be your money. You will be forcing me to commit two crimes – smoking and stealing. And then I will have to commit a third crime, lying, because whenever you ask, I will say, ‘No, I don’t smoke.’
“I am making things simple. Just give me the money. I want to smoke just to see why people are smoking and what they find in it, because I see people all around smoking against the warning of teachers, parents, doctors, priests – everybody. There must be something if they don’t listen to anybody and still go on.
“And they are paying for it, for their sickness, for their death to come earlier, to have tuberculosis, or cancer of the lungs. I cannot make any judgment before I experiment. Now it is up to you. You want me to do three wrong things or just one?”
He looked at me and said, “You are just impossible! Now I cannot even prevent you from smoking. You are asking money from me…but you are right, you would have to do three wrong things, so take the money.”
And I said, “I am going to smoke in the house, not hiding somewhere behind the house. I am going to smoke in my own house.”
He said, “Don’t do that! Because my father is still alive; your uncles are there, your aunts are there” – it was a joint family of fifty people. “They will all condemn me – they won’t say anything to you – they will say that you gave him money for smoking and he is smoking just sitting in the middle of the house so everybody can see!’“
I said, “It is better that everybody sees it; otherwise they will hear it from somebody and they will have to ask me. Why waste time unnecessarily?”
I smoked sitting in the middle of the house. Everybody was angry with my father, that this was going too far. But the first cigarette was enough; it was my last cigarette because tears came to my eyes and I started coughing. I said, “It is all nonsense. Even if somebody pays me to smoke, I am not going to smoke.” The remaining packet I returned to one of my uncles who was always smoking, hiding.
He tried to say, “I don’t want….”
I said, “Why be afraid? You have seen me smoking in the middle of the house – why do you hide here and there? I know, everybody knows that you smoke. Keep these cigarettes; otherwise I will have to throw them out. They are costly because I had told my father that these may be my first and last, so I want the best ones.”
When anything that you are doing makes you feel that something is wrong, don’t be too hasty to call it wrong; there must be a long chain of causes. You have to watch the whole thing. And until you reach to the basic root, it is going to remain.
And this is what I call the magic of awareness: the moment you reach the basic root of anything it disappears, it simply disappears. You don’t have to drop it, you don’t have to take a vow, “I will not smoke again.” It simply drops of its own accord because you have become aware of the whole process. Now you will rather try to learn something that makes you relaxed, helps you not to be nervous.

I have seen people strangely…I used to know one of the speakers of the state assembly. He must have been seventy, and he must have been speaking for fifty years at least. He was the speaker of the assembly, but each time he stood to speak, he was so nervous that he used to keep his hands in his pockets. Those hands were just trembling.
He was also the vice-chancellor of my university, where I was teaching. One day he was inaugurating a new library building, and as he started speaking with his hands in his pockets, I approached with a piece of paper with some note on it. He had to take his hands out, he had to take the paper, and the paper went like this…and the whole audience was laughing. And there was nothing on it, just unreadable scribble.
He was very angry. He called me after the meeting into his office, and he said, “What was the need to expose me?”
I said, “It was absolutely necessary. You are seventy, you are a public speaker – forty years or more you have been speaking – and your hands tremble. Do you think nobody knows? Your hands are trembling in your pockets also. Anybody who has a keen observation can see that they are inside and trembling. I simply wanted you to be aware that hiding won’t help. Why are you so nervous?
“You are not an amateur. A new person facing an audience may feel afraid perhaps, may wonder perhaps whether he proves up to the standard of the people and their expectations or not. But you are a well-know speaker. You have proved yourself; now there is no need to be afraid. But you have been hiding your fear for these fifty years – not from other people but from your own consciousness, from your own awareness. What is the problem?
“Next time you try it: let your hands tremble but let them come out, they should not be in your pocket; otherwise I am going to come with a piece of paper again, and you will have to receive the paper, either with your mouth or with your hands.
“If you receive it with your mouth, you cannot speak; if you receive it with your hands the whole audience will see. It is better, if I am present that your hands are out of your pockets. But I would like you to go deeper into this stupid habit.”
He became silent. He had been angry, but now he was not angry because I had not done any wrong to him; I had brought something to his notice which he had been denying to himself and to the whole world. Now he was seventy and soon he would be dying.
I said, “You think about it. I am available to help you – I can come anytime you want – but first you go through it from the very beginning, how it started and why you have not been able to change it your whole life. And it doesn’t look right for a well-known speaker, the speaker of the assembly.”
I said, “I will be coming tomorrow. You just look into it. Rather than avoiding it, face it! Don’t condemn it. It is condemnation which has caused the whole problem.”
And the next day when I reached him, he said, “You are right. It was my father: because when, for the first time, in my high school days, I went to speak in a competition between two schools, I was preparing my speech, and my father was a man who wanted everything to be perfect – a real perfectionist.”
Perfectionists are always neurotic, because in life nothing can be perfect, and they are always miserable because life is never as they want it. So he told the boy, “You repeat your speech again and again. Go to the bathroom, stand before the mirror, repeat your speech, and see that no nervousness is there.”
The vice-chancellor said to me, “Even in my bathroom, although there was nobody, I could feel great nervousness coming to me, and particularly to my hands. I tried again and again, but the more I tried, the more my hands were trembling. I went to my father and told him – he was a very prominent military officer. He said, “If your hands tremble, keep them in your pockets. Nobody should know about them; otherwise you will become a laughingstock.”
I said, “If I had been your father I would have told you to use your hands and their energy as gestures, because there are things which cannot be said by words but can be indicated by the hands. In fact, to keep your hands in your pockets cuts off almost half of your communication, because words are not complete; they need much support from your hands, your eyes, your voice, your tone. Even the silences between your words are expressive.
“So rather than using the energy of the hands in gestures, you have been repressing it – and energy cannot be repressed. Your father had no idea that your hands are joined with your mind. Hands are extensions of the mind: your left hand is the extension of the right side of your mind; your right hand is the extension of the left side of your mind.
“If the mind is functioning perfectly, then your hands are certainly going to move with the movement of the mind. Stopping the hands, you are cutting off your own possibility of expressing more clearly, more penetratingly, more emphatically. You will remain a poor speaker. And you may be hurt,” I told him, “that although you are the speaker of the assembly and a well-known speaker, I want you to know that you are a poor speaker.
“Your speech has no juice in it, no gusto in it, no emphasis in it. It is flat, as if you are reading – there are no gaps. You are not communicating with people, you are really avoiding the people. You are saying things but there is no joy in saying it, there is no music in it. Release your hands.”

It happened in America in the first jail where I was – the sheriff of the jail immediately fell in love with me. He was a really nice and beautiful old man. And when the court denied bail to me he said to me, “This is absolutely unjust – to keep somebody in jail whose crime is not proved; whose crime is not even tried: there has been no trial. And to refuse bail – it is just political, unjust.”
I asked him, “Would you help me a little?”
He said, “I will help you all the way. What do you want me to do?”
I said, “I would like a press conference in the jail.”
He said, “It has never happened in history – a press conference in jail by a prisoner.”
I said, “Then let it happen, let it be a precedent! And if you feel it was unjust, then do something.” He agreed. The press conference was called, but my hands were cuffed, and I told him, “It will be impossible for me to speak with my hands in chains.” And not only were they in chains; they put a chain belt around my waist, and they locked the handcuffs to the belt, so you could not move more than this….
So I said, “I will not be able to speak at all. You have done a great favor to call the press conference” – and almost one hundred press people were there, all the television and radio stations and all the big newspapers. “Now, do me a favor – because I am not going to escape. I have chains on my legs; you can keep the chain on my waist. You can put chains all over my body, but leave my hands free. It is impossible for me to speak a single word without my hands being in harmony with what I am speaking.”
He understood. He said, “I have seen you on the television, and I have loved your hands and I have loved it that they certainly express something.”
I told that vice-chancellor, “You give freedom to your hands – that will give freedom to your mind. Your speech will become alive. There is no harm in the fact that you are now seventy years old; it is never too late to begin. And you will be immensely joyous for the first time because all your speeches…and you have to speak almost every day, and it is a torture to you. If you are nervous, speaking is a torture to you, it is not a joy.”
He agreed with me. The first day he spoke with his hands out of his pocket, the whole university wondered what had happened because nobody had seen him like this. And there was no trembling, the trembling became gestures.
He called me again – there were tears in his eyes – and he said, “Fifty years of speaking have been hell to me. You released me from that hell. Nobody ever told me that I am the cause of the whole nervousness, that I am repressing an energy that can be transformed.”

Most of the things that you think are stupid, idiotic…if looked at deeply, it may turn out that you have just not used the energy rightly. Simple observation, and you will be able to change.
I never tell anybody to change anything by force, because anything changed by force is never changed. And the more you use force to change things, the more you are imprisoned by your own force.
My approach is absolutely nonviolent.
Just watch, and watch to the very root cause. And you will be surprised that what was looking like stupidity has changed into something intelligent, something beautiful. The whole life can be an organic whole of beauty.
You can ask your second question.

Osho,
Do you agree with the choice Socrates made? Would it have been your choice?
It is very difficult to answer for the simple reason that I am not the same type of person as Socrates. If the choice was given to me, I certainly would not have chosen death by poisoning, because to me it is simply suicidal, against life. And my whole approach is life-affirmative.
I would not have chosen to die, but somewhere deep down there must be a suicidal instinct in Socrates himself. The choice is coming from him. I am not a lover of martyrs – I think they are insane.
I would have chosen just to be outside Athens, just close to the boundary of Athens, where my people could reach. I don’t think…what was the problem? The judges were saying, “Just get out of Athens.” Socrates is more insistent on his own egoistic stand of “Either I will have all or I will not have anything – all or none.”
I don’t see life in those terms. You never have all, you cannot have all. There is no need to make such a division between all or none. Have as much as you can, squeeze every moment to its totality – but what is the hurry to die?
Athens was a city state – he could have moved just out of the boundary of the city, and his people would have been perfectly willing to come there. In fact it would have been far easier there, outside the city, to have a beautiful school where he could teach silently only to those who really wanted, than to have a school in the main part of the city with all the hustle and bustle.
And the question is not of Socrates, the question is of the truth. Socrates sacrificed not only himself, he also sacrificed his truth. He also sacrificed the people who loved him, the people who wanted to listen to him, the people who wanted him to live.
That would have been my choice. And in fact that has been my choice in America. They had no crime against me. They knew it – the judge knew it, everybody was aware that they had no crime against me. And all the crimes that they are talking about – there were mainly two. One was that I helped people to get married, and those marriages were just to get residence in America.
It was absolutely false because for three and a half years I had been silent and I had not been meeting with any sannyasin. It was true that people had married just to remain in America, but it was not my arrangement; I was not guilty of it. I had not told anybody, not a single person, to get married to somebody. I was not seeing people at all; I was in isolation and in silence.
And the whole house – twenty people who were taking care of me – they were witnesses that nobody entered in the house and I didn’t go anywhere. So it was absolutely absurd.
Their second charge was that before coming to America I had an intention to remain there forever. I told my attorneys, “This is absolutely absurd, because unless they can read somebody’s mind, I don’t think the judge or the US attorney or anybody…. I am standing here in the court: can they say what I am going to do next? Then I will hit the US attorney.
“If he cannot see my intention right in front of him, on what grounds can he say that I had that intention? You can talk about actions because actions can have witnesses; but intentions don’t have witnesses. Intentions cannot be punished.
“You may intend to kill the whole of humanity. That does not mean that you should be crucified. You did not kill a single ant – you just intended to. You can enjoy intending to kill the whole humanity, to create a third world war, but it cannot be a crime.
“On these two grounds you have arrested me without any arrest warrant – which is illegal. You have not even shown me what the cause of my arrest is, which I am absolutely entitled to know. You did not allow me to call my attorney, which is my birthright. You have been committing all kinds of sins and crimes against me.”
They knew that in a trial they were going to lose the case. They had made the case “The United States versus Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh.” If they lost the case it would be really very damaging to the prestige of the nation – that a single individual wins against the whole nation. And it is their folly that they have named the case in this way – I have not named it.
At the last moment they understood that they were in trouble, that they were going to lose. They asked for negotiation with my attorneys, and the negotiation was exactly the same as the situation was in the case of Socrates. The negotiation was – they said it clearly – “We don’t have any factual grounds to prove anything, so we are ready to negotiate before the trial begins.
“Only one thing is needed: Bhagwan should accept in court that he is guilty. Then we will withdraw the case, and he will not be allowed to enter America for five years. If he insists, that “I am not guilty,’ then we are not going to allow bail for him at any cost – five million dollars, ten million dollars. No, no amount of money. The United States government is not ready to give him bail.
And we will prolong the case as much as we can – five years, seven years, ten years. So in those ten years he will be harassed, in those ten years his work will suffer, in those ten years his commune will suffer, in those ten years millions of his people around the world will suffer. Of course he will win in the end. But these ten years will be a nightmare for millions of people, so the choice is yours.”
Certainly Socrates would not have said, “I am guilty.” Even my attorneys were afraid to tell me what the government wanted. There were tears in their eyes when they said, “We have come to ask you something which is absolutely absurd, but the question is, if you insist that you are not guilty – which we know you are not, and which we proved that you are not, but it is out of our hands…. The bail, the pressure of the government is too much. They are not ready to give bail to you, and they may prolong the case for five, seven years. That will destroy your whole work; your people will suffer.”
In just twelve days hundreds of people around the world were not eating, were fasting, crying, weeping, feeling absolutely helpless, “What to do?”
“So they want you simply to say, ‘I am guilty.’”
I said, “Don’t be worried and don’t cry. I am a totally different man than Socrates. To me compassion and love are far higher qualities than my own ego. I don’t have any. I will say to the court that I am guilty, and then my whole life I will prove to the whole world that I was not guilty, and I was forced by the government, under oath, to lie.
“On one hand you put me under oath: ‘You will speak only truth and nothing else but truth,’ and on the other hand you make a situation in which I have to lie.”
And I told my people, “Don’t be worried, I will say I am guilty. My saying it does not make me guilty. And once I am out, there is my whole life to prove that I was not guilty and the American government is guilty. The whole thing is criminal: to put me under oath and then to force me to lie or be ready to suffer in jails for any period of time; and to let my whole movement be destroyed.
I love my people. For them I can speak not one but one thousand lies. I love my work, so this is nothing; you don’t be worried.
Certainly my choice would have been different. Just outside Athens would have been my commune!

============================================================

Osho,
In these times of uncertainty, the best – and the worst – seems to be coming out in those of us who are around you. Would you comment on this?
There are no “times of uncertainty” because time is always uncertain. It is the difficulty with the mind: mind wants certainty – and time is always uncertain.
So when just by coincidence mind finds a small space of certainty, it feels settled: a kind of illusory permanence surrounds it. It tends to forget the real nature of existence and life, it starts living in a kind of dream world; it starts mistaking appearance for reality. It feels good to the mind because mind is always afraid of change for the simple reason: who knows what change will bring – good or bad? One thing is certain, that change will unsettle your world of illusions, expectations, dreams.
Mind is just like a child playing on the seashore, making palaces in the sand. For a moment it seems that the palace is ready – but it is made of shifting sands. Any moment just a small breeze, and it will be shattered to pieces. But we start living in that dream palace. We start feeling that we have found something which is going to remain with us always.
But time continuously goes on disturbing the mind. It looks hard but it is really very compassionate of existence to always remain with you. It does not allow you to make realities out of appearances. It does not give you a chance to accept masks as your real face, your original face.
So whenever time strikes one of your cherished illusions, it feels that it brings out the worst and the best in peoples’ lives. It simply brings out what was hidden behind the false permanence, behind a dream that you had taken for granted to be real. It simply takes away your mask. It has nothing to do with good or bad, better or worse – it simply takes away your mask. It simply exposes you, it brings you to face yourself, so whatever you have been repressing starts surfacing. It can be the worst, it can be the best.
Time has nothing to do with these categories. It simply allows your repressed to surface, it brings you to yourself.
Most of the people are hiding the worst. It is very rare to find a person who is hiding the best – why should he hide the best? People are even pretending to show themselves in the best of colors – why should they hide the best? People simply hide the worst, thinking that it is ugly.
A change – and your mask slips. A change – and you are for a moment…suddenly you find yourself naked. You have lost your clothes and the whole reality becomes a mirror: from everywhere your nudity, your nakedness is reflected.
Yes, very rarely, very exceptionally it also happens that the best comes out. But the best comes out only in those people who don’t have a mask, who are already naked, and who have already accepted their nudity as beautiful and natural. So the change in time cannot destroy anything in them; on the contrary, it enhances. It brings to light something which they may have forgotten, others may have forgotten. We tend to take things for granted.
So, only in a few exceptional cases where a person has been living innocently, without any hypocrisy, where a person is living knowing perfectly that nothing is certain here, and nothing is permanent…. And to expect these things is to create grounds for your own frustrations in the future – it is sowing seeds of despair, of anguish, of anxiety.
If you accept that change is the nature of reality, and everything is going to change; if you know it moment to moment, that the next moment may bring something totally new and whatever is so real in this moment will disperse like a cloud – which was here a moment ago and now is no longer here…. If this awareness is there, then any change does not create difficulty, then every change is acceptable.
You do not resist it, you do not want it to be otherwise. Even if it takes you and your beautiful dreams, your cherished desires, your half-finished palaces, there is no frustration because it was accepted from the very beginning that this can happen at any moment. So there is no conflict, there is no frustration in reality. You are at ease.
Hence I say there are no times of difficulties, no times of uncertainties. Time is change, is always changing. It is just that we go on making permanent things. Against time, we are going to be defeated – and we are at fault. And when we are defeated, naturally we are angry, we are frustrated with existence itself. We lose our trust. It seems that everything is against us, and we start living in paranoia, in fear – a certain spiritual trembling enters into our being.
But this happens because we have been expecting something which is not part of reality. Existence has no obligation to fulfill our expectations. And then mostly the worst comes out, because that is what we had hidden behind a certain idea of permanency. We were living with the idea that this was going to last forever; now there is no need to change. And then suddenly the whole earth disappears from under our feet – and naturally the worst comes out in people.
The best is also possible, but it is possible only if you have been living in tune with life, existence, without asking any favors. And we are always asking favors. If we are not asking any favors then there is no frustration, no anger.
For example, many who have been with me have felt great frustration with life itself because they worked hard, they put their whole energy into creating a beautiful dream, and as they were almost getting it finished – just the finishing touches were to be done – suddenly the whole thing disappears. They will feel angry, disgusted, against the whole of existence – but it is simply our own doing.
I am not frustrated – I have not even looked back for a single moment. Those were beautiful years, we lived beautifully, and it is the nature of existence: things change. What can we do? So we are trying to make something else – that will also change. Nothing is permanent here. Except change, everything changes.
So I don’t have any complaint. I have not felt even for a single moment that something has gone wrong…because here everything has gone wrong, but to me nothing has gone wrong. It is just that we tried to make beautiful palaces out of playing cards. You were just finishing and a breeze comes in without knowing that you were making palaces out of playing cards, and those palaces are scattered all around.
Perhaps except for me everybody is frustrated. And they feel angry at me too because I am not frustrated, I am not with them. That makes them even more angry. If I was also angry, and I was also complaining, and I was also tremendously disturbed, they would have felt a consolation. But I am not.
We enjoyed whatever we were doing, and we will be enjoying whatever we will be doing – and things will go on changing always. If this remembrance is always there as a lighthouse, then it will never make you feel in such a state that a difficult time, an uncertain time has brought the worst. We had never planted the seeds for it in the first place.
That’s why I am amongst you, but still something of me remains a stranger, an outsider. For the simple reason that I look at things in a totally different way; to me it is all acceptable.
Now it is going to be difficult to make another dream come true because many of those who worked to make one dream come true will be in a state of defeatism. They are defeated. They will feel that reality or existence does not care about innocent people who were not doing any harm, who were simply trying to make something beautiful. Even with them existence goes on following the same rule – it makes no exceptions.
So many sannyasins will be in a state of defeatism, will find it very difficult to make another effort again. They will feel, “What is the point? We will put in our energy, our expectations, our hopes, and who knows? – tomorrow everything is destroyed just by any small thing.” They will feel it is better not to hope, it is better not to dream. It is better to get lost in ordinary life where people don’t dream, where people don’t hope, where people don’t create, where people go on living a day-to-day life.
In that life you don’t come across such frustrations. Such frustrations come only when you try to reach the moon. And when you have almost reached, suddenly the moon disappears and you are further away from it than you have ever been: further away than before you had started the journey.
I can see that it is painful, but we are responsible for the pain. It feels that life is not just, not fair, because it has taken a toy from our hands. One should not be in such a hurry to come to such great conclusions. Wait a little more. Perhaps it is always for the good – all the changes. You should just be patient enough. You should give life a little more rope.
And always remember, the joy is not in completing something; the joy is that you desired, that you desired it with your total intensity, that while you were making it you had forgotten everything, the whole world – that it was the only focus of your whole being. And there is your bliss and your reward – not in the completion, not in the permanence of anything.
In this changing flux of existence we have to find in each moment its own reward. Whatever we were doing, we did our best, we were not half-hearted; we were not keeping back something: we were putting our total being into the act. That’s where our bliss is.
Then what happens to those dreams…they are really dreams, and it is a great challenge to make dreams into realities. But you should never forget it is a dream after all. It is a joy to make it a reality, but don’t forget that it remains a dream – and sooner or later it disappears.
If this awareness is there, then after each change in your life you will find yourself becoming sharper, more intelligent, more mature; becoming more alert to the very delicate nuances of existence – and with tremendous acceptance of whatever happens.
My whole life I have seen many things disappearing. I have made more friends than perhaps anybody has ever made. But somebody is a friend today – tomorrow it is finished. He finds some path on a crossroad and separates. But I have always taken it for granted that we are only travelers – one never knows how long someone is going to be with you. While someone is with you, give as much love as you can, share as much as you can. Tomorrow perhaps you will have to say good-bye to the person.
My whole life I have been going from one place to another place because something has failed. But I have not failed. Thousands of dreams can fail – that does not make me a failure. On the contrary, each dream disappearing makes me more victorious because it does not disturb me, does not even touch me. Its disappearance is an advantage, is an opportunity to learn to be mature. Then the best will be coming out of you. And whatever happens will not make any difference – your best will go on growing to higher peaks.
But never try to succeed against time, against life, against existence. Always remain in a let-go. Then one is never defeated, is never in a state of failure. And there is nothing to hide because there is no clinging to anything to make it permanent – any relationship, any friendship, any activity, anything – there is no desire to cling to it as long as things happen which you enjoy. You open yourself, you allow the juice of those moments to fill your being, and when those moments are gone you are always grateful, never complaining.
If the disappearing dreams leave you in gratitude, then the best is going to grow in you. I have never looked back.
Just the other day at evening darshan time a few people were very happy and enthusiastic, and they said, “Osho, we have come from Jabalpur.” And the only thing that came to my mind was that my time there has been left so far away and so far back that not even a memory has remained. Yes, I lived a dream there also, and just as all dreams fail, it failed.
And I have been doing that my whole life – I’m still doing that. I will go on doing that until my last breath, undefeated. That undefeatedness I find to be one’s victory. In that undefeatedness – that every time you make something, time changes it, life starts flowing in a different direction, things start happening that you had not expected….
The unknown is continuously entering your known world and disturbing it. But it disturbs only because you don’t welcome it. If you can welcome the unknown, and you can leave the known…. It is always the known that is disturbed by time – it is not the unknown. The unknown cannot be disturbed by time or by anything.
If you are ready to welcome the unknown, you know the secret of remaining victorious in all the defeats and all the failures.
Those dreams do not matter. What matters is how you come out of those broken dreams, those great expectations that have disappeared into thin air, you can’t even find their footprints.
How do you come out of it? If you come out of it unscratched, then you have known a great secret, you have found a master key. Then nothing can defeat you, then nothing can disturb you, then nothing can make you angry and nothing can pull you back. You are always marching into the unknown for new challenges. And all these challenges will go on sharpening the best in you.

Osho,
What is home?
There is no home, there are only houses.
We try to make homes out of houses, but in fact, home is projection – there is only a house – it feels cold. We need a home: we want something cozy, something that belongs to us, something to which we belong. Something which is an extension of our being, something which we can make part of us; something which is not just a place where you live, but which becomes alive with you. A house is a dead thing; a home is a living entity, but it is a projection.
So those who are searching for a home will find themselves frustrated again and again because they will find again and again that it turns out to be only a house. Home was their idea. It was their illusion, their hallucination. It was their poetry, their romance. They have been weaving and spinning something invisible around the house which nobody else can see – only they can see it. But it is just a mind game.
Man is born homeless, and man remains his whole life homeless. Yes, he will make many houses into homes and he will get frustrated. And man dies homeless.
To accept the truth brings a tremendous transformation. Then you don’t search for a home – because home is something there, far away, something other than you. And everybody is searching for a home. When you see its illusoriness, then, rather than searching for a home, you will start searching for the being that is born homeless, whose destiny is homeless.
There is no way to make a home. And this is a miracle: the moment that you realize that there is no way to make a home, then this whole existence is home. Then wherever you are, you are at home; because now there is no question of making a home – now there is no question of creating an illusion. You have accepted your homelessness, not with any unwillingness, any resistance, but joyously, because it is good that you are born without a home; otherwise that home will be an imprisonment.
Just think, if people were born with a home, they would be born imprisoned. To be homeless is to be free. It is freedom. It means there is no attachment, no obsession with anything outside; that you are not in need of getting some warmth from the outside, but that your warmth is within you. You have the source of warmth inside; you don’t need it. So wherever you are – without a home – you are strangely at home.
The people who are searching for a home are always getting into despair, and finally are going to feel, “We have been cheated, life has cheated us. Somehow it gave us the desire to find a home – and there is no home at all, it simply does not exist.”
We try in every possible way: one finds a husband, one finds a wife, one brings children into the world…. One tries to create a family – that is a psychological home. One makes, not a house, but tries to make it almost a living entity. He tries to make a house according to his dreams – that it is going to be a fulfillment of warmth, that in this coldness…. And it is vast, the coldness of existence. The whole universe is so cold, so indifferent, that you want to create a small shelter for yourself where you can feel that you are taken care of, that something protects you…that it is something that belongs to you – you are an owner, not a homeless wanderer.
But in reality this kind of idea is going to create misery for you because one day you will find that the husband you have lived with, the wife you have lived with – is a stranger. Even after living together for fifty years, the strangeness has not disappeared; on the contrary, it has deepened. You were less strangers on the first day you met.
As time has passed and you have been together, you have become more and more strangers to each other, because you have come to know each other more and more – and now you don’t understand at all who the other person is. The more you have known, the less you know. It seems that the more you have become acquainted with the person, the more you become aware that your ignorance about the other is absolute…there is no way to destroy it.
Your children – you have thought they were your children, and one day you find they are not your children. You have been just a passage they have come through. They have their own lives – they are absolutely strangers. They don’t belong to you. They will find their own ways and their own lives.
Who is with you? Nobody is with anybody. You are in a crowd always, but alone. Either alone or in the crowd makes no difference: either in a home or just a wanderer – it makes no difference

I have never had a home. When I left my father’s house for the last time, I told him, “I will not be coming back again, because this was only a commitment to my maternal grandmother. She had a promise from me that I would come back at least at the time of her death. So just to keep the promise, I have come. Now there is no longer any commitment.”
My father said, “You always say strange things – this is your home!”
I said, “That’s where we differ. Neither is it my home nor is it your home. But you continue to live in an illusion and one day you will understand that this is not home.” And I told him a famous Sufi story I have told many times.

The king heard one night the sound of footsteps, somebody walking on the roof of his palace. He could not believe it. The palace was so well guarded – how had somebody reached the top?
He shouted, “Who are you?”
And the man on the roof shouted, “You should ask it of yourself first: who are you?”
The king rushed out and called the guards to catch hold of the man, but he was not found. And the next day, again there was a stranger. But the king recognized the voice – it was the same man. And the strange behavior that he had shown the night before…to walk on the roof and then to talk in such a way, and to say to the king, “First you should ask, who are you? You don’t even know that and you are worried about me! You do your business – I’m doing mine.”
The man was fighting with the guard at the gate of the palace and saying, “I want to stay in this caravanserai for a few days.”
The guard was saying again and again, “You seem to be an absolute idiot; this is not a caravanserai! This is the palace of the king, his home!”
And the man said, “Then I would like to see the man who lives in such an illusion.”
The king was listening: he recognized the voice. He called the guard and said, “Bring that man in.” And he asked him, “Are you the same man who was on the roof?”
The man said, “Yes.”
“And what were you doing there?”
He said, “My camel was lost, so I was searching for it.”
He said, “You seem to be really mad! Your camel was lost on my roof? Has anybody ever heard of camels getting lost on the roofs of houses? And now you are fighting with my guard and calling my home a caravanserai! This is very disrespectful to me: I am the king, and this is my home, and you have to learn how to behave!”
And the man started laughing. He said, “Strange! You are telling me to learn how to behave, and you don’t know at all what behavior means! Because I came here once before, and I found another man in your place. He was also saying that this is his home. I had come before that too, and there was another man and he was also saying that this is his home. Now you are saying this is your home!”
The king said, “That man was my father, who has died. And the first time you came you met my grandfather.”
The stranger said, “That is what I wanted to make clear to you, that they called this their home, and then they had to leave it behind. They could not take it with them. It is a caravanserai. This is an understanding, that many people have been here who thought it was their home, and they are all gone. You will be gone when I come next time! When so many people stay here and come and go, this is a caravanserai!”
“And I also wanted to stay for a few days, so what is wrong? You will stay a few days, your father stayed a few days, his father stayed a few days, and this has been going on for centuries. But I am not illusioned: to me it is a caravanserai.”

I told my father, “One day you will also understand that this is not home, because in this world we are born and the day we are born, we start dying. You can call your homes your graves, but you cannot call them homes, because you are only dying in them, you are not living!”
And since then I have been in many houses which people thought were my homes, and I have been telling them that they were not, that there is no possibility.

It is good to understand that we are wanderers, gypsies – searching for something, certainly. But the search can either be for a home…that means some security, some warmth, some coziness, some love from the outside, from somebody else – and that is the wrong way. That is the way of the worldly man – and he always ends in misery.
A sannyasin basically recognizes the fact that the search is not for a home, the search is for: who is this being? – the being who is born homeless, and will remain always homeless.
Don’t search for the home, because there is none. Search for your self, because there is one! And finding that one, suddenly, miraculously, the whole existence becomes your home. And you don’t create it, you don’t project it, you don’t make it. Suddenly it is a revelation. You cannot believe how you have been missing it up to now. The home was always where you were.
The gypsies have a better name in the Indian language. The gypsies are basically from Rajputana in India. They got the name “gypsy” because they first went out of India to Egypt and from Egypt they entered Europe. It is Egypt that gave them the name “gypsy” – from Egypt. But they are really people from India, and in India their name is “khanabadosh.”
That name has tremendous beauty. It means a person whose home is on his shoulders; so wherever he goes, he is always at home. The word khanabadosh is tremendously significant: khana means “home”, badosh means “on your own shoulders”.
It is not visible, it is there, but it is revealed only to those who can find who this wanderer is, who this seeker is. Rather than going after the sought, search for the seeker. And finding the seeker, you suddenly find the whole existence is your home; wherever you are, you are at home, even in a hotel. Because every house is a hotel and every place is a caravanserai.
So it is a question of how you look at things.
When I was in India, I was at home; when I was in America, I was at home. When I am in Nepal, I am at home. And tomorrow I don’t know where life may take me, but wherever it takes me, I will be at home. That, nobody can take away from me for the simple reason that I am not making any projection which can taken away.
Just finding yourself, you find that the whole existence is your home.

============================================================

Osho,
I love to hear you call us your friends. Why is it both exciting and challenging?
It has many implications.
It was twenty-five centuries ago that Gautam Buddha said as a departing message to his disciples before he died: “I will come back after twenty-five centuries. My name will be Maitreya.”
Maitreya means the friend. And why should it be the name of Buddha? – because the spiritual evolution of man has passed through many stages. Its ultimate stage is where the master and the disciple should be just friends…because the whole idea of the master and the disciple is based on a subtle spiritual slavery. The disciple surrenders. The master provides all kinds of devices so that the disciple disappears as an ego. But there are dangers.
The danger is – and it is not only theoretical; the danger is very practical, and it has happened almost all over the world throughout the centuries – that instead of the ego disappearing, the individual disappears and the ego remains. Instead of disappearing, it becomes very subtle; it becomes holy, it becomes religious, it becomes spiritual.
The individual disappears in surrender – and that was not the purpose. The individual has to become more individual, more independent, more himself. The ego has to disappear – it is a false entity deceiving everybody as your true self. And unless the false is discredited, the true cannot appear.
In the death of the false is the beginning of the true. Surrender is simply a device so that the ego can be dropped and you can become yourself. But this is the trouble, that with humanity you cannot be very predictable. There is almost a possibility that everything will fail, so deep is the ignorance of man, so deceptive is his own mind. And he is so caught up with his own chains that he thinks they are ornaments; he does not want to throw them. They have been with him so long that he has become identified with them.
Man has forgotten who he truly is. He has almost become autohypnotized with a certain idea about himself, and he carries that idea his whole life without knowing that it is not he but only his shadow. And you cannot fulfill your shadow. A shadow is nonexistential – you cannot make anything out of it. Your effort will simply destroy your whole life; hence the device of surrender.
But again man’s ignorance is there: he surrenders, but he surrenders the wrong thing. He saves the ego, which was to be surrendered, and he surrenders the individuality, which was to be saved. And he starts feeling himself to be a spiritual being just by becoming a disciple, an initiate. And if by chance he has come across a great master, he starts projecting himself as a great disciple of a great master.
Gautam Buddha’s whole life’s experience was that finally the device of surrender has to be dropped, because in the majority of cases it has not been of any help, it has been a hindrance. This was his whole life’s experience – seeing people changing the color of their ego. From a worldly ego it becomes an otherworldly ego; from a materialistic ego it becomes a spiritualistic ego – which is far more dangerous. The first one was very gross; it was easy to see it and to catch hold of it. The second is more difficult because it is more subtle, it will elude you.
Hence Buddha’s last message was: “When I come back again, I will come not as a master to you, and you will not be a disciple to me; I will come as a friend. And you have to rise to the standard of being a friend of a buddha.” A great challenge to the whole tradition of initiation, to the whole relationship of master and disciplehood. He could see that it has helped once in a while but in most cases it has blocked people’s growth.
And we can see that he was right. There are millions of people in the world who think they are religious, they are spiritual, they are saints, they are great spiritual beings. All that is nothing but feeding the ego. They have gone far away from their real being.
One thing is to be remembered: Gautam Buddha cannot come back. He has said, “I will be coming back.” That’s purely symbolic – he cannot come back. A man of that stature, a being who has reached to the ultimate experience of existence cannot come back; it is just not possible in the very nature of things. He cannot take another form, another body. He cannot be born again in the womb of a mother; he cannot become again flesh and bones. Once you have reached the state of being where you realize yourself as pure consciousness, it is no longer possible for you to be born again.
So when Buddha says, “Next time when I come back…” it has to be understood only symbolically. All the Buddhists of the world have been waiting – they are waiting unnecessarily. They will never find Gautam Buddha back in the body again. And if they can find him back in the body again, then he was not a real buddha in the first place. This is the dilemma: he can be born again only if he was not a buddha, if he was not yet awakened.
Once you are awakened, you cannot dream again; you can dream only in sleep. You cannot dream again – and all our lives are just dreams and we are fast asleep.
The Buddhists have missed the symbolic meaning. When Gautam Buddha said, “When I will be coming back,” he simply meant the next time when there is an awakened man – and the quality of two awakened men doesn’t differ. There is not even a bit of difference. So he is perfectly right in saying, “I will come back.”
In fact, each time a man is awakened, Buddha will be coming back in this sense – that it is the same consciousness again. Again the same flower has blossomed, and the same fragrance and the same message! He sees it, that within twenty-five centuries man will be capable of taking the buddha as a friend.
It is a great challenge, because when you accept the buddha as a friend, there are two possibilities: either you have to pull the buddha down to the state where you are, or you have to rise to the state where the buddha is. The challenge is that you cannot pull the buddha back down to the state where you are; that is simply impossible. You cannot in any way bring him down to the darkness and to the depth and to the blindness where you live. You will have to rise to his sunlit peaks. It is a tremendous challenge.
And in rising to become capable of really being a friend of the awakened one, you will have to drop many things on the way – those same things which were expected to be dropped by surrender. You will have to drop all kinds of burdens. The higher you go, the less burdened you will have to be. At the highest peak of consciousness you reach just naked, like an innocent child – not even with clothes. Even that is too much of a burden.
I have called you my friends…the same challenge.
And exactly after twenty-five centuries, Gautam Buddha is not back in one sense, but is back in another sense. Whenever, wherever anybody becomes awakened, it is the same taste, the same sweetness, the same joy, the same bliss, the same silence.
Can you tell any difference between the light of two candles? Light is simply light – to which candle it belongs is immaterial. Its function is to destroy darkness – that’s the only meaning of light.
So whoever becomes light has now the responsibility to raise humanity from the old, traditional way of surrendering to a master, because that has created many kinds of spiritual slaveries around the world. It has not enlightened man, it has darkened his soul.
The very effort of becoming a friend…and something starts changing in you, because you are trying to reach the moon. The moon cannot come to you, but you can reach the moon. The moon can give the invitation. The moon can call your very being – provoke you, challenge you, inspire you – but it cannot come to you. You have to travel the whole path.
And it is easier and it is simpler when the master is a friend, because now between you and the master the relationship is of love.
Friendship is the purest love.
It is the highest form of love where nothing is asked for, no condition, where one simply enjoys giving. One gets much – but that is secondary, and that happens of its own accord.
To create a state of love between the master and the disciple means we are avoiding the device of surrender; instead we are making the disciple responsible. Surrender becomes, in most of the cases, an irresponsibility…because the disciple thinks, “I have surrendered to the master – now it is his responsibility to change me, to transform me, to take me to the heights where he belongs.” He starts thinking in terms of the master as the savior, that “I have found the savior; now I will believe and have faith in him and he is to save me.”
That’s what all the religions of the world are doing. They have found the savior, and they have dropped all their responsibility. Now it is the duty of Jesus or Krishna or Buddha to take you in their arms and carry you into the highest state of being.
Now, this is not possible. Nobody can take you to the ultimate; you will have to go on your own, alone. The master’s function is not to save you: his function is to show you the path. You have to save yourself.
Except for you there is no one who can become your savior.
People have never thought about it: The moment you think somebody else can save you, you are becoming dependent on somebody else. And dependence is not the right way to reach to the high peaks of consciousness, independence – total independence – freedom. You are cutting your wings with your own hands, and now you will not be able to fly to the moon.
The moment you think of your master as a friend, you save him from the responsibility of being your savior, and you save yourself by becoming responsible, by taking the whole path – its difficulties, its beauties, its anguishes and its ecstasies…accepting everything with tremendous responsibility.
You are alone, and alone you have to seek and search. And only in your ultimate aloneness will you find it. The master can only show you the path. He is only a finger pointing to the moon. He is certainly a great friend because what he is indicating to you is the greatest bliss in life.
Existence moves in two ways. One is the horizontal way, like a straight line moving from A to B, from B to C, up to X Y Z. You start becoming more and more alive.
Perhaps at point A you were just a stone. Yes, there is some kind of life in the rocks too, because they grow. The Himalayas are still growing higher, every year one foot. They are still young and still full of energy to go higher. They are the highest mountains in the world – seem to be inexhaustible in energy, as if they want to touch the stars.
I was born near a mountain which is the oldest mountain in the world, Vindhyachal. It came out of the ocean at the very beginning – the first mountain in the world. It is the oldest; ancient…it has stopped growing for millions of years. It is so old that there is a beautiful story about it.

One great sage was going to deliver his message towards the south – Vindhyachal is just in the middle of India – and for the old sage to cross the mountain was really difficult. Seeing the difficulty of the old sage, Vindhyachal bent down, just as if somebody were touching your feet, and allowed the way to the sage. And the sage said, “Remain as you are, because I will have to come back again, and by that time I will be even older. So please wait for me!” But the sage never came back; he died in the south, so Vindhyachal is still bent.

I have been to the place where the sage went; it is still bent like an old man. But it is the most ancient; nothing grows, it has come to a full stop. But it did grow sometime in the past.
The Himalayas are the newest mountains, the latest mountains in the world to have come out of the ocean. They are still growing, becoming higher and higher.
Even rocks grow, so don’t think they don’t have life; but the life is very dormant, very deeply asleep – not even a dream, just darkness and deep sleep. But it is still life, maybe the most primitive – at point A of a horizontal line.
So there in the horizontal line is man. And there are men ahead of you, but they are not higher than you. There is Albert Einstein – he is ahead of you, you may perhaps be miles back, but it is the same line…a linear progress. The difference between you and him may be miles, but it is the same road. Even if somebody reaches the very end of the line, reaches Z, then too he becomes at the most Zorba the Greek.
I have loved the name “Zorba the Greek” for so many reasons. One is because Z is the last letter in the alphabet. He is the Z; he is the end of the line. He is more alive than any man, but his aliveness does not make him higher than you. His aliveness is more like a wild animal – innocent but ignorant; full of energy, vitality, but blind, with no eyes to see. Yes, he can dance, but his dance will not have anything of divineness in it. It will be tremendously powerful but it will remain earthly.
The horizontal line moves on the earth. You can become at the most Zorba the Greek, but your unconsciousness will still be your life; you will still be groping in darkness. You will still be unaware that there is another dimension also – the vertical dimension.
The vertical dimension moves from A to a higher A. It goes on moving higher, but it remains the same energy, A becoming purified, becoming more conscious, becoming more alert; ultimately becoming fully conscious. It does not move from A to B, from B to C; it simply moves from A1 to A2, to A3, to A4. At point A4 something happens that we call the awakened one.
Life moving horizontally remains simply life; life moving vertically becomes consciousness.
It becomes consciousness, it becomes a new phenomenon. Horizontal life always has a goal to it, it is goal-oriented. When you are at B, your eyes are focused on C. When you are at point B, you are not there at all; either you are thinking of point A that you have left behind – your past, all your yesterdays, your memories – or you are projecting into the future: B, C, E…up to Z, a whole long line of goals.
Your mind is either in the yesterdays or in the tomorrows, but it is never herenow. You are never where you are; you are always somewhere else, where you are not.
This is the whole tension of the human mind, that it is always absent where it is actually present, and it is present where it is not actually present – and cannot ever be present in any possible way.
If you are at point B, you are at point B: you can only think of C, you can imagine it. You can have memories of the past and you can have imaginations of the future – but you are in the present.
The vertical line moves from the present. First you have to be herenow. Wherever you are, you have to be exactly there – no memories, no imagination – and suddenly there is a transformation, because when there is no memory, no imagination, all your energy is accumulated in this small moment. And this moment is so small, it cannot contain it. That’s what brings transformation.
It brings an explosion, like an atomic explosion. The present moment explodes: suddenly life becomes consciousness. You start moving upwards, from consciousness to superconsciousness, from superconsciousness to the collective superconsciousness, from the collective superconsciousness to cosmic superconsciousness. And that is A4: cosmic superconsciousness is the state of the awakened person, the buddha.
To be the friend of the awakened master means to transform the very quality of your life, to change its dimension from the horizontal to the vertical. It is a beginning of living in the moment – suddenly you will find Buddha is not so far away, he is just very close to you – only three steps, and he is the fourth.
In the East we have called that state “the fourth.” We have not given it any name; we have given it a number, not a name. We have called it turiya; turiya means the fourth. This is the only experience which has not been given a meaningful name but only a number. It is significant.
Why did they give it a number? – because no word can explain it. It is such a mysterious experience that all words fail, all explanations become meaningless. Nothing can be said about it; only silence can give you a taste of it. Hence no specific name has been given to it, but only a number to indicate that in this world names cannot enter.
Wherever you are on the horizontal line, there are millions of things ahead of you to achieve, and whatever you can achieve, still there will be millions of things to achieve. So everybody remains a beggar – everybody without exception. Wherever he is, he remains a beggar, for the simple reason that he is never fulfilled. There is much more that is ahead of him, there is much more that others have.
Even the greatest king, even the greatest rich man, even the greatest, most knowledgeable person cannot claim everything because there are millions of things. The king may be the greatest king, he may be Alexander the Great, but in many things he is a poor man.

When Alexander the Great met Diogenes, a naked sage – just looking at Diogenes, he felt jealous. Alexander the Great, who has conquered the whole known world, feels jealous of a naked man, for the simple reason that that naked man seems so contented, such a peace surrounds him! He has nowhere to go, he has nothing – and yet it seems he has everything. And Alexander cannot forget Diogenes – he remembers Diogenes again and again.
He cannot forget, because that man was far richer, and there is no way…you can conquer the whole world but you cannot become Diogenes. And Diogenes laughed when Alexander met with him, and he told him, “You are unnecessarily feeling jealous, because whatever I have got, you can have it – just drop this race of conquering the world. You will die exhausted, spent, and you will die a beggar.”
And Alexander died when he was only thirty-three – spent, because continuously fighting, he burned himself out too quickly. And the day he died – because he remembered Diogenes saying, “You will die a beggar” – he told his prime minister and his generals, “This is my last will, and take care that it should be fulfilled. My hands should be hanging out of the casket. When you carry my dead body to the graveyard, my hands should be hanging out.”
“But,” they said, “this is not done! A strange kind of thing you are asking. And people will ask us, ‘Why are his hands hanging out?’ – because it has never been done before. What are we going to say to them?”
Alexander said, “Tell them that my hands are empty. I came with empty hands and I am going with empty hands – I am dying a beggar. Diogenes was right. Let the whole world know that I spent myself, burned myself out, unnecessarily rushing after shadows.”
Yes, he became a world conqueror but he could not have even the peace and the silence of a naked beggar who had nothing. Gautam Buddha at least used to have a begging bowl….
Diogenes also had a begging bowl, but one day he was rushing to the river – he was feeling thirsty – with his begging bowl, to fill it with water and drink it. Just by his side a dog was running; it got there before Diogenes and started drinking directly from the river.
Diogenes said, “My God, this dog is far ahead of me! He does not even need a begging bowl; he has defeated me – I am finished with my begging bowl!” He dropped the begging bowl in the river and started drinking water the way the dog was drinking. That was his last possession; after that he never possessed anything.
A man who had nothing in the world, not even a begging bowl – which a beggar is allowed to have – still he made emperors jealous. Just looking at his eyes, just the light in his eyes…the very sparkle of the man was stunning. The silence of the man and his small statements, but with such great meaning….
Alexander, leaving him, asked, “Can I do anything for you? I am really impressed, I have never come across a man like you. I would love to do something; you say anything and it will be done.” And Diogenes said, “Just stand to one side because I am taking a sunbath and you are blocking my sun.”
Diogenes was sitting on a bank in the sands, naked, taking a sunbath. And he said, “It would be very kind of you if you can just stand a little to one side – that’s more than enough. What else do I need? I have got everything.”

The man who says, “I have got everything,” is not speaking of the things of this world – because Diogenes had nothing of this world. He is speaking of another dimension, of another richness, of another kingdom: he is talking about “the fourth.” He is talking about a vertical growth.
To be a friend of the awakened master is a great challenge. But the distance is not far; you have just to change your dimension. If you go on moving on the horizontal line, then you will be moving farther and farther away from the master and his state of mind, his consciousness. To be a friend you have to turn and become vertical-just the way a tree grows: vertical, higher – not flowing like a river, which is horizontal.
Every person has the potential at every moment to change the dimension of his life. It is simply a decision, a commitment – not to anyone else but to your own self. It is just a decision: that “I have accepted the master, the awakened being, as my friend – now I have to prove it.” Nobody else can do it for you, only you will have to prove it.
It is certainly a most exciting experience…to come closer and closer to the master’s being, and to come to the experience of the fourth state of consciousness. Then suddenly all the mysteries of existence are available to you. All the questions disappear. Then suddenly you are the answer.
There is no question mark, there is no quest; you are not going anywhere anymore – you have arrived. It was so close; it was within you – and you have been carrying it all along for many, many lives; you had just never looked at it. It was your treasure, and it was for you only. It has been waiting for many lives within you. It will wait for eternity because nobody else can claim it.
Any moment it is yours – you have just to decide to turn from the goal-oriented, ambitious world where you are always looking for more and more. And you are capable of getting more and more, but your dissatisfaction remains, your desire for more continues. There never comes a point when you can say that now the desire for more has disappeared. The more you have, the more you want, the desire goes on growing more.

An ancient parable is that a king had a massagist, a poor man, who used to come to massage the king every day; he was the best massagist in the capital. He used to get just one gold coin every day, and that was more than enough. He lived like the richest man in the world. In those days, a gold coin every day…no care for tomorrow. He was the happiest man, the king never found him sad – and the king was always sad because there were so many problems and no way to solve them, and they were continuously increasing, and the enemies and the wars…problems upon problems.
And this man had nothing but…he gets only one coin every morning, and that’s all. And he does not go anywhere else – his work is finished in the morning, then the whole day he enjoys. He used to play on the flute – he used to live just in front of the king’s palace in a small hut. In the middle of the night when the king was overburdened with all his worries, the massagist would be playing on his flute. In the full-moon night when everything was beautiful, the king was just anxiety and nothing else.
He was very jealous of this massagist, because this poor man got only one coin every day from him and he was enjoying life like a king; and the king could not even enjoy life like the massagist.
He asked his prime minister, who was a wise old man, “What is the secret? I can’t understand why he is so joyful, always singing, playing the flute, and always happy. And whenever he comes I have never seen any sadness in the man, not even the shadow of it.”
The prime minister said, “You wait just a few days.” In the night the prime minister threw a bag full of ninety-nine gold coins into the massagist’s house.
In the morning, when he was getting up and getting ready to go to the king, the massagist found the bag. He was puzzled. He counted the coins and he said, “My God, ninety-nine coins! What am I going to do with so many coins? – one is more than enough.”
But he became worried. That day he was not so happy as every other day. The king said, “What is the matter?”
He said, “Nothing; it is just that I have got into trouble. Somebody has thrown a bag of ninety-nine coins into my house, and since I counted those coins in that bag my whole life is destroyed. It is just this morning that my whole life has been ruined, because I am worried. I have never been worried.”
The king said, “But why should you be worried?”
He said, “I am worried because I am thinking that it will be good now to save one coin today; I am going to try to make one hundred exactly. Today I am going to remain hungry because I cannot eat, I cannot purchase my food. And today you will not be listening to my flute because a hungry man cannot play on the flute. And the idea persists, that it will be good to make the number exactly one hundred.” And since that day the man was a different man.
The old prime minister told the king, “Now do you know the secret? Up to now he had no desire for more; now there is a problem. When he has one hundred he will think that now if he can save one more, he will have one hundred and one. And now he is in a vicious circle; he will never be out of it. Those ninety-nine coins have destroyed his whole life; he will remain miserable. Now you will see him every day becoming more and more miserable.”

The world of “more” is the world of the ordinary man. The world of not going after the more, not going after any goal ahead of you but just looking in the moment where you are, who you are, and taking a plunge into the presentness of your consciousness – this is the only revolution, and the only religion, and the only spirituality there is. And it is so close, only three steps. And it all depends on you.
To be the friend of the master means you have accepted the challenge: that you will rise above yourself, and you will go on rising until you reach the point where you are synonymous with the consciousness of the master. Only then is the pilgrimage of the friendship with the awakened one fulfilled.
It is the greatest challenge, but once accepted, it brings you to the greatest blessing possible to human beings.
I would love not to be your master, but just to be your friend, and give you the challenge. I cannot come to the valley of darkness, but you can come to the world of stars and light.
I can call you, invite you, challenge you, provoke you. I can show you the way – but you will have to walk. Nobody else can walk on your behalf. And that’s what for centuries we have been hoping: somebody else will do it for us. That’s why it has not happened; it has happened only to a few people who have walked themselves. The whole humanity has remained in misery because they have been waiting for the savior to come.
The savior never comes. He is always there at the sunlit peaks, calling. It is not the same person always; the person goes on changing, but there is always someone on the sunlit peaks calling you forth. It is the same voice. The face may be different, the body may be different, but it is the same source. All the buddhas are the same; their message is the same, their mission is the same. Their language may differ but their indications are always to the same path.
Move from the past and the future to the present. Bring your whole energy to the present moment; and the present moment is so small that you need not do anything else – just that much energy in that small moment is bound to explode. That explosion becomes light, and you are suddenly moved one step ahead, from conscious to superconscious. Then you know – because it is the same step and it is the same movement.
If you have taken one step…. The ancient sages of China have a proverb: “One step is half the journey” – because if you have taken one step, the journey is finished really, because you know now the secret of how this one step has been taken. Now go on gathering your energies more and more in the present, again and again, and there will be bigger explosions.
The fourth explosion and you are no more – and you are for the first time, both together. You are no more as an ego, and you are for the first time as an individual. You are no longer a separate personality in existence; you are no longer a dewdrop, you are the whole ocean. And each step is such a joy that the very joy goes on taking you further and further.
Only the first step is difficult; then there is nothing difficult. You have the master key in your hands.

============================================================

Osho,
Is there a possibility that a saint can be a rascal?
The question reminds me of a small story – it happened in a Christian monastery. Two monks were discussing in the garden of the monastery – every day they were given one hour to walk in the garden and meditate on God…. They were discussing, “Is it possible to smoke while walking in the garden?”
They were not in the church, they were not in the monastery; they were outside the church, outside the monastery. Both decided it would be better to ask the abbot of the monastery. Next day, the first was sitting under a tree very dejected, very sad, and the other came along, smoking a cigarette. The first could not believe it.
He said, “It seems you have not asked the abbot, because I asked, and he was very angry, and he refused me absolutely. How is it that you are smoking?”
The second monk said, “What did you ask the abbot?”
The sad man said, “I asked simply, ‘Is it possible to smoke while contemplating God?’ And he said, ‘No, absolutely no!”
The second man laughed, and he said, “That’s why! I asked him, ‘Can I contemplate God while smoking?’ And he said, ‘Yes, of course!”

It is absolutely impossible for a saint to be a rascal – but a rascal can be a saint.
It is absolutely impossible for a saint because the very definition of the saint does not include any possibility of being a rascal. The saint is thought to be a simple, truthful, sincere and very serious seeker of truth. He is one-dimensional.
To find the truth he abandons everything, he renounces the world; he renounces his own body, his own feelings, his own emotions. He becomes almost bodiless. He is in the world but he belongs to the world no more. He has turned his back upon the world.
This has been praised for centuries, but there is something which has been overlooked – that this type of person is flat. He has no colors, he is like a very ancient, antique, faded painting. He is just surviving, not living. He has chosen an anti-life attitude. He rejects life to gain spirituality.
Necessarily, rejecting life, he rejects everything that is implied in life – all its colors, all its songs, all its beauties, all its joys. It is a tremendous phenomenon. He becomes dry, juiceless – just a skeleton, waiting for death so that he can be released from the body completely.
Of course, he cannot be a rascal.
But there have been rascals who became great saints: Chuang Tzu in China, Hotei in Japan, Bodhidharma in India; and in this very century, George Gurdjieff in the West…just to mention the very great and very significant people of tremendous importance as saints. But you cannot include them in the ordinary concept of the saint.
They are very colorful people, very alive, living intensely. They have not renounced the world; they do not see the need to renounce it. Because God has not renounced the world, why should they renounce the world? And God loves all these colors and these flowers and these birds and these songs and these people. Existence is multi-dimensional. It accommodates, it is very compassionate. It will not prevent a rascal from becoming a saint. Of course the very quality of the rascal’s being will be totally transformed.
Chuang Tzu remained an enigma to all the religious people in China for centuries because of his behavior, his statements, his absurd stories which nobody can think of as being holy in any way. They certainly contain something holier than the so-called holy books, but to perceive it one needs great insight.
One morning Chuang Tzu was sitting, very sad, by the side of his bed. His disciples had never seen him sad, and they asked him what had happened.
He said, “I am in such trouble that I don’t see how I will be able to solve it in this life or ever.”
Everybody was eager to know about the problem that Chuang Tzu could not solve. He was one of the greatest philosophers, and whenever they came with great problems, he had never said that they could not be solved; he had answers for every question. So what could be the problem?
Chuang Tzu said, “The problem is, in the night I dreamed that I have become a butterfly.”
They all laughed; they said, “It was just a dream! Where is the problem?”
Chuang Tzu said, “You have not heard the whole thing. Now I am wondering: perhaps the butterfly has gone to sleep and is dreaming that she has become Chuang Tzu! Now, what is the truth? Did Chuang Tzu become a butterfly in the dream, or did the butterfly become Chuang Tzu in the dream? Who am I?”
It is perfectly logical. If a man can become a butterfly in a dream, there seems to be no contradiction; a butterfly can become a man in a dream. What is reality?
And he has written these kinds of parables – absurd. You cannot solve them, they are basically unsolvable. He was asked why he goes on writing such stuff – “Because we have never heard religious people writing such things. They write about God, they write about heaven, about hell; they write about how to live your life. And you write things that disturb us! They don’t help us.”
And he said, “Unless you are totally disturbed you will not be reborn. Unless you are so disturbed that nothing of you remains undisturbed, you will not find yourself; you will not find that space which nothing can disturb. I go on writing these stories to disturb you.
“I am not here to give consolation to you. For consolation you can go to ordinary saints. I disturb, and I disturb totally, to the point where you have a nervous breakdown, because unless you have a breakdown, you can’t have a breakthrough.”
Very few people had the courage to remain with Chuang Tzu. He was creating situations which were very embarrassing. Saints are not supposed to do such things. For example, he was found one day in the capital sitting on a donkey, his disciples following him, and the whole town laughing. And the people are gathered on both sides…because he is not sitting in the right way, he is sitting looking at his disciples and the donkey is going forward and he is looking backward! The people are laughing and the disciples are feeling very embarrassed.
Finally one disciple said, “Why are you doing it? You are making a fool of yourself! And with you we are becoming idiots unnecessarily – people are thinking we are idiots!”
Chuang Tzu said, “There is something great implied in it. I have thought it over and over: if I sit the way people sit on donkeys, then my back will be towards you, and that is insulting. And I don’t want to insult anybody, not even my own disciples. There is a possibility that you can be in front of me, but then you will be insulting me – and that is not right at all, disciples insulting the master.
“So this is the solution that I have found. Let the fools laugh – but I am facing you, you are facing me. That’s how a master and disciple should be; and I am respectful towards you, and you are respectful towards me. And the donkey has no objection – why should we bother about the people?”

Now this kind of man is rare, unique, difficult to find. But he attained to the highest clarity, consciousness, love, compassion – but he remained a rascal to the very end.

I mentioned the name of Hotei. He was just on his deathbed, and he asked his disciples, “Can somebody suggest to me a way to die which has never happened before? – because I don’t want to die in the ordinary and common way. For example, most people die lying in their bed.
“And,” Hotei said, “that’s why I never lie in bed because that is the most dangerous place: ninety-nine percent of people die there! So I have been sleeping on the floor my whole life to avoid that place.
“But I would like to die in my own way, just the way I have lived my life in my own way: not caring at all what others say but simply living spontaneously, out of my own being, out of my own insight. Whether I am condemned or whether I am disrespected – that I have never cared about. But I am worried – I need some suggestion from you.”
Somebody suggested, “You could die standing.”
He said, “The idea is good!”
Then one of the disciples said, “But it is not very original, because I have heard of a great rascal saint just like you who died standing. So it will not be very unique and original.”
Somebody suggested, “Then the best way is, die standing on your head! We don’t think that anybody has done that before. It is going to be unique – never done before and perhaps never in the future.”
Hotei said, “I like the idea!” Even at the point of death he stood on his head. And it is said that the disciples were at a loss to figure out what to do now. Because they knew what to do when a person dies in the bed, but what to do with the master who has died standing on his head?
Somebody said that his sister, who was older than him – she was a nun, just as he was a monk, and she lived nearby…. “It is better to ask her; we should not do anything before asking somebody who is in a better position and is a better authority.” The elder sister was called.
She came up and she said, “Hotei, you rascal! Your whole life you have been this way – but at least behave at the point of death! Get up and lie down on the bed!”
Naturally, when the elder sister says so…. Hotei jumped up, laughed, lay down on the bed and died!

But this kind of saint is a very unique phenomenon. Tradition would not accept him, religions will avoid mentioning him. Even after death he continued to be himself. Before dying he said, “Remember, I am not a traditional man, so please don’t give me a bath”. It was a traditional thing, that before taking him to the funeral pyre he should be given a bath. He said, “I have taken my bath in the morning so there is no need to give me a cold bath again. I hate it!” “But,” they said, “you will be dead!”
He said, “Dead or alive, I hate it! And remember that you are my disciples and my will should be followed; don’t remove my clothes.”
Traditionally, a bath is given, and new clothes, food…because we are sending the person on a new pilgrimage, on a new journey. But he insisted. The traditional people were not even willing to participate in his funeral because they said, “This is not right – he should be given a bath, his clothes should be changed.”
But his disciples said, “We cannot deny our dead master – and he never cared about you anyway. And we don’t think he will care whether you come to the funeral or not.”
They had to put his body on the pyre in his clothes…and only then did they recognize that that man was really something, one who comes only once in a while. The whole crowd of disciples started laughing, because he had hidden in his clothes fireworks! So, many things started exploding. He made a joke even of death! He created laughter even at his funeral.
So I cannot say that a saint can be a rascal, but I can say certainly that existence is very accommodating: a rascal can be a saint, and perhaps a greater saint than your so-called ordinary saints. Your ordinary saints are ordinary human beings. They fulfill your expectations; a rascal saint never fulfills your expectations. On the contrary he goes on destroying your expectations. He functions in such a way that you cannot define him, you cannot explain him. You cannot make sense of many things in his life.

George Gurdjieff, who died only in 1950, was a contemporary man but perhaps the most rare man in this whole century. One of his disciples, Nicoll, remembers traveling with him on a train in America, when Gurdjieff started behaving as if he was a drunkard. Nicoll knew that he had not touched any drink for years – he had been with him – but he started behaving like a drunkard…shouting, throwing things, disturbing the whole train.
Finally the conductor came, the guard came, and Nicoll was very embarrassed. He was trying to prevent Gurdjieff – “What are you doing?” – but Gurdjieff wouldn’t listen. He was making a fool of himself and making a fool of Nicoll.
Nicoll was even more embarrassed…because at least people thought Gurdjieff was drunk: “But you should take care of your master, and if he is drunk then you should not travel in the middle of the night. He has awakened the whole train!
“And he is not only throwing out his things, he is throwing out other people’s things. You stop him; otherwise we will have to call the police at the next station.”
Nicoll was trying to persuade Gurdjieff, and said, “Stop this game! Why are you unnecessarily…. I know perfectly well you are not drunk.”
And Gurdjieff said into Nicoll’s ear, “I know it too – don’t be worried! I have my own ways of working. You have to learn not to be embarrassed – whatever the situation. If you are to be with me, you have to learn one thing: not to be embarrassed. It is a teaching for you; I made this whole train a teaching class for you. Why does one feel embarrassed?”
And people gathered and started listening. Suddenly Gurdjieff was not drunk, and he was talking on embarrassment and its implications. If you can drop embarrassment, there is a certain spiritual growth in you. Why is one embarrassed? – because one wants respectability, deep down one wants everybody to think of one in nice ways, good respectable ways. When something happens which goes against respectability, there is embarrassment. It is the ego that is embarrassed.
And Gurdjieff said to Nicoll, “If you can drop embarrassment, you have dropped the ego. Now we can go to sleep.”
The whole train was wondering about the man. Whatever he said was absolutely right. Many people in the morning came to visit in his compartment. They said, “Forgive us, but you have made such an impression. We had never thought that a teacher, a spiritual master, will behave in this way just to give a lesson to his disciple. But we could not sleep the whole night – we thought about it again and again. It is true, we feel embarrassed. It is not our true self, it is just our idea of our prestige, of our status; of how people should see us, how people should know us.”
We all have masks. And whenever somebody takes the mask away, suddenly you are embarrassed, because you have been hiding your original face from the whole world and suddenly you are exposed. Suddenly you find your clothes have disappeared and you are standing naked!
But only a man like Gurdjieff would do that. Once he called one of his most important and the greatest of his disciples, P.D. Ouspensky. This man, P.D. Ouspensky, was a world-famous mathematician. Nobody knew about Gurdjieff before Ouspensky became his disciple; it was his becoming initiated by Gurdjieff that made Gurdjieff’s name world-famous.
Ouspensky was a world-famous mathematician. He has written one book which is thought to be one of the three great books in the whole world. He himself in that book…. It is on mathematics, higher mathematics – but not only on mathematics, it is also on spirituality. And he is the only mathematician known up to now who has made some basic bridges between the highest flight of mathematics and spirituality.
His book’s name is Tertium Organum. It means “the third canon of thought.” He writes in his introduction: “The first canon of thought was written by Aristotle; it is called Organum. The second canon of thought was written by Bacon; it is called Novum Organum – the new canon of thought. Both have been tremendously decisive in scientific growth.” Ouspensky has called his book the third canon of thought – Tertium Organum and he says, “Although my book is coming third, it existed before the first ever existed.”
And certainly it is more fundamental than both Bacon’s and Aristotle’s. And it is now almost half a century old, but no other book has come which can be the fourth…perhaps it never will come. He has done such a perfect job.
This man was a professor at London University in the times of the Russian revolution, and Gurdjieff was in Russia, far away in the interior in a small place, Tiflis. Gurdjieff called Ouspensky to come immediately. And it was very dangerous: the whole of Russian life had been disturbed, the czar had been killed. Although the revolutionaries had overturned the old regime, the new regime had not yet come into existence; it was just chaos all over the country – and it is a vast country, one sixth of the whole earth. The army was scattered and nobody knew what was happening. Trains were running on their own, or not running; there was nobody to control anything. Everything was on fire; and to move, everybody was at risk.
Gurdjieff called Ouspensky immediately, and Ouspensky dropped his well-paid job, his very respectable professorship, and went into a dangerous Russia. He was afraid that he might not be able to reach; he might be killed – people were being killed and butchered like anything. But somehow he managed. It took three months for him to find the village of Tiflis, but anyhow he reached there and he was happy that he had managed it.
When he entered the house of Gurdjieff, Gurdjieff said, “Good! So you have come. Now you can go back and rejoin your job.” Ouspensky could not believe that Gurdjieff would do such a thing – putting him at such risk unnecessarily. And Gurdjieff had not even said a single word! He had not even asked Ouspensky to sit down and rest a little before he left to go back. He said, “Now you can go back immediately.”
Even other disciples who were there with Gurdjieff became very suspicious: this was strange! One of the disciples said, “We cannot believe what you have done! What is the meaning of it?”
Gurdjieff said, “This is the last fire test of trust – and I don’t think he will be able to pass it. I have seen on his face that he has failed; I have seen frustration. He could not go gracefully. If he had gone gracefully he would have been born anew, he would have become a new man.
“I had given him the opportunity to be reborn – he missed.” And certainly Ouspensky missed, because he became so angry that he disconnected himself from Gurdjieff.
Even such a great thinker, mathematician, scientist, could not see that when a man like Gurdjieff does something – howsoever absurd, meaningless – there is bound to be some meaning in it. You should not take it at face value, you should give it a chance to sink deep. Many of Gurdjieff’s disciples left him at one point or another because they could not conceive logically what the man was doing.
A rascal saint will not behave logically, his behavior will be very illogical. But still, if you can figure out the deeper implications of his illogicality, you will be simply surprised that he is a miracle man.
For example, Gurdjieff would make the vegetarians eat meat, force them to eat meat. The person who was not drinking he would force to drink as much as possible – till he was flat on the floor, saying things which you could have never thought that the man would say. And Gurdjieff would be listening to him.
He said, “I never believe what people say unless they are unconscious. Only in their unconsciousness do they say the truth. In their consciousness they go on saying things which are respectable, which have to be said, which are expected to be said. Only when they are unconscious are they true. Then you can see their original face. And only the original can be changed, you cannot change the false. The false does not exist, how can you change it? You can change only the real, but first you have to find it.”

Gurdjieff had his own ways of finding it. But these ways are not common; hence neither Chuang Tzu nor Hotei created a religion, nor Gurdjieff, nor Bodhidharma.

Bodhidharma perhaps is the greatest of all these four. He was born in India and went to China. And his fame went ahead of him; the great Chinese emperor had come to receive him on the border. And the emperor had done great service to Buddhism – he had made thousands of temples and thousands of monasteries, and he had thousands of scholars translating all the Buddhist literature from Pali to Chinese.
He had put all his treasures in the service of Buddhism. He changed the whole of China to Buddhism – his name was Emperor Wu. And naturally, every Buddhist who had come before Bodhidharma had told Emperor Wu, “You have earned great virtue. You will be born in the seventh lotus paradise, the highest paradise in Buddhist mythology. You have done such great work that there is no comparison – even Ashoka is left far behind.”
Emperor Wu, gracefully bowed down, touched the feet of Bodhidharma and asked him, “What is my virtue?”
And Bodhidharma said, “None!”
The emperor was shocked. He said, “But I have made so many temples, and I have made thousands of Buddha statues, and I feed thousands of Buddhist monks. I have changed the whole of China to Buddhism. And you say that my virtue is nil? Will I not be able to be born into the seventh lotus paradise?”
Bodhidharma laughed, he said, “You will be born in the seventh hell!”
The emperor had never seen such a man; he was accustomed to courtesy, grace – he was a great emperor. And this man is simply hitting him so hard. He asked Bodhidharma, “Why are you so hard on me?”
Bodhidharma said, “Because I love you, and whoever I love, I am hard on him; otherwise, who cares? The people who have been telling you that you will be born in the seventh paradise don’t love you, don’t understand you; they are simply cheating you, because you are serving their purpose. They are giving you great promises to be fulfilled in the other world. I cannot give you any promise unless I see the transformation happening here and now.
“You may have made thousands of temples, but you are not a temple yet. And you have made thousands of Buddha statues, but you are not a buddha yet. And the seventh lotus paradise is not for statue-makers; it is for those who have become a buddha themselves. I can make you a buddha, but I am going to be a hard man. You will have to forget completely that you are an emperor. With me no nonsense can be tolerated.
“So you go back home and think about it. If you are ready, I am always ready. But don’t be befooled by these so-called Buddhist monks – who are good people, who are simple-hearted, who are not doing any harm to anybody. But they are not masters who transform, who create a new consciousness.”
And he said, “I will wait outside the town, I will not enter your empire. You will have to enter into my empire. I will wait outside. Tomorrow morning at four o’clock, before the sun rises, if you have decided that you are ready to travel the path whatever the consequences, you can come; otherwise I will move.”
The whole night the emperor could not sleep…whether to go to this man? – because he looked dangerous. And to go alone at four o’clock, in the dark…. And Bodhidharma had warned him, “Don’t bring your guards or others, because you will have to go alone on the path.”
Who knows? – the man might be a little insane or something. Certainly he was dangerous! He was not the common run-of-the-mill saint. But his eyes, his gestures…! Although he was very rude, still behind his rudeness there was great compassion. And the king thought about it again and again: To go or not to go? But he could not resist – he had to go. The man was irresistible.
Fearing, trembling inside, still the emperor went to the temple – Bodhidharma was staying outside the boundary of his empire. Bodhidharma said, “I knew you would come. I knew because although I was hard and rude, and you were shocked, you were not angry; you were understanding. You were puzzled – you have never seen such a man, a very strange type of saint! But I knew that you would not be able to sleep.
“I have also not slept the whole night. I have been waiting for you. I was certain that you would come because whatever I had said was said with immense compassion and love.”
This man, Bodhidharma, had very few disciples, but whoever had the courage and guts to be with this strange man was certainly transformed.

Now, Bodhidharma is not accepted by the traditional people. But this is the beauty of life: there is a traditional crowd, but there is also a small untraditional path, trodden by the rare. It is almost like walking on a sword. But these few rare people have done more as far as transformation of consciousness is concerned than millions of ordinary saints.
They are good – but good for nothing. These people may not seem the right kind, but to meet such a man is the rarest opportunity in life. They are dangerous. It is playing with fire, but unless you are ready to play with fire, you cannot expect something miraculous to happen to you.
From ordinary saints and priests and theologians, you can get only an ordinary kind of religiousness. If you get satisfied with it, you are unfortunate. It is not enough – not enough for any man worth calling himself a man.
I am certainly in favor of all those rare beings – extraordinary, untraditional, strangers, outlandish – because they can change you so quickly. Just to be near them can create a new fire in you. It is there; it just needs a little work to remove so many conditions, thoughts, conventions, which have covered it. Otherwise, everybody is carrying the fire.
But you need a surgeon, you can’t just depend on simply good people to help you. You need somebody who can cut through and through and reach to your heart.
And certainly these strange people will have strange ways, because to reach to the human heart is not simple. To reach to the human mind is very simple, but to reach to the human heart is very difficult, and to reach deeper than the human heart – to the very soul of the man, to his being – you need rare surgeons, rare physicians. Their methods will be outlandish.
So it is a blessing to the earth that there have been a few rascal saints too. They are the very salt of the whole evolution of human consciousness.
Go for the rare, search for the unique. Only then may you be able to find a door to the unknown.
The ordinary saint is good if you want just to worship and touch his feet and give him some flowers and get his blessings. He is good – he does no harm, he is a consolation. In a troubled society where everybody is miserable he gives you consolation. Where everybody is suffering he provides you with a certain kind of opium. He keeps you contented in a very discontented world.
But the rare saint you asked about creates discontent in you – discontent for the divine. Your ordinary discontentment is nothing, he wants more discontent in you. He wants you to become aflame with discontent. Your very discontent will become such a fire that it will burn everything that is not necessary in you, that is not really part of you, and will bring out your radiant being in its utter beauty and nakedness.
I love the rascal saints!
Nobody has talked about them, nobody writes about them. Nobody even dares to call some saint a rascal saint. But I cannot be untruthful.
I simple call a spade a spade!

============================================================

Osho,
How is it possible that you just walk past a person and you set them on fire? I have seen even people who don't know that they love you burst into flames.
The question is great. Life is not synonymous with logic, particularly the logic that Aristotle has given to the world. It has an appeal to the mind – it is very simple, very obvious, very mathematical, scientific. But the appeal to the mind of Aristotle’s logic is not that it fits with existence, that it represents life. On the contrary, mind is overwhelmed by it because it fits with the split mind, and it fits perfectly. Naturally the mind is convinced.
But life is not logic. So first we have to understand the split of the mind which makes it so much impressed by a wrong logic, a logic which is not representative of existence itself.
Mind has a double split. The front of the mind and the back of the mind – that is the first split.
The front of the mind is active, and the back of the mind is inactive. The front of the mind thinks;, the back of the mind simply lives. The front of the mind is the base of all our activities, of all our achievements, of all our scientific, technological progress. The back of the mind is absolutely silent, and only meditators have known it; others have it but they are unaware of it. Unless you become inactive, so much so that there is not even the subtle activity of thoughts or emotions, you cannot enter the back side of your own mind.
The front side of your mind is very limited; action has to be limited. Inaction is enormous; it has no limits, it is vast. Action can be defined, reduced to explanations, to theories. But the beauty, the experience of the inactive, stays with you, is beyond words. But it is there whether you know it or not, it does not depend on your knowing, it is always there. I will come to it later on when I am answering your question exactly. Just now I am creating the space in which the question can be answered.
The second split is between the right side and the left side. Our hands are representative of the right and the left sides, but in a strange way: the left hand represents the right side of the mind, and the right hand represents the left side of the mind. And because we have used only the right hand and the left hand is very secondary, somewhere deep in our minds the right is right and the left is wrong.
So anything that is wrong we condemn as leftist, and anything that we want to appreciate – the tradition supports it, the orthodoxy is behind it, the masses are absolutely for it – is rightist.
In India the wife cannot sit at the right side of the man, she has to sit at the left side. She is a condemned being. At the most she can be the left hand, but never the right hand – that is preserved for the man.
But strangely we were not aware for centuries that the right hand represents the left side of mind; it is joined crisscross. So the left side of the mind has developed because the right hand is active. Its action is an extension of the side of the mind it is connected to. And because the left hand is ignored, the right side of the mind has also been ignored.
So there is a cross in the mind of man, dividing it in two ways. Front and back, that is one division; then right and left – another division. If the cross can have any significance, this should be the significance.
Every man is on the cross, not only Jesus Christ.
And the cross is not outside you, the cross is within you. It is far heavier than the outside cross, and it is far more murderous. It has destroyed so enormously, so devastatingly, that it is almost incalculable. And all the traditions of the world have been supporting it.
The left side of the mind has its qualities…. For example, it can be used by the front of the mind without any difficulty. It has a certain affinity with the front of the mind. The right side of the mind has a certain affinity with the back side of the mind. So as the meditator moves into the unused parts of his own mind…if he moves to the back part he becomes absolutely silent.
Many mystics have never spoken, for the simple reason that they had no idea…that if they wanted to speak, they had to move to the right side of the mind, they had to use the right side of the mind.
Before they ever entered into meditation they had used the left side of the mind – they knew only it. When they moved into meditation suddenly they found that there is no connection between the left side of the mind and the back of the mind. They became disconnected. Their silence was not willed; simply, they could not find a way out of it. They tried the left side of the mind, to which they were accustomed, and they could not reach it. From the back of the mind there is no way to the left side of the mind. They never said a single word.
Very few mystics have done the tremendous job of searching and seeing the fact that the left side of the mind is used by the front mind for thinking and for all kinds of activities. It is a natural deduction that perhaps the right side of the mind may be the way to express silence, to let it become a song. These are the few mystics who became known as great masters.
All mystics have not been masters. They had realized, they had come to the ultimate peak of experience, but they remained isolated and cut off from the larger humanity. They could not contribute anything. They knew it – but suddenly they found they were dumb. They have tasted it, but by tasting it they have lost their tongue, they cannot speak about it.

One of the greatest philosophers of the contemporary West, Ludwig Wittgenstein, has made one of the most pregnant statements. He is the only man in the contemporary world who writes only maxims, who does not even make a paragraph – just lines, each line separate and individual.
One of his lines is: “That which cannot be said should not be said.” Now, this man is aware that there is something which cannot be said. He is not denying it, he is not saying that there is nothing mysterious; it is there. But he is making a statement that that which cannot be said, should not be said. Why? Because whatever you say is going to be wrong. That is the situation of a person who has somehow come in contact with the back of the mind.
Now, this man was a trained philosopher, and trained under the greatest minds of this age. He had fortunately, Bertrand Russell as one of his teachers, G.E. Moore as one of his teachers – and both these great philosophers, G.E. Moore and Bertrand Russell, have said about him, “Although he was a student, we felt like pygmies before him.” And these were the great philosophers, Nobel Prize winners.
What was it about Ludwig Wittgenstein that made them feel like pygmies? – he was just a student and it was at the suggestion of Bertrand Russell that Wittgenstein published his notes that he was taking in Russell’s class. They were not notes of what Russell was saying, they were notes of what Wittgenstein’s reactions were to Bertrand Russell’s statements.
When Russell looked at Wittgenstein’s copy book he said, “My God, I thought you were writing about my speeches, my lectures. But you have written original things, you have done a great job.” He was reacting…. Bertrand Russell had a developed front part of his mind, and that man Ludwig Wittgenstein was in contact with the back of his mind.
Scientists say we don’t know what the purpose of the back of the mind is. They have not been able to figure it out, why it is there, because it is half of the mind but it seems to have no purpose. It helps in no way, it has no function. Scientists perhaps will never be able to understand this abysmal depth, darkness, and the mysterious part of their own minds.
Whatever Wittgenstein had noted down as reactions in his notebooks, Bertrand Russell persuaded him to publish. Wittgenstein said, “but these are simply notes! You were talking, and when I heard something and I felt it was not the right thing, I simply wrote down notes, just for my own purposes.”
Bertrand Russell insisted, “the notes should be published as they are; and don’t edit them, because they bring something which is not known to the thinker, the philosopher; they bring something which is known only to the mystic. It is just a coincidence that a mystic has come to study philosophy.”
But Wittgenstein could not find the connection between the mysterious side of his mind and the left side of his mind. There was no bridge. He tried hard – he was a trained philosopher, logician, so naturally he worked very hard. He wrote his books again and again, revised them, tried hard, and finally decided that that which cannot be said, should not be said, because whatever you say is going to be wrong. It will not represent the actual experience.
He could not find the real passage from the back of the mind. It is not the left side of the mind. The left side of the mind is in the service of the front of the mind, it is part of the world of activities. The right side of the mind is in the service of the inactive, of the silent, of the unmoving. We are carrying this cross continuously. Aristotle’s logic fits with the left side of the mind and the front of the mind, but it leaves great spaces outside. The front of the mind and the left side of the mind are very small. The back of the mind is just endless; it is an opening into the mysteries of life.

Once in a while it has happened that somebody has found the link and has been able to say something significant. That’s why there are so many mystics in the world but very few masters. A master is a mystic who has found that the right side of the mind is the way to convey the illogical, the mysterious, the unexplained and the unexplainable.
Your question is: What happens to people sometimes? – People who are not even acquainted with me, who may have come just out of curiosity to see me, who may just have happened to be there accidentally when I was passing by…. But something transpires, they are aflame. You can see from their eyes, from their faces: within a second they have moved miles. And they were not expecting it, they were not desiring it. They were not even aware of it, that this was going to happen. They become aware of it only when it has happened, and there is no way to undo it.
It happens because of a few things. First, because they were not expecting it, so there was no barrier. They were not there desiring something, so there was no barrier. They were not in any kind of relationship with me, so they were simply present, with no hindrance, with no expectations.
Just being there is one of the most significant things, and a person who loves me will find it difficult to just be there. Some unconscious desire, expectation…just a very small expectation that I should recognize him – that is enough.
But the stranger, the tourist, the curious, the accidental has no expectation, even this much. He just happens to be standing there, and I pass by. And because there is no barrier, the mysterious part of his being is available…not that I have to do something, it is just that he is available. And as the flame can jump from one candle to another candle – you just have to bring them close enough….
He is there, silently waiting, without expectation: that brings him closer. The bigger the expectation, the bigger the distance. And from my mysterious world just a small flame has to take a jump. All that is needed is a certain closeness so that you catch it.
Once it has happened, perhaps he may come tomorrow again, but it is not going to happen, because the next day he will come with the expectation – the same man. In fact ordinary logic will say that now it has happened to him, there is more possibility of it happening. But life does not follow the ordinary logic. It has its own way, which is very illogical. At least it is certain it does not follow Aristotle’s divided logic, it does not follow our mind’s divided approach to reality.
Mind sees things in black and white, nothing in between: day and night – nothing in between; life and death – nothing in between; love and hate – nothing in between. Mind simply divides, splits, cuts a thing into two separate polar realities, makes them so contradictory that it seems impossible that there could be a way for them not to be separate, for them to be one reality.
The mind has only taken the two ends of one reality. That’s how it is. Logically, love and hate are opposites, contradictory. But existentially, that’s not true. Love can move easily into hate without any barrier. Hate can move into love just like waves moving into other waves with no barriers anywhere.
It is our idea that light and dark are two contradictory realities. That’s not true. There are animals who see in the night, and in the day they cannot see. The light is too much for their delicate eyes; it blinds them. In daylight they see only darkness because their eyes are closed and they cannot open them. They can open their eyes only when the calmness and the quiet and the peaceful night descends. Then they can open their delicate eyes, and the night is all full of light. They have more sensitive eyes than us. Our night is their day; our day is their night.
There is no opposition. At the most we can say that light is less dark, and darkness is less light. But we have to use something which makes only a difference of degrees and does not create any contradiction.
And every day we see life moving into death so calmly, so quietly, without making any fuss. You cannot hear even the footsteps of death. There cannot be any contradiction. And those who know, know the other side also – that death goes on moving into new forms of life. All distinctions are man-made – existence is distinctionless.
Once we start thinking of one reality, distinctionless – not dividing into dualities or dichotomies – the cross can disappear from the mind. Nobody else has crucified you – you yourself are responsible, because you can put the cross away from you, and your whole mind can become one.
In the oneness of your mind you have tremendous powers. Not that you become powerful over other people, but suddenly you find things are happening through you, not by you. You have become a vehicle of a vast existence; and this is what creates such kinds of happenings.
You can see it: a stranger is standing close by, and suddenly becomes afire. He will never be the same man again because he cannot forget what for a moment had become reality. It will haunt him, it will follow him like a shadow. He will have to do something; otherwise he will be haunted by the memory of it. What has happened is that the back of his mind, which may have remained dormant for millennia, has suddenly become alive.
This is what I call synchronicity. And this is the only symbol of whether you are with a master or not.
People have wondered down the ages, “What are the qualities of a master? How to define the master? How to decide who is the right master? Who is just pretending to be a master and who is really and authentically a master?” They have come to many definitions and many qualities and many attributes – and they are all of the logical mind. None of them is of any significance.
I would like to tell you that only one thing decides a true master, and that is that his presence can make your dormant mind suddenly alive; it can put you on fire.
It can make you blossom into thousands of flowers in just a single moment. The moment becomes so intense that it is almost equal to eternity. This is the only way to decide-everything else is meaningless.
Each religion has its own definitions of a true master. They all differ in their definitions – obviously – because they have found those definitions by following a certain teacher, who may have been a master or may not have been a master. They have simply collected all his attributes – what he eats, what he wears, how he walks, how he sits, how much he sleeps….
But each master is unique, so you cannot define him by these things. Mahavira is naked, Buddha is his contemporary, and he is not naked. Now, Jainas cannot accept Buddha as an authentic master for the simple reason that he is not naked: a true master has to be naked. Buddhists cannot accept Mahavira as a master for the simple reason that Buddha’s whole teaching is to remain always in the middle; all extremism is egoistic, the extremist is always an egoist.
Now, there are people who go on collecting all kinds of things – this is one extreme. And there is another extreme: there are people who, as far as possible, go on renouncing everything. If it were possible for them to take off their skin, they would take off their skin too. They have to stop at the clothes because more than that is impossible to do, they have come to the end.
So according to the Buddhist, Mahavira is an extremist. There is no need to be naked. Perhaps when it is too hot you can be naked; but when it is too cold you need a blanket – and there is no harm in it, you have to take care of the body. You just remain in the middle, you don’t go to the extremes. You don’t start collecting blankets; nor should you remain naked in the cold, unnecessarily torturing yourself.
The Buddhists cannot accept Mahavira as a master because their definitions are from the outside. They are just watching a man from the outside, they don’t know the inner reality of the master. There is only one thing that defines – everything else is casual, an individual choice.
Mahavira, as far as I understand, was such a beautiful man – perhaps in the whole history of men there has never been such a proportionate body with such an exquisite beauty. I don’t accept the Jainas’ idea that he is an ascetic, that’s why he is naked. No. My own understanding is that he loves beauty, and he is so beautiful that any clothing on him will simply destroy his beauty. Naked, he is just pure beauty.
In fact, clothes have been discovered by people to cover their bodies so they don’t show their unproportionate bodies. Clothes have other purposes too, but the basic purpose is not only the climate; the basic purpose seems to be to keep your body looking as beautiful as possible. Naked, it is not so beautiful; naked only very few people will be beautiful – most of them will look ugly. With clothes most of them look beautiful because only the face shows.
I don’t think Mahavira is an extremist. I simply conceive that the man is so beautiful he does not need clothes; and he is so healthy that the changing seasons make no difference to him. It is because of his health and his beauty. But that does not decide anything as to his being a master or not.
For that, there is one, and only one, criterion: whether he puts people on fire – particularly those who are strangers, particularly those who have come only as curiosity-seekers, just to see what kind of man this is who attracts so many people.
They have not come with a spiritual desire because desire as such is always unspiritual.
So there cannot be any spiritual desire. They have not come to gain anything, they are just onlookers. And this is the criterion: if the master passes by such people and something transpires in those people – who are not ready in any way, who have not prepared for it, who have not even dreamed about it, who are as much surprised as anyone else seeing them….
In fact they feel a little embarrassed because this was not their idea: they had come just out of curiosity to see the man. And now something has happened in them, something which is so unique, and so valuable…. A gift that they had not asked for suddenly has been thrown into their hands.
And this is a difficult phenomenon, because then they would like to come again and again, but now there is desire, now there is expectation; now they are not coming in the same innocent way as they had come for the first time. And now it will not be happening.
Let me remind you of the divisions of the mind. The first time they were there, they were simply interested to see the man. Seeing the man, for a moment their thinking stops. For a moment they are engulfed by the energy the man carries around him; unknowingly they are pulled into something for which they are not ready. Something in them has changed, and changed forever, and will not leave them at rest.
But they should understand the simple process; otherwise they will get into the very troubled journey millions of people are in. And then they will be angry at the master: “Why is he not doing the same thing to me again?”
He had never done anything, he had simply passed by your side. He is passing every day by your side – only the first time you were clean, you were open; you had no hindrance, you had simply allowed him to come in. But now you are tight, tense, you are demanding; you want it to be happening again and again, more and more. Now you have got into a vicious circle: the more you demand, the more you expect, the less is the possibility.
All demands come from the front of the mind, all desires come from the front of the mind, all expectations are in the front of the mind. The back of the mind is absolutely innocent, that of a child.
So you have to understand your first experience; how it has happened, where you were, what your space was. That is more significant. So if you can keep your space intact and don’t fill it with expectations and desires and demands; remembering that the master never does anything…it is beyond doing, because all doing is of the front of the mind. All action is of the front of the mind, and the master lives at the back of the mind, the dark side of the mind, the mysterious side of the mind, the illogical side of the mind.
If you come to him with the front part of your mind, then there is an unbridgeable gap between you and the master. You have to come to the master without the front part of your mind, allowing him the availability, the receptivity of the back part of your mind.
Neither the master does anything nor are you expected to do anything. It is simply a happening.
That’s why I call it synchronicity.
It is just that the master is full of it, and you are silent and available: That fullness is going to fill you. But you have to be empty. All that is needed of you is that you have to be empty.
And remember, I repeat again: the master cannot do anything. Yes, much happens in his presence – he is a catalytic agent. It can happen while he is speaking, it can happen while he is silent, it can happen in any moment.
All that is needed is your availability.
In my own life’s experience this has been a continuous problem. The people who have felt something changing in them have remained with me – but with a desire. Then they are angry because it seems as if I have forgotten them, as if I am no longer working on them, as if I am no longer interested in them. No, I am the same. Neither my interest can do it nor can any action on my part do it.
How it happens is something that you have to understand. It is not a question of being virtuous, it is not a question of being very scholarly. It demands nothing.
It simply happens to those who can be in the presence of the master simply, innocently, who can just enjoy the presence itself – whether anything happens or not is irrelevant, then it will come with more and more force. It will become a tidal wave, and it will be coming more and more often. And soon it will start coming even at a distance from the master.
You may be thousands of miles away, but you just have to be in the right posture – I mean the inner posture – and it starts happening…because the presence was only a triggering of something which is already yours. Just the presence made it clear to you that it is there within you. And once you become certain that it is within you, then wherever you are, just getting into the right inner posture….
See how things go wrong with man. It is the inner posture that is required – and people are practicing yoga postures around the world, which have nothing to do with it. It is not how you are sitting, whether in a lotus posture…. It does not matter, it is something within you.
So just always remember your first experience because that is the most significant experience, and it gives you the whole secret. And the secret is that you were completely innocent. And once you know that, you can be anywhere, just in the same posture, and it will come and you will be afire, aflame.
The distance makes no difference.
Even if the master is dead, that makes no difference because the reality is within you; the master was only a triggering point.
Now it is up to you not to misunderstand, and to be clear how it happened, and to just go on being in the same position.
Looking at the sunrise or sitting by the side of a tree, watching the stars, just get into the same posture, and you will find your master is everywhere.
The people who started worshipping the sun, the moon, the stars, the trees, were not idiots. Because they found that the whole existence provides you with your master in different forms. And the whole thing depends on you.
It happens even with those who are not masters but mystics only. But the difficulty with mystics is, it may happen to you but they cannot explain to you the how and why of it. And because they cannot explain it to you, you are going to remain in the wrong posture you whole life.
The master’s function is to give you the experience, and then to explain to you that you are responsible for it, that you are the source of it, that the master was only a certain situation, a certain device that triggered your dormant mind, moved it, made it alive.
Now it is for you to get deeper and deeper into the same posture of synchronicity with the master and then with this whole beautiful existence, with anything.
And unless the whole existence becomes your master, your master has failed.
So don’t let me down!