---
title: Om Shantih Shantih Shantih 01
series: Om Shantih Shantih Shantih 01-27
talk_number: 1
url: https://oshoworld.com/om-shantih-shantih-shantih-01
language: English
duration: 02:05:28
author: THE MANTRA SERIES
scraped_at: 2026-01-03T09:18:50.610886+00:00
---
Osho,
I am always intrigued by Eastern scriptures that begin with Om, Shantih Shantih Shantih and end with Om, Shantih Shantih Shantih.
Would you please talk about this?
The East has approached reality in an almost diametrically opposite way to the West. First, the simple meaning of the word should be understood, and then all the implications. All Eastern scriptures begin with Om, Shantih Shantih Shantih and they also end with the same.
Om is the symbol of the universal heartbeat; it is not a word. And as you come closer and closer to the universal heartbeat, the by-product is a deepening silence. Shantih means silence and it is always repeated three times because by the time you reach to the fourth, you are no more – just the silence has remained. You have disappeared as an entity separate from the universe.
The West has not been able to begin even a single scripture with this intention. It is understandable. They never went into the deeper communion between your heart and the bigger heart of the universe. They have taken a wrong route, that of fighting, that of conquering, that of being victorious. They have chosen to be extroverts.
Their world is true, but they don’t know anything about themselves.
The outside is true and the inside has not been explored.
The Bible says, “In the beginning was the word.” Now this can be said only by somebody who is absolutely ignorant, because the word means a sound with a meaning. These sounds made by the words are just sounds; you cannot call them words. The moment you say, “In the beginning was the word,” unknowingly you have accepted that there is someone who gives meaning to it, but then the word is not in the beginning.
In the beginning is one who gives meaning to the word. And The Bible says, “God was with the word.” Anyone who wrote it must have felt uneasy that the world should begin only with a word. Immediately, he needed someone to give meaning to it; hence the second statement that God was with the word.
If you look into things very impartially, deeply, you will be amazed how much they can reveal. Then he must have become aware to ask, “Who is first? God or the word?”
The third sentence then tries to make a compromise. It says, “God and the word were one.” Nobody in the whole Eastern search will agree with it. The East has not experienced the beginning because naturally you cannot see the beginning: you are already there, the beginning has happened. In your being you have preceded the beginning, so there is no possibility of any witness of the beginning. But there is a possibility to be a witness of the end.
The Eastern meditators found as they entered into their inner being, they are first surrounded with a tremendously beautiful and musical sound. It is not the sound of any music being played, it is simply the heartbeat of the universe. And once they come in tune with the heartbeat of the universe, silence descends. They would like to dance and declare to the world about silence, but they can only say three times, “silence, silence, silence” – and they are melting and merging.
Rather than their declaration of silence becoming louder, it is becoming more and more like a whisper and finally, they are not – but they have witnessed the end. Now, it is a logical conclusion that the end and the beginning cannot be different.
The seed grows into a tree, blossoms, brings fruits and again seeds. In existence everything moves in a circle, the earth, the moon, the sun, the faraway millions of stars…all move in a circle that meets at a point.
The end and the beginning are the same.
That’s why the Eastern scriptures begin with the declaration, Om – the sound of the soundless, the very music of the heart of the universe. And as they go deeper, silence becomes the only reality. They want to declare silence to the world, but nobody has been able to go beyond the third because each time they say silence, it becomes more of a whisper.

I am reminded…
I had one doctor friend who was perhaps the most famous doctor in those parts. I told him, “I would like to experience something for which there is no reason. You can help me. I want to go slowly and deeply into the unconscious.”
He said, “This is against medical practice. You don’t have any reason, and I cannot use something without reason and make you unconscious.”
But I persuaded him. I said, “Find any reason, and I am not going to tell anybody. Although, I have told it to the whole world.”
He put me on his table, sent all the servants and nurses away because he was doing something against the medical code. While he was covering my head so that I could not breathe anything else, he said to me, “Do one thing. While you are going into the unconscious, go on saying one, two, three, four, five…as long as you can.”
Strangely, I could not go beyond three. I tried hard. I was aware of the fact that I had only come up to three, and the four would not come. Later on I told him, “This was my reason to be put into the unconscious state. I wanted to see why every scripture stops at three.”
I asked him to tell me how I was saying one, two, three. He said, “One was clear, two was not so clear, three was almost a whisper, and beyond that you never uttered anything.”
This was my way through a scientific experiment to see why all the scriptures stop with three. They begin with the same and they end with the same.
The beginning we cannot know: we are already here; the beginning has happened. But the end we can know – the disappearance into absolute silence. But if we know the end, we can conclude with absolute certainty that this is how the beginning must have started: from silence, not from words.
Silence is the beginning and silence is the end, and if you are a meditator, silence is the middle.
Silence is the whole fabric of existence.
This is not a hypothesis, nor is it a philosophical idea. It is the experience of thousands of mystics who have entered into their own being. First they have heard Om, and as the Om becomes overwhelming, silence follows. We are made of sound and silence.
Sound is our mind; silence is our being.
Sound is our trouble; silence is our liberation.
It has been discovered by some unknown explorer of the inner, it has been followed by thousands of people – but you are not to repeat it. That’s where the masses have got lost. They think that by repeating Om, shantih shantih shantih they are doing some spiritual meditative act. In each temple in the East you will find a metal disc, and everybody who enters into the temple hits the disc with a steel rod. The whole temple becomes full of sound and then slowly, slowly the sound also disappears.
In Tibet, they have even made a very special thing, a small pot of metal with a rod – with great calculation it has been made. When I first saw it, I could not believe that it was possible, but the thing was in front of me.

One of my friends in Patna was a great collector of all kinds of things. He was continually telling me whenever I was in Patna, “Come to my museum.” Even the prime minister and the president and everybody had visited. He was a very rich man and had gathered things from other lands – strange things. But when he said to me that he had recently received a metal pot which repeated Om, shantih shantih shantih, I could not resist….
Patna is a strange city. It is not spread in all directions, it has only one main street running by the Ganges – because the Ganges is so beautiful everybody wants to be around it. So Patna is a very long city, perhaps twenty miles. And he used to live thirteen miles away from my place – but I went to see the pot. It was really a great experience.
The pot is made of many metals, and you move the rod in the pot round and round for a certain number of times…then you stop. And suddenly, the sound comes from the pot, Om, shantih shantih shantih. These things may be beautiful, creative, but they are not in any way religious. Every Hindu temple is resounding with the sound, everybody is praying, but they have misunderstood the whole thing. It is not your repeating Om that is going to lead you to the reality; it is your becoming utterly quiet, and from your very being arises the sound Om.
You are just a witness, you are not a doer.
And as the sound settles, you feel silence, silence, silence…. Then everything disappears, there remains only a universal reality of which you are just a part. Just as a dewdrop disappears in the ocean, you disappear in the ocean of existence.
The East has found this to be the only spiritual experience, not God, not your holy scriptures, not your prophets; they are all creating fictions. Not even your prayers because they are nothing but your desires. The only thing that is really significant is to be quiet, centered, grounded, in the very life source, in your very being. This sutra of Om, shantih shantih shantih is heard when you are at your very center. It is not by your repeating it that you will reach to it. It is not exactly the same either. We have invented it…approximately, just to communicate what has happened: something similar, but far deeper; something similar, but far more delicate; something similar, but not the same.
The mystics’ writings start exactly the way the universe has started, and they end exactly as the universe finally goes to rest. There is a statement relevant to this sutra by Gautam Buddha. It is very significant. He says that it is absolutely foolish to think the way all the theologians of the world think about the beginning – how the world began.
I can see the significance of a statement that you can never come to a conclusion about how the world began – because you were not there. How can you be before the world began? – you are part of the world. So all that you say about the beginning is just imagination, hypothesis, guesswork.
Buddha says that the mystic is not interested in how the world began, his interest is in how it ends, because in that very ending you will find the beginning too. But without finding the ending, you can only guess and argue and fight about the beginning – and it is all futile. The philosopher’s work is absolute nonsense. The mystic is very earthbound, very pragmatic, very realistic. Buddha says, “First find how it ends” – and it is to be found within you.
You cannot wait for the whole world to end. That way it never ends. It is always there – beginningless, endless. But within you how did the world begin? And within you how does the world end?
Those who remain clinging to the world are the materialists. Others start looking inside and try to find how everything ends, and still you are – but just a pure consciousness, just a pure awareness.
The flower disappears.
Only fragrance remains.
I agree with Gautam Buddha that if you have found the fragrance within you, you know the whole secret of existence, because every individual is a miniature universe. What is happening on a vast scale in the universe is happening on a very small scale within you.
If you have tasted a simple dewdrop, you have tasted all the rivers and all the oceans and all possibilities of water anywhere. And you are the dewdrop…. Rather than running here and there, just taste yourself.
The East has approached reality in a very different way. And certainly because it has reached in a different way, it has produced a different kind of enlightened people.
The West has produced popes – and the worst is a Polack pope. And now, the Nobel Prize committee is nominating him for a Nobel Prize! A Polack and a Nobel Prize…? In this way, the Polack is not given respect; in this way, the Nobel Prize loses all nobility, all grace.
And what experience has the Pope? What is his authority? He represents Jesus Christ. Jesus Christ himself does not seem to be enlightened. Because an enlightened person does not bother about saying, “God is my father…I am the only begotten son of God….” Who cares? We have seen thousands of enlightened people in the East. None of them has claimed that he is the only begotten son of God. That would be laughed at for centuries: “That man has gone mad!”
So in the first place he represents Jesus Christ – who seems to be a lunatic. Either his nuts and bolts are loose, or too tight. He does not show the grace of a Gautam Buddha. Neither does he show the dance of a Meera nor the grace of a Mahavira.
What he goes on talking about he has gathered from the society – because he is uneducated. And popes, hundreds of popes in these two thousand years have represented him. It is a hierarchy: the pope, Jesus, God…you cannot go unless you follow the proper channel! And I have always wondered that even the intelligent people in the West never think what is the contribution of these popes? A man who is a representative of God must show something, some sensitivity, some grace, some blissfulness; some fragrance should surround him. But the pope is elected!
It is so hilarious that people elect somebody as enlightened. Enlightenment is not an election campaign. Many candidates can stand up and say, “I am enlightened.”
Enlightenment is an inner opening of the rose. Those who are in search of the truth of their being, will immediately be pulled towards the man of enlightenment.
It is not dependent on anybody’s election or nomination. It does not represent even God or anybody. It simply declares its own heart and invites and welcomes anybody – any wayfarer who wants to share this juice, this music of the eternal Om, one who is in search of finding a living silence and a dancing silence.
This sutra contains the whole – the beginning and the end. But it starts from the end and reaches to the beginning. The statement of Gautam Buddha was: “Ignorance has no beginning and enlightenment has no end, and both make a circle.” You know you have been utterly ignorant of yourself because now you are so alert, so full of joy, so much is dancing in your every cell, every fiber. This is an experience; it is not a hypothesis, and it has never been argued.
There have been Hindu mystics, there have been Buddhist mystics, there have been Jaina mystics…but as far as this sutra is concerned they have never quarreled about it, they have never argued. This is simply accepted because it is the experience, it is not theoretical guesswork. It is not philosophy. It is philosia, it is darshan.
They have seen it within, in their own being and there is no way not to agree with others who have also seen it. But by repeating it one is simply being stupid.
One has to come to an inner space where it explodes on its own and you are just a witness. Then it transforms your being, gives it beauty and grace, gives it sincerity and truth.

Osho,
The words resistance and surrender, extremely popular in the old Pune days, are no longer being used to punish, judge and reject. The Oregon experience helped. Now the ashram is less fear-orientated.
But in private life, how to distinguish between resistance and healthy rebellion, between surrender and resignation? The pitfalls of my habitual unconscious stubbornness make me suspicious of my imperceptible false yes and no.
Osho, is there any simple test? Is it authentic when it just feels good?
When you feel something authentic then you can stand against the whole world. But the authenticity should not be another name of your ego. Nobody else can make it clear, you know it.
When it is ego, you know perfectly well that your desire is to be somebody special. And when it is an authentic truth, you also know that it has nothing to do with your personality, with your ego. You are not going to gain anything out of it except a tremendous joy.
Let joy be the criterion.
As far as I am concerned, neither your yes means anything to me nor your no means anything to me. You are so asleep that in your sleep whether you say yes or you say no, does not matter. Whatever you say, I am going to pour a bucket of cold water on your head.
Your yes and no are not important.
Your awakening is important.
And out of your awakening whatever happens is right. The moment you are alert, awake, conscious, your revolt and your surrender are not two different things.
It is the unconscious mind which either wants to surrender to avoid unnecessary trouble of revolting – cheap surrender – or it wants to revolt because it does not want to lose its ego. Those are by-products. My insistence is not on by-products.
My insistence is on a single thing….
I call it witnessing.
Be aware, and if your awareness leads you to surrender, it is perfectly beautiful. And if your awareness leads you to revolt, that’s how it should be. It will be difficult for you to understand that surrender is the greatest revolt. Revolt against the ego, revolt against your conditioning. But it should not be imposed on you that you surrender.
Here, nobody is interested in your surrender. What will we do with your surrender? I don’t see any use of it. And nobody is interested in your revolt. The only difference will be if you really want to revolt go to M.G. Road. What the hell are you doing here? This is a gathering of people who are searching for the real life, who are trying to awaken themselves. Neither revolt nor surrender is of any importance.
The only important thing is to become absolutely alert and aware, and then whatever you do is right. All the religions have labeled things: this is right, this is wrong; this is good, this is bad; this is virtue, this is sin…things are fixed.
My whole approach is that things are constantly changing, nothing is fixed. So I cannot say to you that this thing particularly is right, and that thing particularly is wrong. In a different context, things will be different. So it is better to give you an awareness which will decide spontaneously, moment to moment, what is right and what is wrong.
You should not be dependent on scriptures dead and old, and you should not be dependent on saints – either dead or alive! You should be simply free in your awareness and let your own awareness respond to reality as it comes – and reality is continuously changing.
Sometimes surrender may be perfectly right: if you meet a buddha how are you going to revolt? He will enjoy all your jogging and jumping, but what revolt…and it is not his problem, it is your problem. By your revolt are you creating more peace, more silence for yourself, or more anxiety, more anguish, more tension, more trouble?
But if you meet Ronald Reagan, then surrender is not the thing. One should have a certain dignity, a certain self-respect. Surrendering to criminals – they may be powerful – cannot be said to be right because it is surrender. Surrender is good only to a source of humbleness, light, freedom; a surrender which will make you more free than you have ever been; a surrender which will not cut your wings and destroy your joy of flying across the sky. A surrender to the man who is alert, aware and has a deep respect is beautiful.

I have told you many times a small anecdote….
Gautam Buddha in his past life heard about another man who had become enlightened. He was not much interested, but curious to see what kind of phenomenon enlightenment was and what it did to the man. He set off, and as he came close to the man something started melting in his heart; something that was hard and arrogant was disappearing.
And as he came very close, he witnessed himself touching the feet of the man. He was not touching, he had not even the idea of touching the feet of the man, but he saw that he was touching the feet. The man had such a beauty and such a grace that it was such a joy even to touch his feet.
But the most miraculous thing happened as he stood up: the man also touched Gautam Buddha’s feet. Gautam Buddha said, “What are you doing? You are enlightened. I can feel the peace that surrounds you. I can feel the light and the fragrance that you have become. It is absolutely right for me to touch your feet and surrender myself, but what are you doing? I am an ignorant man, very stubborn, very egoistic and you are touching my feet.”
The enlightened man said to Gautam Buddha, “Today you are asleep; tomorrow you will be awake. Today you are not enlightened, but enlightenment is your very nature. I don’t care about your arrogance and your ego and stubbornness; they are not your self-nature. I am touching your feet to remind you that you are not what you are thinking, and also to remind you that when in your next life you become enlightened, be respectful of those who are still groping in the dark.”
Now to touch the feet of such a man is a beauty, is a grace, is a blissfulness.

Germany seems to be my land. I own it because for two years continually in the German parliament, they have been discussing me. In two German courts our sannyasins have won cases. Their parliament calls Christianity a religion and my movement a cult, and in Germany, the word cult is condemnatory. Two courts have given their verdicts against the parliament, and the parliament is still continuing to call my people a cult.
Just the other day I received news from one of my sannyasins who is also a member of the parliament that they are very stubborn and they go on changing…. First they said, “You are not a religion because you don’t believe in the fiction of God.” I am going to reply to the parliament, “Then that means you should not call Buddhism a religion because it does not have any God…or Jainism a religion.” Now they have changed the argument because I have been jailed in America and blackmailed to accept that I have committed two crimes.
Sometimes I look at this world – it is so hilarious. The government attorney has placed thirty-four crimes that they say I have committed and they ask my attorneys to negotiate and not to go for a trial. And the negotiation was: “If you accept any two crimes, then Osho can be released from the jail. If you don’t accept then you are putting his life in danger because the case could go on for twenty years, thirty years…”
This is sheer blackmail. My attorneys were at a loss what to do, because I have not committed those crimes. But to save me they accepted the two crimes, such petty crimes that generally in America the punishment would be twenty-five dollars or fifty dollars at the most. And that’s what my attorneys were thinking: get finished with fifty dollars.
But when those two crimes were accepted, the punishment was four hundred thousand dollars, nearabout six million rupees. And now, there was no way for my attorneys to do anything; they had accepted and the judge had given the judgment.
So now in the German parliament, they have changed their whole idea. Now they say they will not allow me to enter Germany because I am a criminal, a criminal convicted of the maximum punishment. Four hundred thousand dollars is the maximum line; nobody has been punished that much. You can murder – still you will not get that much punishment. You can rape…
All that I had done, that they had accepted, was so tiny, so meaningless.
First, they said that I had the intention of staying in America and I had deceived the immigration department. For “the intention,” the simple way is not to give me residence. Secondly, they said that I had arranged a marriage for the purpose of getting residence. That is sheer stupidity. If I had wanted to be a resident, rather than persuading others to get married, I myself should have married – as many American women as they required.
But because I have been punished and deported, in the German parliament they are using the argument that my followers are a cult and I am a criminal. I have to inform my attorney there that if I am a criminal, what about Jesus Christ whose punishment was certainly more than mine…? Deport him. Make a law that Jesus Christ cannot enter into Germany – because after resurrection…nobody knows where he has gone. And secondly, those who follow Jesus Christ should not call their religion a religion. Call it a cult; it is very simple.
The parliamentary secretary said that ‘cult’ is not derogatory. I am informing my attorney: “Ask that if ‘cult’ is not derogatory, then why make any distinction? Christianity is a cult just as any group of people is a cult.” But strange people and criminal minds….
You are saying to me that before, the ashram was fear-oriented. You should not have been in the ashram. The whole world is outside the ashram. If you wanted to be in the ashram that shows more about you than about the ashram. You wanted to be in some place where you are dominated.
Always remember, problems are yours.
It is your problem.
If the ashram is fear-orientated, then can you name any religion which is not fear-oriented? Then what is the purpose of hell?
In fact, this is the only place where nobody cares about hell. In fact, if I am going to hell, all my people are ready to go, dancing and singing. Nobody is fear-oriented here. We are not afraid to deny God. People are always afraid, “Who knows, perhaps he may be there and after death, how will you face him?” I am preparing my people so that God will be afraid of them. Just do the Dynamic Meditation the moment you see God.

I used to live in a place near a Mohammedan cemetery. The caretaker called me saying, “You are going to create a riot in the city.”
I said, “What happened? I have not said anything against anybody.”
He said, “That is not the question. A deputation of Mohammedans has come to me and they say, ‘The people who are around Osho…early each morning they start Hoo! Hoo! Hoo! That disturbs the people who are lying in their graves. So many of them have come out – and we are afraid of ghosts. If this man is allowed…the whole city will be full of ghosts. Nobody can rest – Hoo!…’“ So he said, “You tell your people to do some silent meditation; they are disturbing ghosts.”
I said, “It is strange, for the first time I have come to know that ghosts are afraid of Hoo!”
The caretaker said, “Personally, my opinion is that anybody will be afraid if so many people come just shouting Hoo! Hoo! It hurts deep…”
So, my people are not fear-oriented.
Now you think that the ashram is less fear-oriented? The ashram is the same. It is the same river: water flows; people come and go. It is the same caravan: somebody joins, somebody departs; somebody takes his own route, somebody comes from some other route.
It is your mind.
Mind is always fear-oriented.
All the societies have tried to make your mind fear-oriented because that is a simple strategy to rule over you – and man is so fear-oriented. He does not show it; he hides it inside. But on a dark night, alone, he starts running. There is nobody, and when he starts running, his own steps make sound and he looks back to see if somebody is following.

You can create fear in any person for any absurd reason…
In my village there was a grocer. I always loved to find people’s actions and reactions. So whenever I passed – and I had to pass at least four times as it was exactly between my house and the school – I would just keep one of my eyes closed.
At first the grocer said, “Strange, why should he do it?” But when I did it again, he called to me, “What is the matter?”
I said, “I don’t know. The moment I see you, my whole being…I feel to do it. And it is not only me, many others are feeling…”
He said, “My God!”
And it spread – one thousand students passing through the grocer’s with one eye closed. Now, it was nothing to do…absolutely irrelevant, but he became so afraid that he would hide whenever it was the time for going to school and coming from the school. He would hide inside; he would close the shop. But I was not going to be satisfied so soon….
We would knock on his doors shouting, “What has happened? I am a customer.”
Hearing that a customer was knocking, he would open a window and he would see me. He reported to the police, “This boy is torturing me; I cannot sleep. One thousand people are passing four times a day, and the whole neighborhood is laughing. They are all telling me, ‘Don’t be worried, they are doing no harm to you. It is their eyes; if they want to pass with one eye closed…’“
He said, “But it creates great fear.”
I was called to the police station. I went with one eye closed. They said, “What is the matter? Why do you keep one of your eyes closed?”
I said, “I am a very spontaneous person. If I feel to do…it is my eye. Seeing you, I felt the same.”
The police officer said, “Just stop it here. I will never interfere in your affairs, but don’t start telling all the school, because those idiots will start passing in front of the police station with one eye closed. That will damage our power and people will laugh.” And he said, “It is not gentlemanly, it is not nice to harass people.”
I said, “I will stop.”
I stopped – but the neighbors got it! They started. Anybody who came to his shop would come with an eye closed.
He called me one day. He said, “You are very nice, because you have stopped. But you have spread the disease so much that now it is uncontrollable. Last night my wife faced me with one eye closed. It creates very much fear.”
I said, “But why should you fear? It has nothing to do…they are not closing your eye. If you want I can tell people that they should start putting one eye – your eye – closed.”
He said, “Don’t do that; that is too much. They will kill me.”

You say that now the ashram is less fear-oriented…. You have become more mature. Always think about your own psychology. The world remains the same; only you change. And you are asking, “But in private life, how to distinguish between resistance and healthy rebellion?” If you can distinguish between healthy rebellion and unhealthy rebellion, if you are that intelligent, I think you will be able to see whether you are resisting or you are in rebellion. You need to sharpen your intelligence a little.
Resistance is not always bad. If you are facing a fascist regime, resist. But here, there is no fascist regime, no hierarchy. Nobody is torturing you, no gas chambers – even Jews are not killed. You are perfectly safe.
Just something for your fear to disappear…

Lord and Lady Bating, the English aristocrats, hire a new butler called James. He has not had much experience. So on the first day, he goes up to their room and says, “Frederick and Cynthia, dinner is served.”
Lord Bating comes out and says sternly, “No, James. You must not call us by our first names. You must call us Lord and Lady Bating.”
James is embarrassed. “Please forgive me,” he says, “Lord and Lady Bating, dinner is served.”
James then goes along to their daughter’s room and says, “Caroline, dinner is served.”
She comes to the door and says angrily, “I am to be called Mistress Bating and don’t forget it.”
James excuses himself and then goes to the son’s room. Before speaking, he thinks for a moment and then calls out, “Are you in there Master Bating?”
“Okay, okay,” calls the son nervously. “You caught me, but please don’t tell my parents.”

============================================================

Osho,
I see your enlightenment as a speaking medium between existence and all sannyasins – based on love as the only true way to go.
Osho, I've heard you say that you are beyond enlightenment. What, theoretically speaking, is the difference between enlightenment and beyond enlightenment?
Life is a continuous change. It knows no stop – not even a semicolon. Enlightenment is not to get stuck somewhere. Nobody has talked about beyond enlightenment, because what is the point? People are not even enlightened. But I’m certain my people are going to be enlightened, and I have to make them aware not to get stuck.
Even enlightenment has to be transcended.
Even transcendence has to be transcended.
One has just to go on and on.
Existence is infinite, in multidimensions – and there is no end anywhere. You can never say I have come. You are always coming closer and closer and closer, but you never come, because once you have come what will you do? Then the only way is to go back home.
One has to go beyond enlightenment; otherwise you will find yourself in a very difficult situation – stuck in a waiting room of a railway station. No train goes back, all trains go ahead, and all that is left behind you have experienced. You are tired of it; you don’t want to go back. Even if you want to go back nature prohibits it.
Can a young man again become a child? Can a child again be in the womb of the mother? There is no possibility of going back. The young man will become middle aged; the middle aged will become old. There is an open future, but there is no reverse gear in your life-style. Simply nothing can be done about it.

I have heard…
When Henry Ford died he met God, and God asked him, “Are you satisfied with my creation?”
He said, “No, if I had created life, I would have corrected many mistakes. For example, when I created the car there was no reverse gear: you have gone two blocks ahead of your house – you cannot come back. Now you have to go around the whole town to come home!”
The reverse gear was Henry Ford’s invention; you can go back. And he said to God, “In life you have missed many things, but especially a reverse gear.”

An old man wants to become young but cannot. If God had placed a reverse gear, you could have just moved back into your youth again – you have to go on.
When I say one has to go beyond enlightenment, I am saying that enlightenment is not the end. It is the beginning of a new existence, a new universe, a new world. It is difficult even to conceive what enlightenment is; naturally it is more difficult to conceive the beyond, but “theoretically speaking” it can be understood.

While all the others are hanging around, Silvester Sperm is exercising doing push-ups, swimming laps and lifting weights. One of the other sperms asks him: “Silvester, how come you spend so much time exercising?”
“Well,” replies Silvester very seriously, “when the time comes, I want to be the one.”
“Ah, really,” says the sperm. “Well, your chances are about one in a million.”
Just then the time comes and all the sperms start swimming. Silvester is way out in front when all of a sudden he turns around and starts swimming back. “What is the matter?” cries another sperm.
“Get back,” cries Silvester, “it’s a blow job!”

But you cannot…! That was theoretically speaking. Practically speaking, forget all about the beyond. First become enlightened.
It is pointless to think about things which are so far away. Take care of first things first: be enlightened. But you are theoretically interested in the beyond…what are you going to gain? Enlightenment is enough for the time being.
Once you are enlightened you will not need anybody else to say to you to go beyond. You will go – you will have to go. There is nothing static. Nobody can stay young and nobody can remain just enlightened.
I am the first person to talk about the beyond. All the mystics of the world have stopped at enlightenment for the simple reason that they were not talking theoretically. They were practically concerned that you become unidentified with your body, with your mind; that you become a pure consciousness without jealousy, without anger, without fear; that you become a love, a flower of eternity, which brings fragrance and blessings not only to you, but even to those who are fast asleep.
Perhaps the noise of the falling flowers of blessing may wake up somebody, just to see what is happening. Perhaps the fragrance may wake up someone. Perhaps the light may penetrate into somebody’s darkness.
Become enlightened, not theoretically but really, existentially, and the beyond will come on its own. I have talked about it because I want you to be aware of every possibility that is going to happen on the path.

One day Gautam Buddha is passing through the forest. It is fall time and dry leaves are thick on the ground….
Finding him alone, Ananda, his chief disciple, asks, “This question has been arising in me: have you said to us everything that you know of?”
Buddha bent down, took a fistful of dry leaves, showed those dry leaves to Ananda and said, “I have said only this much. What I have not said is as much as all the dry leaves in this forest.”

But I don’t want to be so miserly. I want to say to you everything that happens on the path in its minute detail. It is time. Twenty-five centuries have passed since Gautam Buddha. Now man’s consciousness is far more mature. It will not be satisfied with a fistful of dry leaves. I offer you the whole garden; hence I talk about many things which you may think are too far away, are perhaps not going to happen to you. But I say unto you, if you listen rightly everything that I am saying is going to happen. Because it has happened to me, there is no reason why it should not happen to you.
People are very strange. They want great theories, philosophies, but they don’t want a great life. They want to be convinced about great philosophical conceptions, but they don’t want their hearts to become an open flower dancing in the wind, in the sun, in the rain. Whatever they hear they go on accumulating in their memory. First, they never hear the whole thing. Secondly, they hear something else that has not been said at all. Thirdly, they interpret it according to their own prejudice. Fourthly, they simply go on accumulating it. Just becoming a great encyclopedia is not going to help.

Paddy wins some money at the horse races and treats himself to a meal at a fancy restaurant. While his dinner is being served, he notices that the spoons are made of real silver. So he eats quickly, and putting one of the spoons into his pocket, he gets up to leave. Just as he reaches the door, the waiter rushes after him and calls, “Excuse me sir, what about the bill?”
Paddy turns around and shouts, “What spoon?”

His whole mind is concerned about the spoon that he has stolen. Seeing the servant running he knows that he is coming for the spoon. He does not hear the word bill, he hears the word spoon. And we can understand; it is natural. You are so filled with stolen spoons, that when a bill is offered, you immediately react: what spoon?

Osho,
In my groups, especially the ones without structure, I discover in me a state of alertness, watchfulness about the group and myself, an aliveness and silence that I only experienced after doing a lot of meditations.
Is this “impersonal space” of the group leader comparable to meditation as I feel it or am I fooling myself because I do not need to look at my own problems while I'm leading a group? Do I love group-leading so much because it gives me the opportunity of meditation or am I just an addict of “group energy”?
Osho, can you please comment?
Do you want my comment theoretical or practical? Let us start from theoretical. Theoretically you are a great group-leader; theoretically in the groups great meditative states arise in you. But you know and I know and everybody else knows that practically the situation is different.
Everybody wants to be a leader, everybody wants to dominate, to direct, to guide, it does not matter whether he knows what he is advising people. What matters is that his advice makes him feel good – that he is a wise man. It makes him feel good that so many people are looking up towards him to be guided. And naturally, you have understood the point that when you become involved with the problems of other people you forget your own problems.
Forgetting your own problems creates a certain peace. When you are left alone meditating, it is very difficult, because how to forget your problems…? When you close your eyes they are all standing there in a queue.

One of the Indian Mohammedan emperors was imprisoned by his son because the old man was not dying but was going on and on…. And the son was already old. He had waited too long to become the emperor.
Finally, he decided, “This old guy may live longer than me.” He imprisoned his own father. It was easy because they were in the same palace, and all the armies were under the son – he was the commander in chief. The old man was imprisoned in his own palace.
The next day he sent a message to his son: “I have ruled enough. There was no need to imprison me. You should have simply asked me and I would have given you the empire. Now, it does not mean anything to me. I wish you well. Live long and let the empire prosper, but make a little arrangement for me. I want thirty children so that I can teach them the holy Koran.”
His son, who had now declared himself the emperor, said to the court, “Do you see the psychology? The old man cannot drop the idea of being the guide, the leader, the wise man. Even if it is only of thirty urchins brought from the streets, it does not matter, but he is the leader and the teacher. Those thirty children will become the substitute for the whole empire.”
Sigmund Freud and his company were not born yet but the son was saying something immensely significant as far as psychology is concerned.
If you cannot meditate alone, your meditation in the group is false.
If you cannot be silent alone, then your silence in silencing others is not authentic.

I am reminded of a famous story….
A dog had become enlightened. Now nobody can prevent…anybody can become enlightened. There is no law that prevents people; it is not a crime to become enlightened. And the dog was very articulate, he went around the capital telling every dog, “Your only problem is that you unnecessarily go on barking. This disease of barking has been preventing your enlightenment. Look at me: I never bark.”
From the morning till late in the night he made a round to every dog until they accepted that he was enlightened, and there was no doubt about it. They felt ashamed, but what to do? – a dog is a dog! Whenever a dog sees somebody in uniform, he cannot resist barking. Dogs are very much against uniforms – postmen, policemen, sannyasins…The dog, just as he sees the uniform, is immediately against the person. He seems to be a great freedom lover; this uniform represents slavery. There must be some philosophy in the minds of the dogs, because they take so much trouble – they get tired from barking.
Because they could not stop barking, they had to accept the non-barking dog as the enlightened one. He is almost the Gautam Buddha of the dogs, his achievement is great: “We are all proud that you are born amongst us; we will worship you. We will remember you, we will teach our children about the golden days when you were alive. But forgive us, we try hard. The more we try hard not to bark, the barking comes more forcibly.”
One full moon night…and dogs are also against the moon; nobody knows why. In fact, in all the languages there are words for mad people. In English lunatic is synonymous with mad people, a mad person. But in its root meaning lunatic means moonstruck; luna means the moon.
In Hindi the same is the situation: the madman is said to be chandmara, killed by the moon. The moon drives people mad; it drives even the ocean mad.
Poets get affected, painters get affected. Most of the people who commit suicide do it on a full moon night; more people go insane on a full moon night.
So if dogs bark the whole night, nobody can condemn them – they have something of the poet, something of the madman, some aesthetic sense, some feeling of the ocean. But they cannot tolerate the full moon, and because we don’t understand their language, we call it barking. Who knows, they may be reciting poetries praising the moon…perhaps their barking is their way of prayer….
One full moon night all the dogs decided that there is a limit to being condemned continuously: “That enlightened dog is too much. You bark, and suddenly he comes. He goes on hiding here and there, watching dogs. This full moon night make a commitment: we may die but we will not bark. And we will not open our eyes so we don’t see the moon.”
There was such silence as there had never been. The Gautam Buddha went around the town – he did not even meet a dog. All the dogs had disappeared…what happened? – and on a full moon night; this was the greatest time of his preaching. But the dogs had disappeared into dark corners behind houses, hiding. They were afraid that if they saw the moon, then commitment or no commitment, they could not resist. They knew…! They were aware of their weakness and their frailty, so it was better they were lying down quiet in darkness, behind houses. But Gautam Buddha was very much concerned, “What has happened…? Has every dog died?”
Then the moon started rising higher. And for the first time – because Gautam Buddha was always concerned with teaching the other dogs, he had no time to see to the sky – he saw the moon. The whole sky fell down. There was such barking – from every corner dogs came out.
That day he realized that because of his continuous teaching there was no time to bark. And you cannot do both the things together: barking and talking. He was badly ashamed…fallen from the heights. All the dogs surrounded him and asked, “What happened?”

The story is very significant. If alone you cannot be silent, then while leading a group your silence is just an avoidance of your inner noise.
You are focused on other people’s problems, so you yourself become hidden behind. Silence is authentic only when you are alone and no thought arises in you. And in fact, this should be a teaching to you. Be more and more meditative, because this is the only criterion.
If you have attained silence, you have the right to tell others to be silent. If you have solved your problems, then you are capable of helping those who cannot figure out how to get out of the mess they have made their lives.
I have heard about a man who had come to a master asking to be a disciple….
And as masters are very colorful people, unpredictable, the master looked at the disciple and said, “Listen, to be a disciple is very difficult. You will have to meditate, you will have to drop your ego; you will have to do this and that…a long process of discipline.”
The man said, “I never thought that to be a disciple is so difficult.”
The master said, “I cannot help it; that is the way. From eternity disciples have followed the path. I have only indicated a few spotlights.”
The man thought for a moment, looked at the master who was relaxing in his chair comfortably. The disciple said, “Then what about if I become a master? If to be a disciple is so difficult, let me become a master.”
The master said, “To be a master is very easy.”
The man was very happy. He said, “That’s what I was thinking. Things should be easy.”
But the master said, “You will have to manage a few disciples, and that is very difficult. They are stubborn, very angry, always ready to fight. Sometimes it can prove dangerous.”
He said, “But you were saying that to be a master is very easy…?”
He said, “To be a master is very easy. Just look at me, I am at ease. But first one has to either lead disciples or to become a disciple.”
The man said, “Both seem to be difficult. What is your suggestion?”
The master said, “My suggestion is rather than getting troubled by so many people, it is better just to be a disciple because you will have your own troubles and not be burdened by other people’s troubles.”

Just as I was coming here, Kaveesha came to see me. She is a very understanding woman and has a clarity of seeing through problems and helps many people. Many people depend on her because I am not available, personally available, to anybody. You know I am lazy. I became a master because it is the easiest job. I have never been a disciple – I don’t have any problems.
So when somebody has problems, I direct them to go to Kaveesha, to go to somebody else, because I have never suffered from any problem and I have never solved any problems. If they were there I left them there unsolved – they died. How long can they live if you don’t pay attention to them?
Kaveesha has a small group of people around her; Avirbhava belongs to her group. You hear her scream every day. She is a beautiful woman. She screams just to announce that I have come. When she is not there even I miss her – and she is not an ordinary woman. Just yesterday she gave Kaveesha all her money with the checkbook – that is three and a half million dollars – and said, “You take it.”
Kaveesha is poor. She thought that this was a good chance in a lifetime to have so much money. But she was not aware that Avirbhava is tricky! She accepted the checkbook, then Avirbhava explained to her, “These are the problems attached to the checkbook – you take them too. I am completely free!” So many problems…In America sales have gone down…Avirbhava has coal mines – and nobody is purchasing coal mines. Nothing in cash…all in problems – three and a half million dollars! So Kaveesha became afraid, saying, “I’m perfectly happy as I am. Now this Avirbhava is making me fall into a hell of problems.”
And Avirbhava was very happy, “For the first time I’m feeling free – free of problems, free of money, unburdened.”
Kaveesha could not reject the offer because that would be insulting; she could not accept the offer because that would be destructive. So she told Avirbhava, “Wait, first I have to see my master.”
Just before I came here she came to me and she said, “This Avirbhava has created a trouble. First she said to me, ‘I’m giving you three and a half million dollars. You take it. I’m burdened, I want to be free of money. Our beloved Osho has been telling me again and again to be free – I have decided.’
“And later on she came back and said, ‘But listen, these are the problems attached: there is no cash.’“
Kaveesha came to me to ask what to do. I said, “You do one thing. Rejecting is not nice; accepting is dangerous because you have never taken such problems as are attached to those three and a half million dollars. You just go to Avirbhava and say, “I have offered the money and the problems to my master. And he said to me, ‘I appoint Avirbhava as my agent to take care.’“
In a simple way nobody is harmed. Avirbhava remains with her coal mines and three and a half million dollars. But now she is no longer the owner. Whenever those coal mines are transferred into dollars, I am the owner. So they come to the commune; there is no problem.
You need a clarity.
Just something beautiful to make this silence a living, a dancing silence….

Grandma Saperstein and Grandpa Rabinowitz are sitting on the veranda of the old folks home rocking back and forth in their rocking chairs. Grandpa Rabinowitz rocks forward in his chair and says to Grandma, “Fuck you!”
Grandma Saperstein rocks forward in her chair and says to Grandpa, “I fuck you too!”
Grandpa becomes very much excited and shouts, “Fuck you!” swinging more forward again.
Grandma remains graceful but leans forward and says, “I fuck you again.”
This goes on. Finally Grandpa says, “You know something, Grandma, this sex thing ain’t all it is cracked up to be.”

It is just oral…theoretical.

Zabriski is hired to wash the windows of an eighteen-story building.
When he arrives at the job, he finds Paddy and Sean there to help him. The three of them climb the scaffolding to the top of the building and start to work. But after an hour passes, suddenly Zabriski climbs over the scaffolding and jumps eighteen stories to the street below.
The police arrive, and one of the officers asks Paddy and Sean what happened.
“I don’t know,” says Sean.
“Well,” says Paddy, “maybe it was because of his deformity.”
“What do you mean?” asks the cop.
“Well,” says Paddy, “he kept on saying that he couldn’t work with two assholes.”

============================================================

Osho,
Since you are coming out again and showering us every day with so much love, my sexual feelings towards my boyfriend have disappeared again. It looks like your coming out seems to be related to my sex dropping.
Osho, I love it!
But please go on coming out so that I can have a stronger taste of enlightenment. Last time it must have been so subtle that I missed it completely. So please give me a chance – I am very slow in these things.
Nandan, love has many layers: the biological, the social, the spiritual. They need not be in conflict but I can understand your problem. For centuries man has been told that either you love the world or you love the beyond, you can’t have both together.
This has been one of the most stupid teachings that has destroyed man’s possibility of blissfulness. This world and the beyond are not two; the beyond has roots in this world. Your love to your boyfriend and your love to me are not competitive. On the contrary, the more you love me, the more you will be able to love your boyfriend. Love is a deepening inside, a cleansing and a flowering. Your boyfriend may be just a small rosebush but that does not mean that that rosebush cannot be a part of a great garden.
There is no necessity to divide them. If you love your boyfriend, you will love the garden. The boyfriend is perhaps your kindergarten where you learn how to love, but love should not be limited, it should spread. It should spread finally to the whole universe. Even your love to me should not be a bondage. Because of this fact Gautam Buddha used to say to his disciples, “If on the path of meditation going inwards you meet me, kill me immediately.”
I should not be a hindrance. I am here to help you, not to hinder you. And I will be happy that your love becomes so big that it contains the song of the birds and the trees in silence enjoying the sun.
Your love should be your sky.
But we have been brought up in such wrong ways that love has become another name of jealousy. It has become another name of competition, another name of domination. But that condition has to be erased; it can be erased. That’s the whole work of meditation: to erase all conditions so that you are as vast as the whole.
When I first came across the statement of P.D. Ouspensky…He was one of the greatest mathematicians of this age and he wrote one of the most beautiful books ever written. The name of the book is Tertium Organum. And in the very beginning he declares that the first book was written by Aristotle; it’s name was Organum. ‘Organum’ means the principle of knowledge.
The second book was written by Bacon, Novum Organum. On the same lines he goes far beyond Aristotle. ‘Novum organum’ means the new principle of knowledge. With absolute humbleness and humility said Ouspensky, “I am going to call my book Tertium Organum, the third canon of thought, the third principle of knowledge.”
Up to that point it was okay. Certainly he has much more to offer now than Bacon. But he goes on, saying, “I want to make a statement that the third canon of thought existed even before the first canon of thought of Aristotle. It was just not discovered.”
All these three books are concerned with mathematics. In Tertium Organum is the statement: “What I am going to write is not mathematics but super-mathematics.” In mathematics the part can never be equal to the whole – it is obvious. But in super-mathematics, Ouspensky says, “The part can be as big as the whole.”
The part can become the whole. When a dewdrop disappears into the ocean, slipping from the lotus leaf, do you think it remains still a dewdrop? Or do you think it is smaller than the ocean?
The moment it slips into the ocean, it becomes the ocean. Then the part and the whole are one.
Love is the art of being one with the whole.
On the path you will find many lovers. Don’t make them hindrances and don’t think of them as obstacles. That’s what has been taught to you by all religions of the world, that if you love things of the world your spiritual growth is retarded. You will never go to the beyond, you will never open your wings to the whole sky – just like an eagle flying across the sun. You will be caught somewhere.
Your boyfriend is simply a first taste, a small taste of love. He is not a hindrance. If you love me and the love towards your boyfriend disappears, then that love was not true. And you cannot be certain about your love for me, because there are greater realities. If you come across them, your love towards me will disappear. No, you are thinking in a very wrong way.
My love should make your love with your boyfriend more pure, more meditative, more musical, more authentic. I should not be a competitor, I should be a nourishment to your love. You have to learn this new language which the society has prevented. There have been reasons why the societies around the world have been preventing it: jealousies of all kinds, competitions of all kinds, fear of all kinds…that if you even love a newspaper, your wife will take it away and throw it out, “While I am here, how dare you…!” And it is true that you were hiding yourself behind the newspaper so as not to see the woman. You were keeping that newspaper upside down, you were not reading it. It was just to keep a coexistence with your wife to whom you say, “I love you.”

The American philosopher Dale Carnegie, who is the most stupid philosopher I have come across, suggests in a book how to influence people and win friends – but you know in America everything is superficial, a hypocrisy. He is teaching a hypocrisy; he says: “At least three times a day, you should say to your wife, ‘I love you darling.’“ It does not matter whether you love or not. It is a question of coexistence; otherwise she is going to create trouble. Bring roses and ice cream and Coca Cola just as symbols of your love.
But in America data has been collected showing that everything has a life of only three years: marriages last only three years – that is the average; jobs last only three years; people change cities every three years…Every fashion goes out of existence within three years. Strange! The number three seems to be a very Christian number: God, the holy ghost and the son. America seems to be really Christian – follows the ideology. But this is the average. In the name of love, so many other things go on.

I have heard…
In a marriage registrar’s office, a couple were signing the forms. The woman signed and then the man signed. And the woman said, “That’s enough. I want a divorce.” Even the magistrate could not believe – nothing had happened: “Why do you want a divorce?”
The woman said, “You can see my signature and he has written his signature in such big words…it is going to be a conflict of the egos. It is better to stop it from the very beginning. Why unnecessarily torture? He is not even polite enough to sign just the way I have signed. He has written as if he is teaching school children on a blackboard…such big words. What is the need? He is filling the whole form with his signature. This is the declaration that this is going to be our relationship: ‘You are going to be a nonentity.’ I don’t want to be a nonentity.”

In the name of love, people can pretend or can even believe that they love. But it is biology, it is hormones. Just give an injection of different hormones and the love will disappear and you will hate each other. This is not love, this is physiology, biology, chemistry. Have you ever observed married people moving together, happy? The honeymoon lasts only one week or at the most two weeks. And every story says, “After the honeymoon they lived in happiness forever.” Nobody describes what happened after the honeymoon. The honeymoon is a fiction created by your biology – a romance. You are not the master of it.
Once those hormones are satisfied – you have known the woman, the woman has known you, and you are acquainted with each other’s geography perfectly – then the question arises how to get rid of…And every society helps you to get married and prevents you from divorce. There is a significant psychology behind it: if divorce is as easy as marriage, then there will be a turmoil, chaos. People will go on honeymoon and then will go directly to the magistrate for a divorce. They are finished; they cannot tolerate each other’s presence – this is not love.
So first you have to understand clearly what love should mean. I have been watching married couples. They look so sad when they are together. And if you see a man with a woman, happy, it is certain the woman is somebody else’s woman. Happiness is impossible because twenty-four hours together becomes a torture.
The same conflict, “Why are you late? Where have you been?” And every husband on his way home is trying to figure out the questions – where he has been…what he has been doing….
It is not only that the husband is trying to figure it out, his wife knows that all that he is going to say is nothing but lies. Even if he tells the truth, the wife is not going to believe it. Nor does the man believe…. Husbands and wives become detectives, watching each other out of the corners of their eyes – what is going on…?

A woman was a hypochondriac. Every day, she was picking up some new disease from television advertisements about medicines. She enjoyed it because it is a very dominating position: you are sick, you are ill – the husband cannot be hard on you, he has to be sympathetic. He has to say, “Darling, I will take you to the doctor.”
But the doctors were saying that she did not have the disease. “What am I going to treat?” So she would force the husband to go to another doctor for another opinion….
But fortunately, she died. She left a will saying, “On my grave nothing else should be written except: Now you know – or do you still think I was a hypochondriac?”

One loves only if one finds a communion of the spirit. It is not against biology or anything. Those are strategies of nature to continue the species. If one loves as a communion of spirit, the indication, the absolute certainty will be that there will not be any jealousy. Because if the wife finds herself happy with someone one day, and you love her, then you should be happy because she is happy.
Love wants everybody whom it loves to be happy. If there is a communion of spirit, there will be no secretiveness. The wife can say, “Look at that man, how beautiful he is,” and the husband will not be offended. He will appreciate his wife’s aesthetic sense. That’s what she is saying; she is not saying anything else.
In nature, no animal is happy while making love. Ordinarily, we don’t come across other animals, only the stray dogs…but have you seen their faces? They are so sad while they are making love, and people make them even more sad. People start hitting them with stones. Strange people…you want to love and you don’t want anybody else to love. The dogs are not doing any harm to anybody, and a crowd follows them and they are dragging each other in agony.
That’s why in the animal world there are only seasons when animals make love. For the remaining year they forget about love completely; that one season was enough. It takes at least nine months to forget what happened.
But man is more stupid. He hates it – every night thinking, “This is the end! Let tomorrow come…” And by the evening he starts thinking again, “Why not take another chance? What is the harm? Then I can stop…”
It never stops, and the strangest thing is, your love, your lovemaking is not making your life more joyful, more musical, more poetic, more dancing. On the contrary, it is making it dry, desertlike. You somehow carry…It is a problem rather than a joy. Yes, in the beginning it seems to be a great blessing, but only in the beginning. The more intelligent you are, the sooner you will be finished with the idea of blessing.
If your love is just of this lower, the lowest kind of biology, then certainly when you love me your love with your boyfriend will disappear. Before the higher can be, the lower has to disappear. This should give you an indication that you have to raise your love higher so that it does not disappear but is more nourished.
My love is not only showering on you, it is showering on your boyfriend too. You both should dance, you both should feel nourished; new flowers should blossom for both of you.
I am not anti-life as other religions are. I am absolutely for life, and life in its essence means love.
I don’t even want your love to be confined to me – there are higher realms. I am only a door. If I can take you to higher realms of love where love is no longer a dialogue between two persons, but transformed into a lovingness, you don’t need a lover. You are love and wherever you move, you are surrounded with the aura of love. You will shower your love on the trees, not with effort; you will radiate love even if there is no one, in emptiness.
The ultimate love is lovingness – where the other is no longer addressed; where everyone, the whole of existence becomes your beloved. The master is only the door to the infinity, to the eternity, to the freedom from duality.
The most important French philosopher, Jean-Paul Sartre, has insisted again and again that the other is hell – and in a way, he is right. To be with the other, it is very difficult not to create misery for yourself and for the other.
Nobody is made for you. You have your likings; the other has his own likings. You are not one; the rhythm of your heart is not one. You live together, you have to live together because you are not capable of living alone. To you, aloneness appears as loneliness, despair – as if you are deserted, abandoned.
You don’t know that aloneness is not loneliness. Aloneness is the highest peak of consciousness. And when love is alone, unaddressed, or addressed in all directions, then it becomes a paradise.
But we have to learn step by step, we have to fall and we have to rise. If your love for your boyfriend deepens only when I am not coming out, I will not come out. Because I will not commit that kind of sin – destroying poor Nandan’s love. When I come out she becomes enlightened – and enlightened women don’t have boyfriends. It is an idiotic idea. Why? Enlightened women should have enlightened boyfriends, so rather than deserting the poor boy…help him to be enlightened so I can also come out. Because if I don’t come out…you see all these people…they will kill you, you and your boyfriend – both.
So, change your strategy. I am not against your love, I am absolutely for it. Love deeply, love without jealousy, love blissfully and help each other to be more meditative. Because what else can we do and what can we share? Man is born naked without anything. Love should be the beginning of sharing something – not all that rubbish that Dale Carnegie is suggesting.
The only sharing is of silence, joy, celebration. Slowly, slowly your hearts start melting and merging into each other. Your love becomes a spiritual phenomenon. And your love helps you to come closer to the master, because the master is not separating you, but joining you.
It is an ugly fact, that even people like Gautam Buddha or Mahavira insisted on renouncing your wives, your husbands, your children. Nobody even talks about how many people – millions must be the number in twenty-five centuries – have been deserted, and for wrong reasons people have become sannyasins. It was the easiest divorce and very respectable: you don’t have to go to the registrar’s office, and you don’t have to be condemned by the society.
On the contrary, if you renounce your wife and your children in the name of religion…. Are you aware of the implications? Millions of women will suffer poverty, will become prostitutes. Millions of children will become beggars, thieves, criminals. Who is responsible for all this? Your great so-called leaders.

A few years back I read the life story of a Jaina monk….
He was very much respected, and the respect came because he was not born a Jaina, he was born as a Hindu goldsmith. Whenever people convert to other religions, in the new religion they are respected greatly because they are giving you the confidence that your religion is higher, greater, truer than their religion. They are becoming a certain argument in favor of your philosophy.
There were other Jaina monks but this man had more respect than anybody else. I was looking at his biography. He renounced his wife and twenty-six years later, the wife died, poor, doing small things in people’s houses – cleaning, washing their dishes, their clothes. The conditioning is such that she was still happy that her husband had become a great saint.
The day the saint received the message that his wife had died, his statement remained with me; I cannot forget it because I cannot forgive it. He said, “My last anxiety is finished.” After twenty-six years…he left the woman in utter poverty…. What was his anxiety? It is easy to renounce a woman, but it is not easy to renounce sex. So although he had renounced – because so much honor and so much respect – deep down the sex must have been fooling him. His statement: “My last anxiety…” means that for twenty-six years he had been carrying the anxiety, he had not really renounced. But this has been happening all over the world.
I want to transform the quality of your love.
I don’t want you to renounce anything.
Renunciation is for the retarded; transformation is for those who are intelligent.
I cannot have millions of people around me for the simple reason that millions of intelligent people don’t exist. All kinds of retarded people…
After the first world war, for the first time psychological tests were devised to calculate the mental age of a man. Up to that point it was never thought that there are two ages: the age of the body and the age of the mind. And it was such a shock to discover that the average state of the mind is very retarded; its average age is fourteen years. The man may be seventy – that is his physical age – but his mind, his psychology is only fourteen years of age.
My effort is to bring your mind equal to the age of your body. In fact, it is possible if a man can be seventy and his mind can be only fourteen, that the vice versa is possible.

Somebody asked Emerson, “What is your age?”
He said, “Three hundred and sixty years.” Emerson was a man of truth and the man could not believe that he could tell such a lie.
Three hundred and sixty…? He pretended that he had not heard. He said, “I am a little deaf. Please repeat. What is your age?”
Emerson said, “You have heard it, but I will repeat, three hundred and sixty.”
The man said, “I cannot accept this. You don’t look more than sixty.”
Emerson said, “Yes, that’s true. That is the age of my body. I am talking about my age, the age of my psychology, and that is at least six times more than my physical age.”

First, I have to cleanse all the garbage that the old generations have poured in your mind. Your intelligence has to be cleansed, your love has to be cleansed. You have to be given maturity, a centering, an individuality and then there are not two worlds as all the religions say.
I emphatically deny that there are two worlds. The other world is simply a fiction, a consolation for the retarded, for the poor, for the miserable to give them a hope, to give them opium so they can somehow manage to drag themselves to their graves.
This is the only world. It does not mean that with your death comes the end. It simply means that with your death, you move into a higher quality of life. It all depends on you. If in this life, you can manage to get rid of jealousies, to get rid of biological and physiological attractions…if in this life you can get in tune, in love; if this life can become a celebration, your innermost consciousness will continue celebrating on higher levels. But there are not two worlds, it is one world, one eternity.
The people who divided it into two were very cunning because that gave them the scope: “If you are poor here, don’t be worried. Just pray to God and in the next life you will be in paradise with all the pleasures that you are being denied here.” That paradise of all the religions is just a consolation for the poor, for the suffering, for the miserable. It does not give you growth, it does not give you more consciousness. On the contrary, it simply gives you a hope which is not going to be fulfilled.
Nobody has written from the other world. At least they could have sent a Christmas card saying, “We are happy here.” No evidence for it exists, no proof and no argument. It is the greatest fiction – the God, the paradise and all the joys of paradise.
Jesus says, “Blessed are the poor” – and everybody knows who is blessed. If the poor are blessed then we should destroy all the riches that exist on the earth. Make everybody a beggar, make everybody blessed – because only the blessed ones, the poor, will enter into the kingdom of God! And their different religions for different climates, different geographies, different problems have managed to give, promised to give…You will find beautiful women there; here you have to renounce a poor woman, and there you will find beautiful women who never age. They always remain young, fixed…sixteen years of age. They can only be made of plastic; they cannot be real.
Those women have been offered to millions of saints who have entered paradise. You can’t find a prostitute on the earth comparable to the prostitutes that are offered in paradise. And you can see a strange thing: beautiful women are provided because all religions are man-made. Beautiful boys are not provided – who cares about women?
Yes, only one religion provides beautiful boys – for homosexuality; that is also for men, not for women. Rivers of wine…Here, wine is condemned and in paradise you swim in wine, you drink, you drown. Whatever you want to do, you can do. And such utterly nonsensical ideas have been prevalent for centuries all over the world.

I have heard…
Swami Muktananda died; in fact, he was never alive, but theoretically he died. One of his chief disciples could not manage to be separated from the master. He committed suicide and rushed as fast as he could into paradise. Just under a beautiful tree with thousands of flowers, poor Muktananda was lying down and on top of him was lying an American actress, Marilyn Monroe.
The disciple said, “My God, this is not right.” And Muktananda was always saying to be celibate…what is happening? Then he realized that the values had changed: this was paradise. He fell into the feet of the couple who were making love and he said, “Forgive me. For a moment, a doubt has arisen because I forgot that values have changed. This is not the earth; this is paradise. You are well rewarded: the woman is really beautiful.”
Before Muktananda could speak, the woman said, “You idiot, you don’t understand a thing. This old guy is not rewarded, I have been punished. They could not find a more ugly punishment for me.”

There is no other world, but consciousness is eternal. Existence has always been here and will always be here. It is up to you – absolutely up to you – to make the best of this great opportunity.
Purify your love and it becomes prayer.
Purify your intelligence and it becomes your wisdom.
Purify yourself completely and you become one with the whole. And to be one with the whole is the ultimate benediction, the blissfulness, the experience for which thousands of people have been searching down the ages on wrong paths.
This world has to be loved, this world has to be respected, this world has to be your temple, your mosque, your church. This world has to be your gratefulness, your gratitude.
Nandan, enlightenment is not something of another world. Enlightenment happens now and here. And enlightenment is nothing but a purity of everything that you are. It is not renunciation, it is rejoicing.
I am changing the very definition of sannyas. Up to now sannyas has been defined as renouncing the world. That has been a calamity. Millions of people have renounced the world who could have created a better world, more beautiful. I change the definition of sannyas. I say it is not renouncing, it is rejoicing.
Rejoice in your love, rejoice in your songs.
Rejoice in your music, rejoice in your dance.
Rejoice in these beautiful trees –
these innocent sounds of the birds.
Rejoice in the night full of stars.
We have the most perfect world and there is no other world – but we have to get in tune with it. We have to become one with it.
Enlightenment is not something special, it is simply a purified consciousness in which thousands of flowers of love and intelligence and truth and peace and silence grow on their own accord.
Nandan, you created a very serious silence – the trees don’t like it. They wait for your laughter; it is their nourishment. When you laugh the birds understand perfectly the language of laughter. They don’t understand Arabic or Sanskrit or Hebrew, but they understand laughter.

A few things for the trees and for the birds….

Paddy is explaining to Seamus what happened when he went into the new Zorba the Buddha self-service restaurant.
“I got myself a cup of coffee,” he says, “and set it on the table. Then I went back for a piece of pie, but when I came back with the pie, the coffee was gone. So I set down the pie and went back for another cup of coffee…the pie was gone. So I wrote a card. It read: ‘I put my finger in the coffee.’ Then I stuck the card alongside the cup. I went for another piece of pie, but when I came back the coffee cup was empty and someone had written on the card, ‘I drank your coffee but I could not find your finger.’“

Herschel Goldberg goes up to his father, Hymie, and says, “Dad, I want to marry Suzy.”
“Don’t marry her, my son,” says Hymie. “When I was a young man, I was pretty wild and to put it bluntly, she is your half-sister.”
Sometime later, Herschel comes up to Hymie and says, “Dad, I am in love with Mildred and I want to marry her.”
“You can’t,” says Hymie, “she is your half-sister.”
“How about Mabel?” asks Herschel, a few weeks later.
“Sorry,” says Hymie, “she is your half-sister too.”
Herschel is really determined to get married, so he goes to his mother and complains.
“Dad says I can’t marry Suzy, Mildred or Mabel because they are all my half-sisters. What can I…?”
“Don’t worry,” says Becky, “you marry any of them you like – he is not your father!”

============================================================

Osho,
When I first sat in front of you, I heard you say to me, “Bring light into the unconscious.”
Eight years have since passed and I feel more silent and loving than ever before and yet sense that there is much more.
Does the light which enters the unconscious come through efforts and determination, or is it an existential gift, requiring patience, openness and receptivity?
Could you speak on what it means to bring light into the unconscious?
Every step on the path reminds one of the utter poverty of language. I may have said to you, Bring light into your unconscious, because in that moment you would not have understood what you can understand now.
You can only prepare the ground.
Light comes on its own accord.
And that is happening in all these eight years by your becoming more silent and more loving. But you feel a lingering sense that there is something more – there is much more. Now I can say to you: Relax in your silence so it can become deeper. And relax in your love so it is no longer a solid thing but becomes more liquid, more flowing in all directions.
In short, learn the art of let-go. The light will come not according to your expectations or by any effort. Every effort will be a great hindrance and every expectation will create distance between you and the light.
In fact, forget all about light…. Just listen to the sound of rain, the sound of wind and enjoy it with such intensity that in every enjoyment you disappear. Slowly, slowly one day you will find you are not. That is the greatest moment in a man’s life, because the moment you find you are not, light enters in you. It waits until you vacate your innermost being. You are too full of yourself; there is no space for the great light to descend in you.
In a certain sense you have to die to be reborn, you have to be no more to be authentically yourself. This is logically very contradictory language, but I am not responsible for it. The whole responsibility is on the poverty of language. It has not been made to express the richer and higher experiences of consciousness. The descending of light is the ultimate, then the lingering sense that there is more will disappear.
That does not mean that there is not much more – there is – but what you have received is too much even to believe in it. You don’t deserve it, you are not worthy of it and it is so vast that it is inconceivable that there can be much more beyond it. But there is no need to be worried about it. Just as the light has come it comes as a ray entering into your unconscious darkness, and soon it becomes thousands of suns, light exploding all over in all dimensions. Because of this fact the experience has been called enlightenment.
You are on the right path. Eight years ago if I had said these things to you, you would not have understood. I had to prepare you before I could say things which are unsayable. And there are so many things to be conveyed to you, but they will have to wait until you are prepared. When you are prepared just give me a hint, “I am ready.”
Then I can forget logic, language. Then I can talk directly about the essential experience – whether it is grammatical or not, who cares? One thing is certain, it is existential.
So from now onwards remember, stop bringing light into the unconscious – please! From now onwards wait for the light to come. Wait with a throbbing heart, with a welcome, doors open – because who knows when the light comes; there is no pre-information. It comes so suddenly, you have to be awake all the time, waiting by the side of the gate, keeping it open – because the host can come any moment.
It is really the relationship between the guest and the host. You have to disappear and just become a waiting, utterly pure and silent, not waiting for something, simply waiting. The moment you can simply wait without demanding anything from existence and without desiring…Because behind every desire and behind every expectation and demand there is a complaint, “Why am I still in darkness? Why have you not come yet?” You may not say it clearly, but deep down you know…. Your heart cannot be grateful in such a situation.
Forget all about light, because it does not come by your remembering it, so what is the point of remembering? It comes by your deep relaxation, silence, peace, love, meditativeness and utter let-go. And one day you will suddenly find your whole being full of light, transformed from mortality into immortality, transformed from misery into blissfulness, into a blissfulness that knows no end.

Osho,
You always say that one becomes a sannyasin because one is seeking for truth. When you say that I always feel very guilty, because I know I didn't become a sannyasin for that reason. I became a sannyasin because I wanted to be happy, I wanted to get rid of anguish and to live all the joy my heart can contain.
Please tell me something about it.
You are guilty! – because what you call happiness is nothing but a by-product of the experience of truth. You may be seeking happiness, you may be seeking the ultimate, you may be seeking yourself…it doesn’t matter, you are seeking the same thing. You are seeking to get rid of your ignorance, your misery, your anguish, but that happens only when you come face to face with the truth of your being.
You are guilty of misunderstanding. Now, no longer feel guilty. The energy that you are putting into feeling guilty, put it into searching for happiness, and you will find that your search for happiness is another name for what I have called the truth.

“Quick,” yells little Ernie as he rushes into the drugstore, “my Dad is hanging upside down by his pants leg in a barbed wire fence!”
“What do you need?” asked the druggist. “Help or first aid supplies?”
“Nothing like that,” says Ernie breathlessly, “I want another roll of film for my camera!”

Just misunderstanding is not guilt….

Two old black ladies are about to get their picture taken. As the photographer pulls the black cloth over his head and starts to adjust the lens, one lady asks the other, “What is he doing?”
She answers, “He is going to focus!”
The other lady looks at her friend in shock and says, “Both of us?”

Osho,
Sex is disappearing, immense creativity is opening up, love is happening. It feels like a cool breeze inside, unexcited and very alone. Then the mind comes in and says, “Your heart is not open,” and tries to doubt this space of coolness.
Could you please talk about this?
Turiya, again a German…! It seems I am going to make the whole of Germany enlightened! Knowing perfectly well what happened about Nandan, still you say, “Sex is disappearing, immense creativity is opening up, love is happening.” My God! “It feels like a cool breeze inside, unexcited and very alone. Then the mind comes and says, ‘Your heart is not open,’ and tries to doubt this space of coolness. Could you please talk about this?”
How many times have I to remind you that this kind of enlightenment will happen many times.
Sex will disappear – and will appear again.
The heart will open – and will close again.
It is the natural process.
Your mind is not creating a doubt. Your mind is simply reminding you not to get caught into great words, cool breeze…unexcited and very alone….
Wake up and become unenlightened again!
Enlightenment needs many times of waking up from the dreams. Because you are all listening continuously about enlightenment, and everybody is talking about it, naturally you start thinking it is happening to everybody. It has happened to Nandan – and Turiya is a princess! What kind of enlightenment happens to a commoner and the royal blood is still unenlightened? Jump up…you have to be ahead of all…!
But then the cool breeze brings with it the boyfriend, unexpectedly. You were not hoping that he would come so soon! And then everything becomes hot. Mind reminds you – it will remind you again. But you say, “Wait, this boyfriend is going to go back again in three weeks.” It is only a question of three weeks then you can become enlightened again: “Just for three weeks don’t be miserly. Open your heart, let love flow.”
And these boyfriends are such – and particularly in this temple, if one boyfriend disappears, another appears. We don’t make much fuss about asking, “Who are you? What is your name?” When love knocks on the door you open it and receive the guest. Even if he is not German, it will do – at least for the time being until the German returns! And everybody has a spare boyfriend; it is intelligent always to have some spare parts. In this technological age you cannot simply depend without having spares.
So if the real does not appear the spare comes – and this will happen many times until you are really fed up. Then sex does not disappear; then you simply transcend it. It remains where it is. How can it disappear?
Everything remains the same. You are just more mature, more centered, more happy for no reason at all. For the first time your happiness is independent. It does not depend on anybody. For the first time aloneness has a beauty, a tremendous beauty, the beauty which only roses know or the stars.
That day will also come, Turiya, but before it comes these kinds of things will happen many times. Just be a watcher; enjoy these too. It is perfectly good to feel once in a while that sex has disappeared, one feels so clean, as if you have just taken a cool shower. It is beautiful to feel a creativity arising in you; nothing is wrong in it. The trouble is that these are only your dreams, not your realizations. So when they surround you they look as if they are real, but when they disappear leaving you in a dark ditch, you understand that your mind has destroyed everything, doubted. If the mind had not doubted, everything was going so good.
Mind is not disturbing and mind cannot disturb anything real, and mind cannot doubt anything real. Mind doubts only the unreal, the belief, the imagination, the dream – and it is good, it is helpful, it is healthy that the mind by doubting prevents you from falling into the trap of the unreal.
Don’t be in a hurry; otherwise you will start clinging to any dream. Be relaxed. Life itself prepares the ground. Its experiences itself bring the maturity and the moment in which you are transformed. Then there is no mind to doubt, then there is no question about it. The real has never been questioned.
Do you think when Gautam Buddha became enlightened his mind said, “Just think over it; it may be just a dream.” Not for a split second can truth be doubted once you should encounter it.
Your doubt is perfectly healthy and your experience is perfectly normal. But one day the real will arrive, because you are searching, seeking, honestly and sincerely with your totality. That day you will not find mind anywhere.
But right now it is too early. Listen to the mind; try to understand. You are not yet ripe. Your meditation is not yet deep enough, but it is deepening. So be happy that you are on the right track.

For sixty years Ruthy Finkelstein has lived with her tight-fisted husband Moishe. One fine day Moishe dies and Ruthy has him cremated.
She takes the ashes home with her in a plastic urn. She walks around her home carrying the urn and talking to the dead Moishe. “Moishe,” she says, “look at the fridge! All those years you would not give me money for housekeeping. Now look, it is full of champagne and caviar. And Moishe, look at my closet. All the time we were married you never allowed me more than one new dress every two years. Now look, it is full of silk dresses and fur coats and the jewelry box is full of diamonds. And Moishe, all those years you would not let me have anything to do with the business. Well, today I took over as chairman.”
Finally, in the bedroom she opens the little plastic urn and shakes his ashes onto the windowsill. “And Moishe,” she says, “you remember that blow job you always nagged me for? Well, here it is…pfft!”

Don’t take things seriously; life is so hilarious. There is no urgency to be enlightened. It is unfortunate that I became enlightened too early! But now nothing can be done about it – once enlightened, enlightened forever.
Let life and its different dimensions be experienced by you. As you experience life, slowly, slowly you become aware of its emptiness. Slowly, slowly you become aware that this is not your authentic being. In this slow process of experiencing, one day you come home. Then it is not a dream, not an imagination. And the most significant criterion to remember is that you will not find mind in your authentic enlightenment. The question of doubt does not arise, not even for a moment. You simply know what is the case.
I know the trouble of being enlightened. That’s why I make you alert. Don’t be in a hurry; otherwise you will blame me. I don’t want to take the blame. Nobody can say to me, “I am grateful to you that you helped me to become enlightened.” I help you to learn and love and live as totally as possible. Out of this, enlightenment is bound to happen some day – but there is no hurry for it. It is your birthright, so you cannot avoid it long enough. Sooner or later – and most probably sooner than later – it is going to happen.
But I am telling you, I don’t want to take any credit for it because then you will see that this whole life is utterly futile, meaningless, no action is of any worth – and then you will search.
That’s why I keep myself locked in my room. I don’t want people rushing to me saying, “Now it is your fault. You talked about enlightenment and I have become enlightened. Now what do you suppose I should do?”
There is nothing to be done, you have become enlightened, close the door and lock yourself inside! Or if you are really angry, try to make others enlightened: Look what life has done to you…. Do it to others!

No one can persuade little Ernie’s great-aunt Esmeralda that she does not possess extraordinary, supernatural powers. Little Ernie believes her when she tells him about one of her visions: “Keep a close eye on your father tomorrow,” she says. “I feel it in my bones that he is going to pop off before nightfall.”
Little Ernie never lets his dad out of his sight the next day. They go to the office together in the morning and then to the park in the afternoon. Nothing unusual happens all day, but when they get home in the evening little Ernie’s mother greets them at the front door.
“A terrible thing happened here this morning,” she sobs, “the milkman dropped dead on the kitchen floor!”

Turiya, you cannot find a more hilarious life than this. After enlightenment there is nothing – to tell you the truth. So manage to do everything before enlightenment strikes! I will try my best to make you enlightened; you try your best not to become enlightened! Don’t get caught into my words.
Just look at Nandan, she became enlightened and became unenlightened quickly – and now she will not become enlightened again so soon!
Most probably by the time I answer the question – it takes two or three days – Turiya may have already dropped the idea of enlightenment, “What is the hurry, why not enjoy a few more days of the juicy life?” I can see her sitting just there behind Devageet – and she is enjoying. That means that the dream of enlightenment is finished!

============================================================

Osho,
I feel so full inside that it overflows, and at the same time, so empty that it scares me. It seems a contradiction. Would you like to say something about it?
Life is not made of contradictions. It is made of complementaries. Only in the mind, do things appear to be opposite. Only in the mind, you cannot conceive how they both can be one. That’s why Euclidean geometry says that parallel lines never meet, but in fact, it has been discovered that parallel lines also meet.
This whole existence is a meeting of many dimensions. That is its beauty, its variety, its unending procession of celebration. If you think about emptiness, you cannot think that fullness and emptiness can be the same. But if you experience you will be amazed that what mind has been always proposing, and what philosophers have always been supporting, is absolutely absurd.
All philosophies are absurd.
Only experience is truth, not theoretical considerations about experience. We teach people’s minds contradictions: emptiness and fullness are absolutely contradictive. But when you come to a point of deep meditation, you are suddenly surprised and scared too, scared because of your conditioning – it is not supposed that emptiness and fullness should be one. But existence never bothers what your philosophers say, it goes on its own way.
When you are utterly empty, you are also utterly full, overflowing. In fact, emptiness itself becomes a tremendous fullness. Looked at from one side, you can call it empty; for example, if you remove all the furniture and all the junk from your house which people go on collecting…All are great collectors. If you remove the whole junk, the room, the house is empty of the junk, but in itself, it is for the first time full of itself. All that furniture and all those things were destroying its fullness.
The meditator is bound to come to the point when he has thrown all junk from the mind, and suddenly he sees that emptiness is there. And also there is a fullness of which logically there is no explanation – but it is not a logical process at all.
Your experience is tremendously meaningful. It shows that you have touched a deep point where opposites meet and mingle, when enemies become friends, when life and death are one; when emptiness and fullness are not two separate things, but only two separate names given by the mind.
Mind is so small, it cannot conceive such a vast phenomenon that life and death are one, that emptiness and fullness are one. It can conceive emptiness is emptiness and fullness is fullness. Those are the discriminations of the mind.
Meditation opens the doors of a vast world, existential not theoretical, where suddenly you are shocked for the first time that emptiness and fullness are one, life and death are one, that men and women are one. But it is not a question to be or not to be. Both are one: different names of the same reality.
So don’t start thinking about it as if it is a contradiction. That is the mind interfering into your meditation. You have to be very alert – mind is cunning. It tries in every way because it is very well trained by all the educational systems and by all the societies. The more a man’s mind is trained in being logical, the more he is accepted as a great intellectual. In fact, he has gone far away from existence with a very rare possibility of returning.
I make a difference between intellect and intelligence: intellect divides things into opposites; intelligence penetrates into opposites and creates bridges. Intellect makes walls; intelligence makes bridges. Meditation is the highest form of intelligence because it is the highest form of consciousness. You will come to such points more and more. This is just the beginning. Just say to the mind, “This is none of your business.”
Mind has to understand that you are no longer in its power and in its grip. Once the mind understands it – that you have moved into a totally different world of existence – not of mere thoughts which are soap bubbles – it starts interfering less and less. The day mind stops interfering, and even great contradictions like life and death are accepted totally as one without any doubt, you have arrived home.
This is a great experience on the path of meditation, but mind will try in every way to create doubt. Listen to existence and never to the mind, because the mind is a creation of the society. You have been trained by the society for years, so it has become very ingrained, but it has destroyed your purity, your clarity. Meditation is simply reclaiming your simplicity, your silence, your perceptivity – where all contradictions dissolve into each other, not as enemies but as friends.

I have heard…
A small child saw his father and mother making love – the window was just a little open. He could not believe that the father was torturing the mother. He rushed to his elder brother and he said, “What are you doing here? We have to do something, otherwise that brute, our father, he is going to kill our mother; he is sitting on her chest.”
The elder brother said, “Be quiet. They are not fighting. It is a kind of exercise.”
What else to say to the little brother…?
He said, “Exercise? You don’t understand the grave situation. I am going to my uncle.”
And the uncle said, “Come on. It is not exercise, it is just fooling around.”
He said, “It is very strange. Everybody is giving different answers and nobody is doing anything. And that poor woman, my mother is suffering under the weight of the heavyweight champion my father? Do something!”
The uncle said, “Don’t be worried; they are making love.”

Mind is a very small thing compared to the vast existence. It cannot understand that contradictions are in deep love with each other – not only in love, they are in fact one. This experience of oneness will give you such blissfulness, such peace, such tensionlessness that you have never experienced before. With these same eyes, you will start looking into the world with a totally different outlook.
Meditation simply changes your vision, your way of seeing, your way of understanding.
This whole existence is a love affair. Nobody is doing any exercise, and nobody is fighting. It is a tremendous balance between the opposites seen by the mind, but it doesn’t see the balance – that there is something more than the apparent oppositions.
When one hundred girls are born, there are always one hundred and fifteen boys born at the same time. It seems to be something of a non-mathematical thing, fifteen boys more, but existence knows more than you know. These fifteen boys will have disappeared by the time they are sexually mature. In fact, within the first two years, those fifteen boys will start disappearing, dying. Nature has to create those fifteen more, so that by the time of marriage, there is at least a similarity, an equality of numbers between men and women.
Nature has its own wisdom.
It is very strange…just at the beginning of this century, in poor countries like India, nine out of ten children would die before they were two years of age; only one would survive. But even at that time, nature was keeping a balance: more boys and less girls would be born. An equilibrium, a balance has to be maintained. With medical developments the situation has changed; just the opposite is happening today. Out of ten babies born, only one dies, nine live.
It is very mysterious how nature comes to know that the situation has changed, and you have to produce according to a new way. But the balance is kept; it has been kept since eternity. Perhaps they are both coming from the same source: two branches of one reality – but man has certainly disturbed the balance.
There are countries and religions which allow that a man can marry four women. Now, if a man marries four women, what about the three other men who will remain unnecessarily celibate? – forcibly. But it happened in countries where men were continuously warring with each other, killing each other. They would rape the women of the enemy but they would not kill them; they would kill the men. So naturally, there were few men and four times more women.
Out of such stupid situations, arbitrary moralities are created. Now those communities have spread all over the world. The situation is not the same but they insist that it is their religious right to marry four women. But if you marry four women, then you are certainly creating corruption in the society. Those three men will start falling in love with other people’s wives – they have to. For those three men, prostitutes will have to be created; otherwise, what is going to happen to their life energy? All kinds of perversions…but these perversions are man-made.
If they listen to the wisdom of nature, there is nothing perverted. Everything is very simple, very silently merging, melting with each other.
There is no conflict in existence.
I say unto you, there is no God and there is no Devil. The Devil was created by the people who created God because they could not think how God can exist without the polar opposite.
Everything exists with the polar opposite.
Even Friedrich Nietzsche missed the point when he said, “God is dead” – he forgot about the Devil. The Devil continues to live because nobody has declared his death. I declare that both were two sides of the same fiction. When God died there was no need for the Devil.
When there is no other world, a heaven, there is no need for any hell. These are man-made polarities. Seeing that existence always lives with polarities, opposites, contradictions, man feels a little hesitant to accept that there is only heaven…. Then what about the sinners?
But the reality is the saint and the sinner are not opposites; deep down they depend on each other.
If there are no sinners, all saints will disappear. If there are no saints, there will be no sinners. They are not contradictions; they are just part of a beautiful polarity and balance.

In a small school, the teacher asks – for almost one hour she has been teaching – how not to sin, because those who sin will be thrown into hellfire for eternity. And if by mistake you have committed something which is sin, then pray. God is compassionate. He will forgive you and you will enter paradise with all its pleasures. Then she asked the class….
A small boy raised his hand.
She asks, “What is the way to reach paradise?”
The little boy said, “Sin.”
She said, “My God, for one whole hour I have been insisting that if you sin you will fall into hell.”
He said, “I understand. But unless you sin, you will not be forgiven either. How will you enter paradise? God will ask what sins you have committed. He is compassionate, he will forgive, but first you have to commit.”

Sometimes children can see things in a very different perspective. The boy is right. God will be absolutely useless if nobody is sinning. What will he do with his compassion? – out of a job, unemployed…not even the possibility of a retirement pension…!
When we create fiction, we have to create the anti-fiction. Christians talk about the coming of the Antichrist. In the first place, Christ was an uneducated, poor fellow, a little whimsical: riding on his donkey, preaching to a few idiots – who are always available. And in his whole life, he could only find twelve followers. But Christians had to create the idea of Antichrist. Then only, Jesus becomes a real Christ, a real savior: he will save you from the Antichrist.
Two thousand years have passed. Nobody has encountered any Antichrist. Many have been condemned by Christianity as Antichrist, but just by your condemnation you are fulfilling your desire to make Christ a reality.
I was amazed to receive a letter from the president of the Nazi party who believes that Adolf Hitler is the reincarnation of an Old Testament prophet, Elijah. He wrote to me saying, “You have been speaking again and again against Adolf Hitler. Perhaps you don’t know that he is a very religious person; he is the reincarnation of the Old Testament prophet Elijah. Please stop speaking against him.”
I told my secretary to write to him and say, “I will continue whatever I want to do. Nobody can dictate to me but I can see that you are utterly stupid: Elijah in the Old Testament was a Jew, and a Jew and Adolf Hitler…Can you imagine how many Jews he killed? – six million. A great reincarnation of Elijah the Jewish prophet killing Jews.” Seeing the point, he has not replied to me that it’s true.
But you can find idiots who even think that Adolf Hitler is a religious man. And there is nothing in his life to make him religious. You have to go back to the rotten Old Testament to find a figure that nobody remembers, Elijah – and he becomes the incarnation. If he had been the incarnation of Elijah then he would have killed all the Germans and not the Jews.
And what was his reason for killing the Jews? – that the Jews are the cause of all misery and suffering in the world. A strange cause, because here almost half of you are Jews, and I don’t think any Jew is creating suffering or misery for anybody. I have found them the nicest people.
I am reminded…
A rabbi was on his morning walk and he came across Adolf Hitler. Adolf Hitler said to him, “Rabbi, do you agree with me or not?”
The rabbi said, “I agree absolutely with you. The world is miserable, in suffering because people are using bicycles. Just destroy all bicycles and you will see the whole world becoming a paradise.”

It is the same…it is arising again. Anando brought me news from Japan. In Japan there are not many Jews, but two very important books have appeared – and are being sold on a great scale – which say that the world is going towards destruction because of a Jewish conspiracy.
It is strange…. And man can be convinced by any stupid idea.

One old Jew was dying and his wife said to him, “Pray to God your last prayer.”
He said, “Yes, I am praying. I was praying silently, but now I will pray openly so that you can all hear: ‘God, you have chosen the Jews as your people. Now it is time you chose somebody else; we have suffered enough.’“

And it is true that Moses is in some way responsible for giving this idea to the Jews that they are the chosen people of God. It gave them an idea of superiority. That hurts everybody, particularly those who have similar kinds of ideas. Hindus think they are the chosen people of God. God gave the Hindus his first book, the Rig Veda – and Hitler felt very inferior: “If Jews are the chosen people of God…then who are the Germans?”
Somehow, some way had to be found – and Hitler found it. He had sent his people to India and to Tibet to find out some way so that he could declare. He found out that Jainism in India is the oldest religion in the whole world; its symbol is the swastika. That symbol was chosen by Adolf Hitler and he claimed that it was given to the Germans first, as an indication that they are the chosen people.
He started calling Germans “Aryans.” Hindus and Jainas had been calling themselves Aryans. Nobody had heard before that Germans were Aryans. But Aryans are the oldest race, perhaps Germans also are a branch of the Aryans. Becoming Aryans and having the symbol of the swastika, he declared his superiority over the Jews – and because he had the power, he killed six million Jews.
Only forty years have passed, and there are idiots who are writing books that there is an international Jewish conspiracy. Jews are not spread all over the world; they don’t have power – they are in trouble in Israel. But rather than looking at reality, people always find excuses: it is a Jewish conspiracy; Jews have to be completely eradicated from the world, then the world will be happy!
There is no logic in it. The same logic as bicycles…destroy all the bicycles and suddenly you will see the world becoming richer, stronger, healthier. Those books are bestsellers – and in Japan, where there are very few Jews. It is dangerous, and when I received the letter from the president – I had never thought that there still existed a Nazi party, that there are still people who believe in Adolf Hitler as a religious leader….
Six million is the number of the Jews he killed. The total number of people killed because of him in the Second World War was fifty-two million. These criminals…and then I inquired from my friends about the party and what is their program? Their program is that they are waiting for the reincarnation of Adolf Hitler.
Rather than collecting your energies and your intelligence to make you a beautiful and graceful being, people go on destroying their very energy which could have been a great transformation and enlightenment to them. So don’t for a single moment allow the mind to interfere with your meditation.
Meditation is very delicate – and in the beginning very fragile. Mind is almost ten million years old; it is very strong, very stubborn. You have to protect your meditation and you have to be alert that the mind does not go on planting seeds destructive to your meditation.
That’s the function of the communion of the seekers. Alone, perhaps you will find yourself very weak against the mind, but when there are so many people meditating and creating an ocean of meditative energy, you also feel the strength and you can put the mind aside. It may be ten million years old, it does not matter. It has no correspondence with reality.

Bernie Bernstein returns to his business in New York after a holiday in Miami where he enjoyed the company of a gorgeous blonde called Suzy.
Bernie has been back in his office for a few days, when Fagin Finkelstein the lawyer, pays him a visit.
“I am here,” begins Fagin, “on behalf of my client, Suzy Lamour.”
He then opens his briefcase and pulls out a stack of glossy photographs of Bernie and Suzy in all the various positions of their lovemaking.
“Well, Mr. Bernstein,” smiles young Fagin, “what do you think of that?”
Bernie looks from one photograph to the next in horror and then in amazement.
Eventually he reaches a decision.
“Okay,” he says, pointing at two of the photos, “I’ll take two of this and two of this.”

Mind finds some way, howsoever stupid, to get out of the reality. But the reality does not change; in fact, you should learn to get out of the mind and the reality changes tremendously. It changes because you can see it now as it is. It is not according to any theology and not according to any religion and not according to any philosophy.
Existence is so vast and philosophers are so small that their efforts are going to be found stupid. They may find some small fragments of reality and make out of those fragments great systems. But existence needs not a system created by your mind, but an experience by your very being.
The being is not very far away – just a little distance. Only one station on the way, from the mind to the heart and from the heart to the being – and you have arrived. It is not a long journey, and you don’t need any vehicle. You can simply slip inwards. The mind will try to persuade you not to do such a dangerous thing because “I am always here to help you; without me, you will be helpless.” Tell the mind: “Shut up! You have helped me enough and I don’t need your help any more. For the first time I want to experience helplessness.”
You have arrived at the heart which is still the same as it was when you were born, innocent. It still wonders, it still feels the mysterious, it still loves. It is still a music of the depths of your being. But don’t get stuck there. You can be a poet, a painter, a dancer which is far more beautiful than being a mathematician or a physicist. Don’t get stuck there, just one step more: enjoy an overnight stay, drink the beauty of the heart, thank the heart and enter into your being. And the heart never prevents, but helps, shows you the way.
And once you are at your being, the whole universe of reality opens up. You cannot find a single contradiction, you cannot find anything against anything else. Everything is supportive to each other; the whole existence is a cosmic, organic whole.
And the moment you realize, “I am also one with this tremendous unity,” the ecstasy that arises remains with you for eternity. But a little effort is needed to get out of the mind, because you are also convinced that your mind is a great help, is a great defense. It is nothing but an imprisonment – and a very small prison.
You are almost like a bird in a cage. Certainly the cage protects, but it has taken away your whole sky. It protects – but it has destroyed your joy and your dance in the sky, in the sun, to far away…. Against the whole sky, this defense of a small cage – it may be of gold – but it cuts your wings, it kills you. You are not the same bird flying in the sky in freedom as encaged in a golden cage, just a showpiece.
The moment your freedom dies, you have died too. The moment your wings are cut, you are only nominally alive.

Osho,
Is there some spiritual passion of the heart that needs to drop away as has the driving force of body passions?
There is essentially such longing to reach my fellow travelers. When it does not happen – the nearer the friend is to my heart, the more I fall off center into an anguish that feels like something dying in my hands or something left unborn.
Seeing paradise lost, the dream of growing and soaring up together with another – is that my soul's agony to go astray?
All passion is of the body – there is no passion of the heart. Yes, there is compassion of the heart and there is a tremendous difference between the two.
Passion is lust and ugly; compassion is love, beautiful, spiritual. But people go on living in fallacies, they go on thinking their body lust is their love. Mind knows nothing of love, because it does not appear in the curriculum of any university. It is not part of mathematics or physics or chemistry or geography.
Love simply does not exist for the mind.
Love exists in the heart.
But you never reach to the heart, you remain in the body, dominated by the mind. The body has only lust; it is nothing spiritual, it is very earthly. It is simply a biological strategy to continue the species, to create children.
The people of the head need to descend from the mind into the heart because all our social systems and educational programs are based on a very cunning device: they avoid the heart. Don’t bring the heart because there is no place in any subject, there is no department in any university where love is being taught. On the contrary, every effort is made so that your whole energy moves into the head and remains closed there. It never blossoms like a flower.
Everybody has a heart, and certainly a right education will be divided into three parts: Education for the body – because the body has a mystery of its own. Education for the mind – because the mind has its own great strength as far as inquiry about objects is concerned. And education for the heart, for love – which is completely denied.
If you ask a physician or a doctor where the heart is, he will say, “There is no heart, there is only a pumping station for blood, for purifying blood; it has nothing to do with love and music and poetry.”
And the physicians are not deceiving you, they are themselves deceived. The heart which the mystics have been talking about is not the pumping station. The heart is part of the body, but just behind the pumping station…an invisible force. All forces are invisible. Nobody has seen electricity. Have you seen electricity? Perhaps you will think you have seen it. You have seen only the expression of electricity.

It happened…
The man who worked the most on the subject of electricity was Thomas Alva Edison. He had gone for a holiday to a small village on the sea coast. They had a small school there, and just by coincidence he saw something was happening and inquired. They said, “The students have made things. It is their annual festival. And people are coming and going to see the things that the students have made.”
So having no other work, he walked into the school. The school children had made an electric train, a small train: push the button and the train makes a circuit.
Edison just jokingly asked the student who was showing it, “What is the force that makes the train move?”
The boy said, “Electricity.”
Edison said, “Have you seen electricity?”
He said, “I have not seen it, but perhaps my teacher – he is a graduate of science – he may have seen it.”
So he called his teacher. The teacher said, “Seen electricity? I have not seen electricity. I have seen only the effects of electricity: it can become light, it can drive engines…. It can do many mechanical things, but what is it? Perhaps our principal who is a postgraduate in science may have seen it.”
The principal was called. And the principal said, “Forgive me, nobody has ever asked. Energies cannot be seen. You can see only their effects.”
Edison laughed. He said, “Don’t be worried. Don’t look so worried. My name is Thomas Alva Edison.”
They said, “You are Edison? You have created so many electrical devices and you are asking this question?”
He said, “I am asking because I myself have not seen what electricity is.”

Love is not part of your body system. Love is a hidden source in the body of pure energy which can make anybody rejoice, can quench the thirst. And unless your energy called the heart, blossoms, you are not perfectly alive, you are just a robot.
Mind is a computer. Just the other day I received the news that for fifteen years in Japan they have been keeping the head of a monkey without the body, wired with all kinds of nourishment that the brain needs. And because they have been successful, now they are going to try on human beings. Just your head is enough; then mechanical lungs and mechanical wiring, blood that is needed for your brain – reaching through the wires, being purified by the mechanical lungs and you will be perfectly alive.
And the strangest thing is that you will feel love, you will feel emotions, you will be angry if somebody insults you. You will talk, you will answer questions which have been taught to you before this calamity, this scientific calamity happened to you.
This whole body has to be understood as a robot. Behind it is another body referred to in the esoteric schools as the astral body. The heart is part of the astral body. That’s why love is such a nourishment. That’s why love makes you so alive. That’s why love gives your legs a dance – and if you allow it to fill your robot, for the first time you will feel what life is. And behind the astral body is your real being, your immortal body.
You are asking if you have some spiritual passion of the heart that needs to drop away….
Don’t jump ahead of yourself.
All that you have to do is to drop out of your mind – and that does not mean that you have to cut your head off. That simply means the energy that you are continuously giving to the mind, you need to change its route and divert it towards the astral, the heart.
The heart has no passion, but it has tremendous compassion. I am using the word compassion because love has been contaminated. People have used the word love almost synonymously with lust. Just say to someone, “I love you,” and there will be no problem. But if you say, “I lust for you,” there is going to be trouble. Then be prepared for the police station – “This man is dangerous.”
In fact, when you say, “I love you,” that’s what you are saying. But a little homework is needed before you reach the bedroom, before lust can be accepted – it must not be announced! The very word seems to be somehow animalistic. Animals have lust – and you are human beings. But the reality is that all the introductions, and the parties, and meeting on the beach, and the gardens, and the presents…ultimately lead you to the animal.
Without all this introduction, if you are a very direct man, you will go to jail – “Why bother about this ice cream? Just let us do the thing.” No, that is not human. Humanity has to be a little sophisticated: first hold the hand, first talk about beautiful things, poetry and music…All the time you are thinking of something else, but you have to create this camouflage. To be straightforward would mean going into jail.
The heart has been completely ignored; society does not need it. It is the need of the individual and society does not need even individuals, it needs only personalities. It needs bogus people, obedient, always ready to follow the order, always ready to be enslaved.
A man of heart is a man in revolt – revolt against anything that is ugly, revolt against anything that is simply mechanical. Society does not want individuals because they will create trouble. So from very childhood, it starts destroying individuality, and the best way to destroy the individuality is to let them pass around the heart, not through the heart. All our educational systems are managed in such a way so that you can move without ever being aware that you have a heart.
I am using the word compassion because love has become mechanical. Everybody is “loving” – it has lost its depth.

A woman said to her husband when the hero in the movie kissed the heroine very lovingly, very romantically…She said to the husband, “Look, you never do that to me.”
The man said, “That is only a film, it is not reality. And moreover, who knows whether that man is married to somebody else or that woman is married to somebody else. About these actors nobody is certain – and anyway, it is all acting. Do you want me to act?”
The woman said, “I know the woman personally. She is married to the hero in actual life.”
The man said, “My God, then the hero is really an actor. To be so loving and so romantic to your own wife…I cannot do it. It is too difficult…”

The moment you remember that it is your own wife and what are you doing…it looks as if you are doing something nasty.
The movies, the films, television, the poets and literature have all reduced and contaminated the word love – polluted it and destroyed its beauty. That’s why I am saying the heart has compassion. Compassion is the purest love which gives and asks nothing in return. You don’t have to renounce it. You have to go deeper into it. You have to become it. Because by becoming it, you will come closer to your being.

Mendel Kravitz opens a new business and wants an international staff. So he hires Klaus, a German, Paddy, the Irishman, and Wu, a Japanese.
“Klaus,” says Mendel, “I’m putting you in charge of production. I want you to make things efficient around here. And Paddy, you will be in charge of personnel. Make sure the morale stays good. And Wu,” he says to the Japanese, “I am putting you in charge of supplies.”
A couple of weeks later, Mendel is touring the business and finds Klaus and Paddy together.
“Everything is going smoothly?”
“Ja!” says Klaus. “Production is up double.”
“Everyone’s getting on great,” says Paddy. “People are all liking each other.”
“How is Wu doing in supplies?” asks Mendel.
But neither of them have seen Wu since the first day. Mendel starts to get worried and looks all through the factory.
As he is walking between some large stacks of boxes, suddenly Wu leaps out and shouts, “Suplise!”

It has been a good morning…. You listened silently to things which are very essential to your spiritual growth, and you laughed heartily. More than that is not needed – a good laughter and a deep silence together are enough to transform you.
You are on the right path, unless you get stuck somewhere. The path is simple and easy and all that it needs is a let-go – either in silence or in laughter, either in music or in dance.
Remember the most spiritual words in existence are let-go.

============================================================

Osho,
Many of your sannyasins, some of whom have been with you for many years, have left you to follow the teachings of channels or psychic clairvoyants.
I have visited some of these people, partly out of curiosity and partly through the recommendation of friends, and have found nothing that comes even close to the love and benediction in being with you.
Osho, what is the attraction to these dead masters or so-called entities when you are here, a living enlightened master?
The question you have raised has many layers and a simple answer won’t be justified. But I would like to go into it as deeply as possible, because it is something of much concern to each of you.
I am not in any way a bondage. I do not create a program in you, a belief system. I don’t ask you to surrender; in fact, I don’t ask anything from you. All I want is to help you to be yourself. This is one of the reasons a few are bound to leave me, because they are in search of someone who can take their responsibility. But they are not aware that the moment you lose your responsibility you also lose your freedom. The moment you surrender to anyone, dead or alive, you destroy yourself – you commit a suicide as far as your individuality is concerned.
But there are people who will feel much relief, relief in being free of responsibilities. Somebody has taken the burden on himself; he is your savior. Now it is easier for you just to believe in him. There is nothing easier in the world than belief, because you don’t have to do anything at all.
With me there is no possibility of any belief. I will destroy all your beliefs so that you can be a freedom, a bird on the wing in the open sky. But very few are the people who are in search of freedom. Those who are not in search of freedom are bound to leave me; it is natural. And I don’t prevent anyone, because even to interfere is against my approach and my respect for individual dignity.
Secondly, there are many who are not interested in understanding existence, their own being, but are very much interested like small children in puzzles, esoteric ideologies, occult phenomena. Just because something is irrational, illogical does not mean that it is truth, does not mean that it is going to give you your innermost being and its treasure. There are thousands of esoteric schools, theologies, theosophies and they are very interesting in a way – but they are interesting because you are retarded! They look very magical and there are people who exploit your retardedness.

The founder of the Theosophical movement, Madame Blavatsky, was found guilty of strange kinds of things; you cannot call them crimes, you can simply call them fraud. She had a servant named Damodar. While she was traveling by train she would be in first class and Damodar would be in third class. Suddenly Damodar would fall flat on the floor of the compartment, unconscious, foaming.
Naturally, the train was stopped, people gathered and then Madame Blavatsky would come and do some abracadabra. Damodar would immediately open his eyes and everybody would see “what a tremendously spiritual powerful woman…” And nobody knew that he was her servant and that was his only job. Finally in a court case Damodar was forced to admit that he had played a part in many kinds of frauds.
Beautiful letters still exist, that were written by Blavatsky herself. She made a special ceiling…Her followers would sit in Adyar, Madras, with closed eyes in the dark night – no light because divine masters don’t want to be seen. Damodar was hiding and would slip a letter from the ceiling. A light would be brought in…the letter was coming from Master K.H.
Those are beautiful letters; they are collected and published. There was no need…the letters themselves are significant, but this way they became very mystical.
Now the followers were not just reading letters written by human hands, but by a great master who is the guide of all those who are in search of the ultimate truth.
I have been in the place in Adyar from where those letters have been dropped, and strange is the gullibility of human beings…. The writing is clearly human, the paper is material, the ink is material, and looked at closely, anybody could have figured that it is the writing of Blavatsky herself and nobody else. But when you want to believe you become blind. When you want to believe you don’t listen to any rationality, your own reason…it feels good to believe.
Blavatsky created one of the greatest esoteric schools in the world, the Theosophical movement. And the reasons people believed in that movement were all neither rational nor mystical, nor based on spiritual experience. In a certain way they were cunning, fraudulent, but very sufficing, very satisfying, very gratifying.

Just today one of my secretaries, Anando, informed me that a nice French gentleman is here. Nothing is wrong with the person, he just believes that he can heal spiritually – and there are thousands of “spiritual healers” in the world. If they are really true there should be no need of any hospitals. Naturally, because he does not understand much English – he is French – all the French sannyasins immediately gathered around him and he talked about me.
These are the ways people are tricked. First he said, “Your master has the biggest spiritual aura that I have seen in my lifetime.” Naturally you feel very gratified: your master has the biggest aura. He has to have, because he is your master, he is no ordinary master!
And he must have heard – it is all over the world in every newspaper, in every language – that I have been poisoned in America, and the poison has affected my body badly. So he said, “Your master’s aura is the biggest, but on his left hand, just on the top of the left hand there is a black hole.”
Now there he missed! The problem is with my right hand, not with my left hand! And the poison cannot create black holes. But just this mistake reveals what he was trying to do….
Everybody knows that I walk like a drunkard. Now nothing can be done about it; I have been walking that way my whole life. I am a man who is utterly drunk.
So he said, “His aura is great, but the energy of the aura is not flowing into his legs. I can heal him and I have come here to heal him.”
Naturally my people would think that this is good if somebody has come from France, from far away to heal me. But I receive dozens of letters from this corner or that corner of the world that their desire is to heal me.
Why this desire…? They don’t want to learn something here; they don’t want to heal themselves here. The simple arithmetic is that if I allow anybody to heal me then all of you will naturally think that the greatest healer has come. These people are not necessarily cunning, are not necessarily deceptive, they may authentically believe that they are capable of healing.
Just a few days ago Doctor Shyam Singha came from London. He was once my disciple, but because he was doing things which are absolutely against humanity, sincerity, truth – he was exploiting people in my name – I had to expel him from the sannyas movement. He was moving around the world, telling sannyasins that he can do this, he can do that and all that he can do is to manage to take as much money from people as possible. He was exploiting on every excuse in the name of healing, in the name of opening your chakras, in the name of raising your kundalini, in the name of cleansing your past life and its evil effects…!
When so many people reported that he was exploiting simple people I had to debar him and announce in the papers that he does not belong to the sannyas movement. And I had to inform him that he cannot enter into the campus. He has been here two times, but was turned away from the gate; he was not allowed in. He must have seen this as a great opportunity – that I have been poisoned.
Nobody knows who has made him a doctor! He does not have any qualifications for it – but there are many doctors in the world and they go on healing people, homeopathically, naturopathically, spiritually…Many are the names but the business is the same.
So he wrote a letter asking if he can come and heal me; if I would simply send my signature on my letterhead so that nobody prevents him at the gate and he is allowed in the campus.

I am not sick, and I don’t need any healing. The poison was given to me two years ago. Because it has not been able to kill me, the man who was responsible for prosecuting me has been fired from his job as Attorney General of Oregon in America. He has been fired because he could neither manage thirty to forty years of jail punishment for me, nor a good dose of poison to kill me, nor to put a bomb in my room and destroy me.
One of my attorneys was here just a few days ago. He said, “That poor government attorney tried hard; he did his best.” But I have not committed any crime – all is fiction. He had a list of thirty-four crimes that I was supposed to have committed. It would have needed at least one thousand years of jail.
“That long,” I said, “I would not be able to live! You should consider the fact: one thousand years of jail? It is hilarious; just think of something practical. The whole list is an absolute lie.”
They could not give me the poison in such a dose that I would have died in the jail. It became clear from the statement of the United States Attorney, Charles Turner, that they did not want to make me a martyr. They were afraid that if I were to die then again another Christianity will be born; then again another religion, another fanatic fundamentalist group of people will gather in sympathy with me.
The court ordered that I leave the court, that I go to the airport immediately. My airplane was waiting; I had to leave immediately. Perhaps they were afraid that if I died before leaving then the sympathy of the whole world would be with me, and against Ronald Reagan and his company. Out of fear they could not give the whole dose; otherwise one dies within twelve hours.
That’s what the experts from England have informed me, who have presumed that the poison given to me was thallium. It kills within twelve hours, but if given in small doses it takes time. It may kill within six months, but now even that time has passed.
The poison is out of my system.
Existence cannot be so cruel! And there is no black hole on the left hand…. So please, next time when you talk, remember: my right hand has some pain, but that too is not something that needs spiritual healing. It is a physical thing and it needs physical healing; no spiritual healing is needed. And as far as the spirit is concerned, it is never sick; it is intrinsically healthy and whole. It is the body which is bound to become sick and some day old and some day it dies.
But there have been spiritualists of all kinds who don’t understand that there is an immense difference between spirituality and physical existence.

I have heard about a young man whose father was a member of a Christian Science group.
In England there has been a very influential group and in America also: Christian Science. The young man was asked, “What is the problem, your father has not been seen for three weeks?” They were meeting every Sunday.
The young man said, “It is difficult; he is very sick.”
The old man said, “Nonsense, sickness is only a belief, imagination! And he is an old member of our group. We don’t believe in sickness, just remind him, ‘You are not sick!’“
He said, “I will remind him.”
After two weeks they met again. The old man said, “What happened, he has not come?”
The young man said, “What can I do? Now he believes he is dead.”

The body has to become sick, the body has to become dead also. One should think of experiencing the spiritual, the eternal, the immortal. One should not waste time on such stupid ideologies, which have been prevalent all over the world.
There are people, simple people, who immediately think that miracles can happen. And the greatest problem is that if you are very trusting something can happen. Seventy percent of sicknesses are illusory; they are only because you believe you are sick. That’s why seventy percent of people are helped by any kind of medical approach other than allopathy – even simple sugar pills work, the scientific name of which is homeopathy.

I used to live next to a Bengali fellow….
He was a great homeopath, but he himself used to go to the hospital when he was sick.
I asked him, “What is the matter? You are such a great homeopath, you have treated so many people.” And it is true, he had treated…
He said, “I have treated, but I cannot treat myself; I know they are sugar pills. Somebody who does not know and believes in me, may be helped.”
And it has been found that seventy percent of people are helped by any kind of medical approach, except a very few stubborn people who are determined not to be healed whatever happens. They torture doctors, they torture allopaths, they torture homeopaths, they torture spiritual healers, they torture everybody. They are very inventive; they go on finding new diseases, even diseases for which the doctors don’t know the name.
Because of this homeopath doctor – I used to sit in his dispensary…A woman used to come almost every day, and the moment the woman would come, he would say, “My God, this woman is not going to die. She has no disease, she is perfectly healthy, but she goes on reading medical periodicals and finds out new diseases. Even I don’t know,” he said. “When she tells me that this kind of disease is happening to her, then I know. But it makes no difference, because I have only one medicine whatever the disease.”

There was a doctor who was tired of a young man, because every day he was standing there. He was poor, he could not pay, and the doctor had tried in every way to convince him, “You are perfectly healthy.”
But every day something new. One day it is stomachache, one day it is a headache…. He told me, “What should I do? It seems cruel because he is poor, an orphan, uneducated, unemployed…”
I said, “Do one thing: send him to me and just tell him, ‘He is a very difficult person; he knows, but he does not want to waste his time, so he is very secretive – but he has the power…if he touches water, the water can heal anything – but he will not touch it. But you remember, remain insistent. Sit in front of his door.’“
He came nearabout nine o’clock in the evening and he said, “I am suffering badly from stomachache.”
I said, “I am not a doctor and if you are suffering, suffer. Why should you bother me? When I have stomachache have I ever gone to you and tortured you?”
He said, “No, you have never come.”
I said, “That makes it simple; just go home.”
He said, “It is strange, I have been told by Doctor Barat, the famous doctor, that you have a power, a spiritual power. If you can give me a glass of water and touch the water I will be healed.”
I said, “I cannot do that.”
He said, “Why can’t you do that? It is not much I am asking. I can bring my own water, I can bring my own glass; you simply touch…!”
I said, “I cannot touch at all! Why should I lose my spiritual power?”
He said, “Now, you have accepted that you have spiritual power.”
He ran home and brought a big bottle full of water.
I said, “I am not going to do it because a stomachache is not something immortal, it will disappear sometime. It will teach you patience, suffering, acceptability and it will give you great qualities. I cannot disturb your life.”
He said, “You seem to be a very hard person. You cannot just touch my bottle?”
I said, “I cannot touch it.”
Twelve o’clock in the night…I used to live with my aunt; she was listening from her room. Finally, she came out and said, “You are also almost insane! If he wants to be touched, just touch the water and get rid of him. Wasting time for three hours. I have been listening – there is a limit!”
I said, “Nobody can convince me, you simply go and sleep!”
She said, “I cannot sleep because this man is sitting there.”
And the man said, “This is a good opportunity.” He touched the feet of my aunt and said, “Just help me, he seems to have no heart at all…three hours and I am suffering so much from stomachache.”
I said, “Listen, I can touch, but you have to promise me not to tell anybody, because I don’t want a queue the whole day, I have to do something else too.”
He said, “I promise, absolutely promise: in the name of God I will never tell anybody.”
I touched his bottle. He immediately drank the whole bottle and he said, “My God, I have never felt so high, not only is the stomach completely cured, other small diseases, they are gone and I feel so much power.”
I said, “Remember the promise.”
He said, “Just one thing, my mother is very sick.”
I said, “You have started.”
He said, “No, I will not tell anybody, I will just fill the same bottle.”
I said, “That you can do, but don’t bring anybody here and don’t bring your bottle again! Once I have touched, that’s all!”
And you will be surprised to know that he became a healer instead of being a crackpot hypochondriac. He would fill the same bottle with new water. But because I had touched the bottle, even though the water went on changing, he was curing everybody. People started coming to his home from faraway villages, and he enjoyed it very much. He came to thank me.
I said, “You should not come here.”
He said, “No, I have not come to ask anything, but just to tell you that the bottle is working.”
I said, “You cure as many people as possible.”
After many years I passed from that village again. By that time he had become a very famous healer.
Doctor Barat, a very famous doctor, said to me, “What have you done? Because I used to have migraine once in a while and I had to ask that stupid boy, ‘Will you give me some water from your bottle?’ And it is a miracle – the migraine disappeared.”
I said, “It is spiritual healing, but never tell anybody about it.”
He said, “But I had never thought that you really have that power. I was just joking and just wanted to get rid of that fellow. And now whenever I have any trouble, instead of my own medicines, I send my car to find that boy. He comes in the car with the bottle – just a cup of water and it works!”
I said, “It has to work…spiritual power.”

The question is if you trust, then anything…
Only thirty percent of diseases cannot be cured by your trust. They are really diseases; they need right diagnosis and right treatment.
I don’t want any kind of stupidity here. I have heard of a few people who have already started feeling great well-being, experiencing “spaces that they have never known.” My librarian, Kavisho – because she is French she has almost become the leader of other sick people.
I warn you: just forget all about this “great space”; don’t corrupt my simple people. And you don’t think that you are a cunning person; you believe that you have spiritual powers, but you don’t even know what meditation is. You have not encountered your own being. So you are simply wasting your time in spiritually curing people.
First find yourself.
That’s exactly what Socrates said, “Healer, first heal thyself.”
First know thyself.
Unless you know yourself all is fiction – your sickness, your health, both are meaningless because the reality is the grave. Perhaps somebody will die from disease and somebody will die with spiritual healing. It makes no difference. The only difference that makes a difference is that when death comes, in your innermost being you are absolutely alert and aware of your immortality. That is the only real healing: real being.
These are just childish games, and because people want something great to happen to them, anybody can convince them: “Look, great things have started happening.”
Great things happen, but not through anybody else.
You have to follow the path absolutely alone.
The people who may have come and left must have found that I am not a man in any way to nourish your stupidity. I am not the man to help you believe in great things: in God…
I am not the man to make you believe that your heaven is certain. On the contrary, I start destroying your beliefs and people become afraid and escape. Those who have left will repent, because they will have fallen into somebody’s hands who will satisfy and gratify whatever the desire, but that is all imagination.
An authentic experience that makes you free from mind and from body – I am interested only in that experience, not in anything else; anything else does not matter.

Police Officer O’Leary is cruising around in his patrol car one night. He is on the lookout for trouble. He sees two little old ladies in the front seat of a Chevrolet convertible, parked in a used car lot. The car lot is closed so O’Leary drives up alongside the Chevy and asks, “Are you two ladies trying to steal this car?”
“Certainly not,” says one of the ladies, “we purchased the car this afternoon.”
“Well,” says the cop, “why don’t you start it up and drive out of here?”
“We don’t drive,” replies the other little old lady. “And besides, we are waiting. We were told that if we bought a car here we would get screwed.”

People are just waiting in used car lots.
This is not that kind of place…!

Arriving home from school one day Herschel Goldberg asked his father, Hymie, if he can take their dog Petunia for a walk.
“No,” says Hymie, “you can’t because she is in heat.”
“What? What does ‘in heat’ mean?” asks Herschel.
“Don’t be worried about what it is,” replies Hymie. “Anyway I have just thought of a way to fix the situation.”
So Hymie goes into the garage and gets a rag, pours some gasoline over it and then wipes Petunia’s tail with it.
“Okay,” says Hymie, “now you can take her for a walk.”
Herschel is delighted and disappears down the street. But an hour later he returns without Petunia.
“What happened?” asks Hymie. “Where is Petunia?”
“Well,” replies Herschel, “everything was fine for a while. She was playing with me and my friend Irving when all of a sudden she ran out of gas. So now Irving’s dog is pushing her home.”

============================================================

Osho,
I am leaving the ashram soon to go back to a small Eskimo community, where I currently work and live. I have this longing inside to share with the Inuits – Eskimos call themselves “Inuits” – the glimpses I have of your vision. My mind says, “Who am I to pretend that I can be of any help to them?” I am afraid of falling into the same trap the Christian missionaries have fallen into with them.
Osho, is this just another mind trip to be aware of and let go?
It is one of the crimes against humanity to be a missionary. A missionary is a hypocrite. I don’t want you to be a missionary; I want you to be a mission – and there is a great difference between the two.
The missionary is simply trying to convert the mind of the other person into a certain doctrine, religion. But a man who is simply sharing his heart and his being with no desire to convert is not a missionary, he is a mission. He is a living flame which can put the whole community in which you live afire. And particularly simple people like the Eskimos don’t need to be converted, they need to be loved. They need more light to be brought into their lives, more understanding. And strangely, when you go to the simple people like Eskimos, you are not only sharing yourself, you are also learning much from them – much that humanity has forgotten.
The ancient people who are still ancient, who have not entered the contemporary world, have much to give you. But the missionary is not there to learn anything, only to teach. Learning is insulting to him; he is a man of knowledge. He knows more than the Eskimos – but there are dimensions which the poor and simple and the primitive people know, of which you have become completely unaware. There are communities in the world still….
One community deep in the Himalayan part of Burma has never known any war in its whole history. It is impossible for them to fight, but they are primitive; they are not civilized people. If Sigmund Freud had gone to that small community he would have been shocked to know that nobody dreams. Because nobody is repressed, there is nothing to dream.
First you have to repress things which are important and natural; you have to be against the natural and the instinctive, then only can you create dreams. That which has not been lived in your waking hours you will have to live in your sleeping time. But if you are living totally, without repressing anything, then certainly you will not have any dreams. Your sleep will be a tremendous silence.
Missionaries have reached there too. They could not believe that those people don’t dream: “Perhaps they are lying or perhaps their dreams are so deep that they forget completely when they wake up in the morning.” But deep research has shown – and there are very simple methods to know whether a person is dreaming or not – that those people have not dreamed.
Once in a while somebody has dreamed. They have a strange ritual. When somebody dreams he goes to his elders and tells them his dream. Sigmund Freud and Adler and Jung should forget that they are the founders of psychoanalysis. These people have practiced psychoanalysis for thousands of years not knowing that it is psychoanalysis – and it is not done by one person, but by all the elders of the commune.
The person relates his dream – the elders discuss the meaning of the dream. They are simple people; their dreams are simple. If somebody has dreamed that he has beaten a young man of the community in his dream, the elders decide, “You should go to the young man with sweets and flowers to ask his forgiveness, because you have beaten him in the dream.”
You will laugh at the whole thing, because what happened in the dream has nothing to do with the young man. But those people are right. They may look illogical, but they are certainly right: you beat somebody in your dream only because you are carrying some unexpressed anger. And whether that anger becomes action in reality or in dream does not matter; for your anger you have to ask forgiveness.
And for thousands of years they have been doing this kind of psychoanalysis and it has helped the commune tremendously. When you go to someone to ask for forgiveness with flowers, with sweets – they are poor people – and the man says, “There is no need, because it was only a dream. You have not beaten me…”
But the other man will say, “It does not matter whether I have beaten you or not, but the desire to beat you must have been in me and it is enough for me to come to you for forgiveness.”
Naturally these people have never fought. Our world needs continuous war because people are so full of anger and rage – and they cannot find any way to express it.
It has been observed that in wartime people look very happy…strange. People are being killed, thousands of people are being massacred, but there is certainly a very alive breeze. People look less dusty, less dead. If it were possible, even from their graves they would get up and ask for the morning newspaper – so much excitement…! Otherwise, life becomes dull.
Those people in Burma have lived without fighting, but that does not mean there is no excitement. There is excitement of a totally different quality: they dance, they love; their dances are beautiful. In full moon nights the whole commune gathers together and dances almost the whole night. Their songs have become more and more refined by each generation. Their music has become more and more spiritual. There is excitement but that excitement is of love, of poetry, of sculpture, of dance, of music; it is not of war.
Certainly the people who feel excitement in war are not civilized. These people may be uneducated and they may not know the geography of the world and the history of the world, but in every sense they are far more civilized than the so-called civilized people.
When you go to the Eskimos – I don’t know what kind of work you are doing there – I hope that you are not doing some kind of missionary work, because that is a crime. Those people are simple and they are living their life beautifully. Don’t unnecessarily drag them into Christianity, into the Catholic church…. Don’t force things on them: celibacy and life-negative attitudes; they will destroy them.
Just today there was a news item from America. A survey has been made by psychoanalysts, and it has been found that two-thirds of patients like to talk to computers about their problems, their dreams. Only one-third of the people want to talk to human beings – the machine is preferred to man. It was shocking, but it reveals a truth, that it is very difficult to find a man who is non-judgmental. The machine is at least non-judgmental. Whatsoever you say it will listen, it will record; it will not condemn you even by its gesture. But to talk to a man about anything, it is impossible not to come across his prejudices.
Everybody has a judgment, and when people have judgments they lose their innocence. Everybody, in the name of education and civilization has lost his childhood. Those Eskimos are still living in man’s past ages, in mankind’s childhood. If you can learn something from their innocence, learn. And if you can share something from your meditation and from your love, share.
Don’t take your Bibles to them; take your guitars. Don’t take your principles and theologies; take your dances. And don’t only be a teacher, but also be a learner. Don’t think yourself superior to those poor primitive people.
If you can do this much – not to feel superior, then you can only learn something from them. And there is so much to learn from every direction if you are available – particularly from very primitive people because they are still uncorrupted by the priests, by the politicians. They are as simple as animals, as birds.
You are going into a beautiful situation, but remember not to become a missionary.
Share me but don’t convert.
Transpire but don’t convert.
Let them become acquainted with the laughter that is happening here, with the silence, with the meditation. But remember that it is not a religion and we are not here to destroy somebody’s dignity and to make him part of a cult. You will have to be very aware, because old habits die hard.
Our education, our society, our civilization…everything has penetrated deep in our minds knowingly or unknowingly. Whenever you come across somebody innocent, childlike, you immediately jump and try to convert him in the name of giving him maturity – and there are thousands of beautiful names. But in fact what you are trying to do is destroy the person, his individuality, and impose your own personality on him. It is an ego trip. So unless you are alert and aware of your own mind, it is very difficult not to be a missionary.

Ronald Reagan is visiting India and is met at the airport by Rajiv Gandhi. As they are driving away in Rajiv’s limousine, Reagan notices a lot of people shitting by the side of the road. He is disgusted and asks Rajiv if this is common practice in India. Rajiv is very embarrassed and replies that he is trying to educate the people to use a proper toilet, but it will take time for the program to be one hundred percent effective.
On a return visit, Reagan and Gandhi are driving through Washington to the White House when Rajiv notices a man shitting in the street. He points this out with some satisfaction to Reagan. The president is furious and orders his secret service agents to arrest the man. A few minutes later the agent returns.
“Well,” snaps Ronald Reagan, “did you arrest him?”
“No, sir,” replies the agent, “we could not.”
“Why the hell not?” bellows Reagan.
“Well,” says the agent, “it was the Indian ambassador.”

Osho,
Is the master coming to the disciple or is it the other way around? I would like to be more open to you, to open my heart to you more, to feel you more, but no effort from my side seems to work out. So I console myself that it's you who will enter me somewhere, suddenly. Is this an illusion?
It is always the master who comes, but it is not necessarily so that he will find the disciple’s heart open. Most often it is closed. So your question is really not a question but two sides of the same coin.
The master comes but the disciple has to be ready to receive, the disciple has to be open. If you are hoping that whether you are open or not the master will come suddenly, somehow, you are hoping in vain. Even if he comes he will have to return. You will not give way; you will shut your door and lock it from inside.
People are very much afraid of opening their hearts. The fear has reasons rooted in our upbringing, because whenever we have opened our hearts, we have been punished or we have been exploited or we have been deceived. Naturally, we have learned to be on the defensive, to keep the heart closed so nobody can deceive us, nobody can come close to us. It is a defense measure. And in a society where everybody is competitive, it is natural to defend yourself, otherwise you will be exploited. Somebody is going to step on you and go beyond you, use you, misuse you in all possible ways.

There is a place in India – one of the biggest junctions. I was waiting in my compartment: the train would leave in one hour; it was waiting for some other trains to come….
A man, a beggar, came to me. Seeing me alone he said, “My father has died. I need some help.” I gave him one rupee and I told him, “If somebody else dies, you can come back. At least for one hour I am here.”
He looked at me very much surprised, but he could not resist either. After ten minutes he came: “You were right. My mother died.”
I said, “I knew. I knew somebody else would die. In these sixty minutes, almost your whole family is going to die!”
He said, “Why are you saying it like that?”
I said, “I had nothing to do…What is going to happen is going to happen; I am going to lose at least ten rupees” – I gave him another rupee.
He looked again and again at me thinking, “What kind of man is this…?”
I said, “Listen. Rather than coming again and again, you take all these ten rupees. Let them all be dead!”
He said, “It is not right to say that.”
I said, “But you will have to come.”
He said, “That’s true. I cannot resist. But you are a strange man. My whole life I have been a beggar. Not my whole life, but as long as I remember, for generations I have been a beggar. My father was a beggar, my grandfather was a great beggar – it is just hereditary – but we have never met such a man; you are unbelievable!
“In the first place, people don’t give anything. They simply say, ‘Go away! Ask somebody else. We have nothing to do with your father. If he has died, he has died. Why should we be bothered?’ And you are killing my whole family, and you are giving me the rupee in advance!”
I said, “You go and look at your family. If somebody is still alive, come back, because all are going to die. Sometimes a few people die – one time, two times, three times…People are unbelievable; for example, by the time you are back here your father may have become alive again.”
He said, “Are you mad? My father alive? He is dead.”
I said, “He will become alive. All will become alive. You just go home.”
He said, “If you say, I will go and see.”
I said, “You see and come back, because they will die any moment – if not today then tomorrow – and I will not be here.”
After a few minutes he came with those ten rupees and he said, “You take these back.”
I said, “Why? Have they all become alive?”
He said, “Don’t humiliate me! They have always been alive. Nobody has died. As far as begging is concerned, every day I have to say that somebody has died. But for the first time the whole family has died – and in advance! No, I cannot deceive you. You are a very simple person.”
I said, “I am not a simple person. I am just enjoying. Ten rupees are not much of a problem…to kill your whole family. If you have some relatives….”
He said, “You want to kill my relatives too?”
I said, “Anybody! Relatives, neighbors – I will give you in advance if they are not dead. Just go and have a look.”
He said, “You are mad and I cannot cheat a mad person. I am not that bad. I cheat cunning people but not a man like you. You are too ready to be cheated.”
I said, “If you want I can come with you to count how many have died, because you may not be able to count that many. How many can you count? How well are you educated?”
He said, “That is true: I can’t count much.”
I said, “I can come with you. This train cannot leave without me. The driver is my friend; I will tell him, ‘Wait. Let me first go to this man’s house and see how many people have died and how many are going to die.’ And in fact, in this world, whoever is born is going to die, so why not take the advance?”
He sat on the floor in the compartment with tears. He said, “I have never returned money to anybody; ten rupees I am returning. And you are ready to come with me to count whether they are dead or alive! And you are ready to give an advance for those who are alive because they will die…!”
I said, “One thing is certain; don’t take ten if you are feeling hurt. Take at least one – for you!”
He said, “But I am alive.”
I said, “You are alive; everybody is alive – but you will die! And at that time it will be difficult for me to find out who you are, where you live, why you lived and why you have died – too many troublesome problems. You just take one rupee and leave me.”
He said, “No, I cannot take anything from you. The train is full of people. I will manage from all those cheats. They are cheating others so there is no problem in cheating them. But to cheat you, it hurts, although I am a beggar. Even though I am a beggar, I have a certain sense of humanity.”
I said, “It is up to you, but for one hour I am here. If somebody really dies you can come without any fear. These ten rupees are yours, deposited with me. With interest I will return them – but within one hour. After that I will be gone. But I often come on this route, and I am easily recognizable.”
He said, “That’s right, because neither can I forget you, nor can I forgive you!”
I said, “Why can you not forgive me?”
He said, “You tricked me. You have taken your ten rupees back!”
This whole world is full of people…

I have a friend….
He was a professor, but he never liked any kind of service because he could never manage to wake up early to get ready to reach to the class in time – and every day it was a problem. The principal would call and the vice-chancellor would call, and finally he resigned.
He said, “This is all nonsense. I can manage without it.”
I said, “How are you going to manage?” – he used to live with me.
He said, “First, I will live with you!”
I said, “This is great! And when you become bored, tired, because I don’t want to give more money to you?”
He said, “I will move. I have many friends all over the country.” And it is true. He had many friends. He had qualities to create friends: he was a very good chess player, a very good conversationalist, very good in many games, very handsome. Falling in love, falling out of love was very easy for him.
I said, “But how long?”
He said, “How long? I don’t think I am going to live more than seventy years. For seventy years this whole world is available!”
Fifteen years after he left me, he met me in New Delhi. I said, “How are things going?”
He said, “Perfectly well.”
He was continually borrowing money. And I said to him, “It is strange that you go on borrowing money. What about returning it?”
And he said, “Everybody knows that I never return it and there are other people from whom I borrow. I never borrow from the same person again. I use that money to create the atmosphere to borrow more money from somebody else!”
Just before I went to America, he came to see me. He was perfectly happy. He said, “In this world where everybody is deceiving everybody else, not to deceive is to be stupid. Just don’t deceive the same person again, because that is not right. When there are other new pastures available, why go on harassing one person? I never harass, that’s why people give me money because they know: once they have given me money they are free from harassment!”

In this world it is natural to be closefisted and closed-hearted, continuously afraid that somebody is going to cheat you. All kinds of frauds are all around, but one thing has to be understood: if you can trust – even in this world where deceit is the law – your trust will open the doors of the mysteries of existence.
Just a few days ago I talked about the French healer who has come here. Now he is a sannyasin – certainly a man of great understanding. I had criticized all kinds of channeling, healing…as frauds. They are parasites, but this is true about only ninety-nine percent. There is one percent which is certainly capable of all these things that I condemned – but it is very difficult to find that one percent.
The day I said this, poor Kaveesha’s channeling had to stop, because people said, “My God, we have been cheated! This Avirbhava as high priestess and Kaveesha, the channel…these people were cheating us!”
They were not cheating you.
They are simple people, very simple.
You know Avirbhava; every day she screams – not that I am going to hit her or anything. I do nothing to her; I just make the gesture – that’s enough. Rather than giving me trouble, she herself shrieks! She knows that if she is not going to shriek I am going to do something! But she is simple…. Kaveesha is innocent. They were not representing anybody; they are simply in tune with me.
When you were asking your questions to Kaveesha she was simply reflecting me, not some dead master. And whenever she found that nothing was coming through, she was simple enough to accept that nothing was coming, no answer was coming – or she would ask me the next day, “Somebody asked this question. I waited for your answer, but nothing came so this is their question…”
But people are idiots! Just one day before I criticized the healer, they were crowding the class and were feeling so happy with Kaveesha. And because I criticized, they started criticizing – just parrotlike, without ever trying to make distinctions. But the man whom I had criticized did not take it badly as a personal criticism. He understood it perfectly that for ninety-nine percent of the people who are doing it, what I am saying is true.
I am not against healing, but if I appreciate healing then those ninety-nine percent of the people are also appreciated. So my difficulty is in not sacrificing you to the ninety-nine cheats and frauds, because the one percent will understand perfectly that he has not been criticized, because he has not been cheating. And rather than being against me or going against me, he remained – and he wants to remain here.
Even after my criticism he became a sannyasin. That shows the authenticity of a person. He may have a healing power which very rarely healers have. It is nothing unnatural, but something unique. A person’s aura, the energy that surrounds his body – if it can surround you, it can heal you without the healer making any effort. I am going to make arrangements for him to have his healing department.
Don’t desert poor Kaveesha – she is a rare woman! It is almost impossible for her to cheat you or to deceive you – there is no reason. She knows how to love, and love can heal you. And love can answer your questions, because love in a certain way, joins the person with the universal sources of energy. And if you are with a master, certainly you are immediately in tune with the master. It is possible to have your heart dance in tune with the master.
When I am speaking I am nowhere. I am simply allowing existence to speak. And those who love me, if their love becomes so overwhelming that all defense systems are broken, then what I am saying will be said by them too.
Every sannyasin finally has to become a master. Never before has it been tried. Masters have been very afraid of disciples who can become masters. Those were not real masters. A real master finally transforms all his disciples into masters.
The day you all will be in tune with existence in the same way I am in tune, that will be my day of rejoicing.
Use Kaveesha’s energy – it is not anything to do with all kinds of frauds who go on moving around the world. No fraud can stay here! Just a single criticism and he will be lost. And this new sannyasin – use his healing energy.
This commune should be aware and alert and loving and open, then you can see with clarity whether the other is real or false. Just by intellect you cannot decide it; only intuition, only your heart can feel the authentic, the real and the false.
The master comes – somewhere, suddenly, sure – but you have to be ready, otherwise his coming will be useless.

This is the world in which you live….

Herbie, the Texan cowboy, is visiting New York for the first time and decides to go to a high-class whorehouse. He pays the fee and is confronted by two doors: one marked Blonde, the other Brunette. He chooses the Blonde, goes through the door and finds two more doors. One says, Big Tits; the other, Little Tits. He chooses Big Tits, goes through and finds two more doors. One says, Fancy Fuck; the other says, Real Screw. He chooses Real Screw, goes through the door and finds himself back on 42nd Street.

Mendel Kravitz, the wealthy American businessman, sends his daughter, Kathy, to Europe to get some culture and maybe meet a rich husband. A few months later she writes and asks her father to send her a book on etiquette. She must be meeting all the right people, says Mendel to himself. After a few more months she asks Mendel for another book on etiquette.
There is no doubt, thinks Mendel, she is meeting royalty – perhaps Prince Edward. Then two years later, Kathy comes home. Mendel Kravitz meets her at the airport and he is shocked when she arrives carrying a small baby.
“Whose baby?” he asks.
“Mine,” replies Kathy.
“And the father?” asks Mendel.
Kathy shakes her head, “I don’t know, Papa,” she sobs.
“What?” cries Mendel. “Two books on etiquette I send you and you don’t even know to ask, ‘With whom have I the pleasure?’”

============================================================

Osho,
In a recent discourse you gave your total support to genetic engineering. I am very much in trouble. For me such engineering is against nature. Who should be in charge of creating that superman? Often a so-called genius was later regarded as the devil. And people like Hitler, Stalin or Reagan are only possible because of all the others supporting them.
Genetic engineering also is against my freedom of self-development.
Could you please explain to me this science which bothers me?
Genetic engineering is going to be opposed by almost everybody. But before I say anything on genetic engineering I would like to remind you that every development, every evolutionary step in mankind’s life has been opposed in the beginning as being against nature.
Do you think man should go back to nature? Just see the implications of it: you will be hanging on the trees, jumping from one tree to another. Even if it had been proposed to the monkeys that by genetic engineering a better kind of monkey could be produced, they would have been offended. It would be against nature.
There is a long history of great names who have been against nature, but these are the people who have created all the facilities and all the comforts and the intelligence that you have. And they were vehemently opposed at every nook and corner.
In Russia now they have many fruits which are “against nature.” They are a crossbreed, just as by crossbreeding animals, far better animals can be produced than their mothers and fathers. In Russia they have been trying to crossbreed many fruits, trees and animals, and they have been immensely successful.
In fact, without your knowing it, you are enjoying so much that is against nature. Your railway trains, your airplanes, your clothes, your medicines, your health, longer life than your predecessors can all be called against nature. Even a simple fountain pen is against nature; nature has not produced it.
One of the most significant thinkers of the West was Leo Tolstoy. He was so much against the very idea that anything should be produced which is not natural, that to Mahatma Gandhi he became a guru. Mahatma Gandhi accepted three masters. On the top of his list was Leo Tolstoy. He was one of the richest men of the world of that time, but lived like a beggar, as if to be a beggar is natural and to have riches is against nature.
Why is to be a beggar to be natural? In fact just the contrary should be the case, because we don’t see beggars in animals. Have you ever met any buffalo begging? They are absolutely natural people. They don’t use cars and trains – unless you force them. Then too they try in every way to resist.
Mahatma Gandhi’s second master was an American philosopher, Emerson, who also “went back to nature.” His third master was an Indian, Shrimad Rajchandra. But they were all his masters because they were in agreement on one point: going back. But where do you draw the line? How far back is natural? All these philosophers of “back to nature” have not been able to give a clear-cut answer, except Mahatma Gandhi. His “back to nature” means when the spinning wheel was invented – but that is not nature. The spinning wheel is as technological as any technology, it is just primitive.
When a man can produce a thousand times more with a small machine, why should he bother with a spinning wheel? It takes eight hours per day to spin if you want enough clothes for the year for one person. So everybody is spinning and everybody will go bananas because you cannot eat, you cannot do anything else – there is no time! You have to sleep too, but just your clothes will take your whole time! But even clothes are not natural. Nobody pointed out to Mahatma Gandhi that even clothes are unnatural, because no animal uses clothes except for a few dogs in England – and that too against their will. It is absolutely unnatural to force them to wear clothes. Ladies take them for walks, and you know dogs – every tree creates a tremendous urge in them, which is natural…nobody has planted it in their minds…. Perhaps they are watering the tree just to help it grow faster. But the lady is embarrassed.
So the first part of your question has to be understood: every new thing is opposed. For example, in India birth control is opposed by all the religious leaders for the simple reason that it is not natural.

I was very friendly with a shankaracharya – who is almost similar to the pope in Hinduism – and he was very much against progress, science, technology. I heard that he had a heart attack so I went to see him in the hospital. And I asked him, “What about your philosophy?”
He said, “This is not the time.”
I said, “This is the time! What is this cardiogram? – something produced by nature…grown by the trees? What are all these instruments that the doctors are using and the medicines that are being given to you? This is the time for it to be decided whether you are a man of your word or just enjoy talking. When it comes to yourself then you forget all about it.” What is wrong with birth control? The Indian religious leaders have many arguments.

One very famous Hindu leader, Karpatri…
Just by chance we were traveling in the same compartment and we started discussing birth control. He said, “Don’t mention that name, it is absolutely against nature. Just look, Rabindranath was the thirteenth child of his parents. If they had used birth control there would not have been any Rabindranath.”
I said, “Agreed, that means every father and mother should produce at least thirteen children in search of a Rabindranath?”
In India there are people who have twelve children, thirteen children, fourteen children…but the Rabindranath does not appear.
…”So can you give me a guarantee?”
He said, “Why should I give any guarantee for anything in which I’m not involved? It is unnatural to prevent children whom God is sending…”
I said, “Who told you that God is sending them? God has been practicing birth control from eternity. He has given birth to only one child, Jesus Christ. If you have learned something from God, learn birth control. He could have produced millions of children – but he is a wise man, it seems. And that too he managed without getting married, via an agent, the Holy Ghost. So the blame goes to the Holy Ghost; God is completely out of it. But the Holy Ghost seems to have learned birth control, because in two thousand years since Jesus Christ he has not tried again.”
He said, “You always bring strange arguments. I am not a Christian and I don’t know the Bible or the Christian God.”
I asked him, “Then tell me about the Hindu gods. How many children has Shiva produced – two…? That’s what the Indian government has been saying, ‘Don’t produce more than two!’ Brahma has not produced any – being wiser!”
He said, “I have never thought about it.”
And I said, “You don’t understand anything of the whole process of the birth of a child. One million people die, then one child is born – and that too once in a while. Every time you make love you don’t create children, otherwise every woman would be carrying so many pregnancies together. Once she is pregnant then you cannot do anything to make her more pregnant; the door is closed. People come and knock – and not a small crowd. In each love affair, loving a woman, millions of male sperms rush to knock on the doors. But if the doors are closed, their life span is only a few hours. So much violence is happening.”
You will be surprised that Mahavira, who was teaching nonviolence – his concern about celibacy was not the concern as it is of other religions. His concern was that in each love act you kill millions of people without even knowing it! Just think of a man, normal…it seems in his whole life he can kill four hundred million people. All Adolf Hitlers and others don’t matter; even normal people are killing!
So birth control will not make much difference. In one million, if one more is added, it will not make much difference.
I told him a story….
A very famous noble emperor, Akbar, was bringing swans from the Himalayas. It must be the highest point where a lake exists of the purest water, Mansarovar. And strangely, in Mansarovar live the biggest swans and the whitest swans. They come to India when it becomes too cold. For nine months it is frozen: you can drive on it without any fear; it is solid rock. For only three months it melts. So for three months those swans go back to Mansarovar. Akbar had seen those swans – and they were so beautiful.
He said, “Make a beautiful marble lake in my garden. Make every arrangement so that those swans don’t have to go to Mansarovar again.”
The lake was made and it was the season when the swans would be coming soon. He said, “It is not an ordinary lake. It is a royal reception, so inform the whole capital: Tomorrow morning fill the whole lake with milk. Bring as much as you can, at least one bucket per person.”
Birbal, his friend and adviser, laughed.
He said, “Why are you laughing?”
He said, “In the morning you will see why I’m laughing. I know what is going to happen!”
And in the morning it really happened…. Everybody thought, “Early, in the darkness before the sun rises, just one bucket of water in the millions of buckets of milk will be lost. Who will be able to figure it out? And anyway, I cannot be caught because it is very difficult to see the difference between water and milk when they have mixed with each other…”
But human minds think in the same way…. Everybody had the same idea, why waste one bucket of milk?
A few were so cunning they even went without water, just buckets, so that everybody would know they were going, and in the dark they would pour nothing, just come back home.
When the sun was rising, the king and Birbal came to see, because it must be a scene: a lake of pure milk. There was no lake of pure milk; it was just water. Moreover it was not completely filled because many cheated – in fact everybody cheated.
Birbal said, “Now you know why I laughed…! When you were saying that, the same idea arose in my mind that in the millions of people of the capital…it is going to happen that the lake would be of water. If it is pure water, thank God!”

I told Karpatri, “The God in which you believe, I cannot believe simply for the reason that if he was a little saner, only one sperm, a good sperm, a Rabindranath Tagore, would have been the right thing.”

What is the need for so many idiots, the crowd, Adolf Hitler and Ronald Reagan…? These are all God-created; these are not natural. What is natural? And when man creates something, why do you call it unnatural?
Man is nothing but an extension of life energy. If you say a flower is natural, then the invention of a man is the flower of his genius.
There is no question of being unnatural about genetics. The fear I can understand. But every new thing creates fear, and once you become accustomed, you completely forget that there was a day when it was a new thing. Do you know that when electricity was invented nobody was ready to have an electric lamp? Who knows, it may burst and put the whole house on fire. Now you are not afraid.
You will be surprised to know that even at the beginning of this century there was a case in an American court against a man who wanted to make a bathroom attached to his sleeping room. It was a new idea, unnatural! The bathroom and the latrines have to be in the backyard, far away…and Indians are even more natural!
In my childhood I used to insist, “Make a bathroom in the house.” And everybody tried to convince me that it is healthy and natural to go out by the side of the river, in the open air, under the open sky, the sun shining…”Why do you insist on an attached bathroom? Are you mad? And the river is flowing…”
But it is the same river where all over people are defecating, washing themselves, buffaloes are swimming, washermen are washing their clothes…All kinds of things go on happening by the side of an Indian river. It is a scene worth seeing. And then people take the same water to drink! It is natural, it has always been so, it is not an invention.
Remember, genetics creates the same fear – who will control it? You are not afraid of medicine, of who will control it. You trust the doctor – a doctor you don’t know at all – that he will not kill you, that he will not cheat you, that he will not keep you sick as long as possible.
Your question is: Who is going to control it?
My idea is simple: there should be a world academy of scientists with different departments. Genetics will be the most important department, and scientists should be trusted. There is no other way. Either trust a blind force of biology or at least trust a human being who is a little conscious and understands his responsibility.
You don’t ask when you produce children…. Who are you trusting? Who is sending all these children? It is a blind biological force, certainly natural, but the scientist is also natural. And whatever he produces is of a far higher value, because it is coming from a consciousness.
I want to make meditation an absolute for all students, whatever the subject they may be studying, so their awareness becomes more and more clean and clear. And out of that clarity we can create a beautiful world. Those scientists, if they are also meditators, will not create atomic bombs to destroy. They may use atomic energy to move trains so they don’t pollute the air. They may use that atomic energy in the factories so they don’t pollute air. Rather than killing man, the same atomic energy can be a tremendous help to save man and his future.
It has been raised again and again that if genetics falls into the hands of men like Ronald Reagan, and he decides what kinds of people should be produced, then there is certainly danger. But if Ronald Reagan decides that Charles Darwin and his theories should not be taught in the universities, you don’t see the danger. If President Truman decides to drop atom bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, you don’t see that politicians should not exist at all, they are dangerous.
You have to understand the whole implication of my proposition. Meditation should be the central subject for every branch of knowledge, and particularly branches like genetics which are very important, which are going to produce new generations, new men. A new world should be in the hands of very clear, silent, loving people. So don’t just think of genetics, also consider that we can add meditation side by side as an essential part of education; otherwise I can understand your difficulty.
Any intelligent person will think that if genetics is in the hands of Joseph Stalin, Adolf Hitler, Benito Mussolini, what will be the fate of the world? They will create slaves, idiots. But anyway ninety-nine percent of idiots are already created – just that one percent of freaks prove to be geniuses. And because they are so rare, politicians grab them. They cannot even go to receive a Nobel Prize – just the fear that if they go out of Russia they may never return again. There are many Russian scientists still in Siberia. Their only crime is that they won the Nobel Prize.
So I can see…but that is happening anyway: all the arms are in the hands of these people. And now, nuclear weapons are in their hands and you are not worried, and you are not taking any action on your part; they can destroy the whole world without any difficulty. So what more can they do? But genetics can be freed, in fact the whole of science can be freed from their hands.
All of education should be one worldwide system. There should be only two languages: one, the national language, your mother tongue, and one, English, the international language. It is accidental that English has become the international language although it is not spoken by more people than other languages. For example, Chinese is spoken by more people than English, but it is confined to China. It cannot become an international language although it is spoken by more people. Spanish is spoken by more people than English, but Spanish cannot become an international language.
It is not a question of more or less, it is a question of having found by coincidence that English has become a worldwide understood language. Teach English as an international language to every child, and his mother tongue, because howsoever you learn the language which is not your mother tongue, something is missing. In your mother tongue there is something poetic, more loving, more juicy. The variety should not be killed.
The international language will remain as a technical language for intercommunication for the whole world. All the armies should be surrendered to the UN, a world government, a real world government. Up to now two bogus world governments have been in existence. One was the League of Nations – but without any armies it was impotent. And the same is the situation of the UN; it is a little better but not much.
The UN or any name you can give to it, a world government, can function only if national governments surrender their armies, their arms. Those who don’t surrender their arms and armies should be boycotted by the world government. They cannot stand against the world government; they will have to surrender – it is better to surrender gracefully. They will have their government, they will have their internal guards, a national force which can manage internal affairs, but they will not have nuclear plants and millions of people engaged in the unnecessary exercise of killing man. Man dies automatically…I can’t understand…. Do something that does not happen automatically. Man dies sooner or later, so what is the hurry? If he lives a few days more, let him live!
These millions of people who are in the armies are a sheer wastage; they are not doing anything. Their use only comes into force when there is war; in peace they are of no use.
A world government with all the armies will slowly start dissolving armies, making them into peaceful citizens, useful, creative, because at least up to now, there is no other known world with which any war can happen. A war of the planets is a faraway possibility. Perhaps after millions of years there may be a possibility of a war between two planets. Right now we don’t even know that anybody else exists in the whole existence – most probably we are alone.
A world government, a world language, a world education system – and you will create all the barriers which will keep science and its discoveries from being misused.
Nations can remain as provinces, so they can enjoy a little politics, but it will be just like you see kings and queens on playing cards: formal. They don’t have actual force; they can’t do anything. In their own country they can control telephones, railways and whatever is necessary for the country. The world government can be an umbrella that takes over all the responsibility of defending them. There is no need because there is nobody else who is going to attack you, and there is no need of piling up arms, new arms.
The whole scientific energy can move into sciences like genetics. According to me, genetics can be the most important part that science can play because it can create a new kind of human being, healthier; their very program is of no sickness. It can make human life long enough, as long as they want. It can drop not only diseases but old age too.
The possibilities are so tremendous that we should put our fear aside, and we should take cautious steps that genetics is not being used against humanity, but for humanity.
Anyway if you don’t do anything, then what you are afraid of is going to happen. Genetics cannot be prevented from developing; every government which has enough power is interested in it, so your fear, your paranoia will not help. If cautious efforts are made, and if there are worldwide protests and movements for sciences like genetics not to be put in the hands of nations but into a world community of the scientists themselves, there is much less possibility of any danger.
And always remember, it is going to happen. These “back to nature” people have always been talking; even they themselves don’t go back to nature.
Mahatma Gandhi was against railway trains. Now railway trains are such good people – they have never done any harm to anybody! He was against the telephone, he was against the radio, he was against anything that can make you comfortable…!
I stayed just a few hours in his ashram – he was dead, fortunately. His son was in charge of the ashram. It was not an ashram but a slum. I told him, “This is a slum. This is not an ashram.”
When nighttime came he told me, “There are many mosquitoes, and because we believe in nonviolence we cannot kill them with Flit spray or anything else.”
I said, “My God, that means I am going to be eaten by your mosquitoes – then I am not going to stay!” I asked them, “How do you manage?”
He said, “Mahatma Gandhi found a very natural thing.”
That “natural thing” was kerosene oil. Kerosene oil is not a natural thing. It has been discovered; it was not there always. There were times when there was nothing else except wood for the fire. And there were times when there was even no fire; you cannot even believe that fire is an invention, it is not nature.
Mahatma Gandhi forced those poor twenty or thirty people who were in the ashram – mostly widows, because in India…
This is the only ashram where you will neither find a widow nor a widower. Once in a while one becomes a widow; that is another thing. Niskriya is sitting behind…Once in a while he becomes a widower. And when a German becomes a widower he stays one for at least a few days – but it does not last long!
…So a few widows, a few old people who had nothing to do, whose families didn’t want them – they are of no use – and Gandhi taught them to put kerosene oil on their faces, on their hands, on everything that is uncovered.
I told Ramdas, his son, “Just think about it: these mosquitoes are more intelligent than you. They don’t come close to the kerosene that somebody has spoiled their food with. How can you sleep with the smell of the kerosene all over the place?”
He said, “I know it looks stupid, but it is part of going back to nature. We cannot use mosquito nets, that is a far too advanced technology” – mosquito nets! – “and we cannot use mosquito nets because of what will happen to the poor mosquitoes. So we have found a middle course. If they are daring enough they will rush in and eat their food; if they are cowards – it is up to them, we are not responsible. We have every freedom to paint our faces with anything we want.”
Mosquitoes cannot bring a protest march to say that this is not good, this is going against nature. It is going against nature, because no animal paints itself with kerosene oil to avoid mosquitoes.
Where are you going to draw the line? And what is the need? New challenges should be accepted with all their dangers. Intelligence requires that we should take the challenge and that we make defense measures against the dangers and the risks – otherwise nothing can happen.
Back to nature…?
No! I say, forward to supernature.
It is also natural.
Nothing unnatural can happen.
Whatever happens is natural.
The question is only of whether you are going back or going forward.
Go forward!
We can create millions of new fruits, new vegetables. Just that old cabbage…and one goes on eating, one never bothers about whether something should be done about this cabbage. Just those old fruits that Adam ate…apples. In all these years you have not been able to make something better. So orthodox is the mind, so afraid of the new. And particularly when it comes to man he becomes very much shaky.
That’s what is making you afraid; otherwise there is no problem.
We should take the risk, making every arrangement that nothing goes wrong – and even if it goes wrong, so what? Anyway everything is wrong. One thing more added…
Just now I was talking about Niskriya and here he is with his question; some problem has arisen: “Osho, the other morning I heard you say that the man of the heart rebels against social conditions. To me flirting is one of these conditionings” – he does not want to flirt!
Then what will you do with your life? Just eating cabbage? Once in a while search for the cauliflower! It is not flirting; it is just intelligence. I have never thought, even in my imagination, that when I am talking about dropping old conditions, flirting is also part of them. This is how people hear what they want to hear.
He is saying, “I don’t want to behave diplomatically when approaching a woman.” Then it is better not to approach a woman, because diplomacy is nothing but the art of approaching a woman. The woman will try to escape. Make a thousand and one excuses, but be strong – and never go backwards!
But Niskriya is saying, “Even if I decided to flirt – and I tried it – I could not because it is not me!” Niskriya, you cannot do it because it is you! Just seeing you any girl will start running.
I have heard, people are asking in the boutique, “Can we have a picture of Niskriya?” – just to make the children afraid.
Niskriya, you do whatever you want to do with your camera, flirt, talk, and mostly that’s what you are doing! You don’t need a woman. A woman will be a great disturbance. Niskriya is so totally devoted to his art…a twenty-four-hours-a-day cameraman! He has no time for a woman. But just seeing others…This flirting is like an allergy.
He says, “But how can I fulfill my lust – which I always enjoy very much as a natural part of myself – without buying ice cream and telling sweet lies?”
It is a difficult question, Niskriya. I will have to talk to some women who look like witches. They may be ready to flirt without ice cream. There are a few. Because you are continuously looking through the camera, you don’t know who is around. Once in a while just look around. The moment you see a woman who looks like a witch, that is the woman! There is no need to be diplomatic; there is no need for any ice cream. Just go to her and tell her, “I want to take a photograph of you.”

============================================================

Osho,
As far as my experience reaches, compassion between man and woman seems to be a rare thing. The other morning I heard you say that the mind creates walls and intelligence creates bridges.
Osho, can you say something about the way from passion to compassion? Also, for two months now I have given my very best in relating to Niskriya. Have you got a little joke for us?
Your question is almost as ancient as man. It is certainly a very rare phenomenon that passion between man and woman turns into compassion. It turns only into hatred, because in the first place it was not passion. In the very first place you had given a wrong name to something which was not love; hence when that experience which you have called love, passion disappears – what is left is not compassion, is not friendliness, is not gratitude, but sheer hatred.
The psychologists have started talking about marriage as an intimate hatred. You are together because you fulfill certain biological needs of each other, but otherwise, you are as far away from each other as two stars can be.
If love is authentic, if it is not just lust but a spiritual harmony, then certainly this passion is going to bring compassion in your life. And the transformation of passion into compassion is the whole evolution of man into a Gautam Buddha. But you are right; it rarely happens. It could not even happen in the case of Gautam Buddha himself.
Gautam Buddha renounced the world, his kingdom, his palace, his wife whom he thought he had loved so much. After twelve years he came back. Enlightened, he realized that he had not been human to his old father, to his loving wife, and to the one-day-old child. So as he became enlightened the first thing was to go back to his old kingdom and ask forgiveness.

There is a beautiful story…
The moment he initiated his cousin-brother, Ananda, into sannyas – Ananda was older than Gautam Buddha – Ananda said to him, “After initiation I am no more. Your word is my life, your order is my way. Before initiation I am still your elder brother, hence I want three conditions to be promised now because later on I cannot ask anything from you, you will be the master.”
Gautam Buddha said, “What are those three things? I don’t have anything to give – just this begging bowl.”
Ananda said, “I am not asking about things. I am asking about something else. The first condition is that you shall never send me anywhere away from you to spread the word, the message. Second, I will be with you the whole day, and even in the night I will sleep in the same room where you will be sleeping. And the third thing, if I ask any question or if I bring someone who wants to ask any question to you, you will not refuse, you will have to answer.”
Gautam Buddha said, “There is no problem in it. It is okay. You get initiated.”
He had not realized that this was going to create many problems. But the worst problem happened when he came back after twelve years to his home. Ananda was with him just like a shadow.
Gautam Buddha said, “I know you have the right to be present with me wherever I go, but you can understand, you have that much intelligence: the woman I loved twelve years ago and left without even telling her that I was going away – obviously she must be very angry. She is from another royal family. In front of you, she will not show her anger; that would be against manners, etiquette. I would like to unburden her of all her anger, rage. But it is up to you. I am asking you if you can remain a little behind – just outside the door of the palace. Let me see my wife…”
There was a moment of silence but Ananda understood the situation and allowed Gautam Buddha. And he was right, the wife was very angry….
She said, “My anger is not that you renounced the world. If you wanted to renounce it, I would never have prevented you. My anger is that you did not trust me. You did not say a single word and in the middle of the night you escaped. That has been hurting me. Just as you belong to a warrior race, I am also the daughter of a great warrior. We send our husbands to war with prayers, with garlands, touching their feet, not allowing even a tear to come in the eyes because that may prevent them, may be destructive to their lifestyle and their life pattern.
“If you had said to me that you wanted to renounce the world in search of truth, I would have been dignified. You disrespected me. You damaged my dignity. My anger is not that you left; my anger is that you did not tell me why.”
Buddha himself had never thought about it, that the cause of anger would be of not saying to his wife…
And the wife said, “If you had loved me enough you would have trusted me. I would have sent you with prayers in my heart that you should succeed and be victorious in your search, but you did not allow me the chance.”
Gautam Buddha said, “You are right. I have come to ask your forgiveness. Forgive me! What I used to think was love was not love. Now I know what love is. But I wanted to wait until you have unburdened the rage you must have accumulated in all those twelve years, day and night, in your loneliness.”
The wife looked at Gautam Buddha with tears in her eyes because she could see that this was not the same man who had left her. He looked the same, but everything had changed: such silence, such presence, such eyes and so much compassion.
She said, “Before I ask to be initiated also – if I cannot be your wife at least let me be your disciple – your son has been waiting for twelve years and I have been telling him, ‘Wait. Some day he will come back.’ And you have come, but you have come so transformed – so luminous is your being.”
And the son was standing just by her side. She pulled the son in front of Gautam Buddha and said, “Ask your father for your heritage. He has given birth to you – what else has he to fulfill…his responsibilities towards you?”
The son asked him and Gautam Buddha said, “I have your heritage.” And he gave him his begging bowl and initiated him into sannyas. He said, “There is nothing which is more valuable. I was waiting for this moment, when I would be really capable of loving you. But my love is now so far away from the love that people talk about that I cannot even use the word. I use the word compassion. I take you both into my compassion. I have nothing else to give, but I am giving you my very heart and my very experience.”

What we call love is not love. And the test comes only when love starts disappearing; then you suddenly see it was not love. You were simply full of lust – a physical, biological attraction. You were not a master of your love, you were only a slave, driven by blind forces of biology. Certainly such kinds of passion cannot become compassion.
If you want your love to grow into compassion then first let it be love! You cannot hope.
You sow the seeds of marigolds and hope for roses. Your flowers will show what was hidden in the seeds.
You are saying to me that for two months you have been very interested in relating to Niskriya: Have you got a little joke for us?
You are a joke unto yourself – why torture poor Niskriya? I have heard that the whole day many women have tortured him. He is a man of a very different quality; he is doing Vipassana. And he had to appoint a secretary to write down the name of all those women and tell them, “When I have time I will see. Right now I am doing Vipassana.”
And the teacher of Vipassana, Pradeepa, has informed me that his Vipassana is strange. He goes on looking into the camera, but his attention is very clear…!
You can torture anybody else – he will be tortured because he has asked for it. And I have told him that there are many witches, but he does not want even to waste time or ice cream. I have given him a simple technique: just take a photograph…or there is even no need to waste the film; just make an effort as if you are taking the photograph and tell the witch, “You are very photogenic” – and that will do! And you don’t have to go very far! Just by your side a witch is sitting.

(And there, a little to Niskriya’s right, is the most irresistible creature. Dressed in flowing black, with a mass of black curls falling over her radiant face, she turns to Niskriya gazing intently from under her long lashes and begins to caress him.)

And this is the joke for you….

Hymie Goldberg has a row with his wife, Becky, and goes out drinking. Late that night he stumbles into the local all-night deli and hunches over a bowl of noodle soup. Hymie notices a Chinaman sitting at the next table, and still being in a bad mood, he picks up his bowl of noodles and dumps it over the Chinaman’s head.
“This is for Pearl Harbor,” says Hymie.
“But I am Chinese, not Japanese,” says the man.
“Chinese, Vietnamese, Japanese – what’s in a name?” says Hymie.
As Hymie goes to pay his bill, the Chinaman suddenly hits him over the head with a salami sausage. “That,” says the Chinaman bowing, “is for sinking the Titanic.”
“But,” shouts Hymie, “the Titanic was sunk by an iceberg.”
“So,” says the Chinaman. “Iceberg, Goldberg, Greenberg – what’s in a name?”

Komala, you can torture anybody – what is in a name? For two months continuously you have been harassing a silent man, who has no time at all. From one morning till another morning he is concerned only with photography.
When my other photographers have a session they ask me to “somehow avoid Niskriya.”
I say, “Why?”
They say, “If Niskriya comes he does not bother about anybody else. He jumps from this corner to that corner. He does not care that other photographers are also present. He stands in front of somebody who is photographing, he crawls on the floor…!”
When he started crawling one day, I also wondered what he was doing – he was finding the right angle. He does not bother anything about what people will say. He is such a devoted photographer, you could say he is a born photographer.
For his whole life he has been doing that. He came here tired of photography, and finally, he saw such a great opportunity. He forgot all about…brought all his equipment, his whole studio! He had come here to meditate – but where is the time?
Now these kinds of people – scientists, mathematicians, artists, painters – these people are not interested in anything else. Their whole interest is in their art. It is possible that once in a while, casually – they may have run out of film or the camera is broken…and then they may think of a woman – but more than that you can’t expect.
There is no need to wait two months. Here things happen so fast that people don’t even ask each other, “What is your name?” because what is the point? Tomorrow you will have to ask somebody else, “What is your name?” Just do the thing and be on your way. Niskriya has to be saved, but it will be very difficult now.
One witch has even written, “It will be good to open a witches’ coven, so anybody who cannot find a woman can come to the witches’ coven.” I like the idea! It will be an interesting place. In India it has never existed; only England has known witches’ covens. They still exist there…again they are arising, spreading….
So I am already looking for a place, and perhaps people like Niskriya can go – just to take photographs! But don’t torture him.
And just now I have told you that a witch is sitting by his side. She will follow him; she is not going to leave him – camera or no camera. You can have a good look!

(By this time the glamorous creature’s long delicate hands are weaving and dancing all around Niskriya in tantalizing delight.)

Osho,
Ten years ago I came to your feet and found that unknowingly I was already there. Have I ever been somewhere else in my life or in any life? Isn't it that this thirst of ours has created your smile to show us how existence smiles?
Osho, I don't know what the question is or if I have any more questions for they are quenched day after day by your love and my gratitude. But then why did I say to myself, jump now? And yet, I look back once more to my passion and to its old songs and dreams.
Osho, can you really promise me that passion is always transformed into compassion?
My god! Sarjano…Has everybody gone mad? You are also in the same trouble…!
But your passion is different. It has nothing to do with ordinary, blind natural forces. Your passion is what has brought you to me, which even makes you feel that perhaps you have always been here, or even in other lives too.
You are asking, Isn’t it that this thirst of ours has created your smile to show us how existence smiles?
Osho, I don’t know what the question is…
There is no need to know what the question is. Just know the answer….
This silence is the answer.
This love is the answer.
This feeling of a thirst being quenched is the answer. Who cares about the question?
The whole of humanity can be divided into two categories: the majority has questions, and the minority has answers. It is very rare to find a person who has both – I have never come across any person, living or dead. By the time a person reaches to the answer, questions disappear. Questions are just like darkness: when you reach to the light, they disappear – not that they are solved, they simply dissolve.
In this quenching of the thirst, day after day, certainly a love and a gratitude arises which says to you,…jump now. But the old, the past, is heavy. To drop it, even though it is meaningless, needs a lion’s heart, because you have identified yourself for long, too long, with things which you are not. And now suddenly, you have to drop all those identities of many lives.
It is not only difficult for you, it is difficult for everybody. But howsoever difficult it may be, it is not impossible. If it has not been impossible for me, why should it be impossible for you? If hundreds of mystics around the world have been able to drop the whole past and have never looked back, you are also capable of the same courage – you have just not tried it.
But you go on looking back. You say, And yet I look back once more…How many times have you looked back, and how many more times are you going to look, again and again, “just once more”?
The past that has been is no longer there, and that which is, is herenow. You need to jump without hesitation. A slight hesitation, a split second’s hesitation and you have missed it.
But you say, And yet I look back once more to my passion and to its old songs and dreams.
Osho, can you really promise me that passion is always transformed into compassion?
I have described clearly: if your love is hiding lust, it cannot be transformed into compassion; there is no way. But if you have really loved, without even your becoming aware, one day you will find your love has become more and more lovingness, your passion has become more and more compassion. Just the right seed is needed and the roses are going to blossom. But learn to forget and forgive the past.
The present has greater dreams and greater mysteries to open their doors for you; you will not be a loser. The past is gone already; you cannot do anything about it. And if you have dreamed in the past, and if you have sung and danced in the past, what prevents you from singing and dancing in the present? If those songs of the past, and the dances and the love affairs of the past are preventing it, then they are not your friends. They are your enemies; they are unnecessary luggage. Drop them without thinking even for a single moment to drop or not to drop. Just drop them – the present is the only reality.
If you can make the present your only reality too, you will have greater dreams and greater dances and greater passions – and greater love. And then, certainly, a man who lives in the present is capable of moving from love to compassion, from passion to compassion, without difficulty and without effort.
In fact, it is not right to say that he is capable, the right thing will be to say that it happens on its own accord. You just be in the present. It is such a fire that it burns all that is rubbish in you. And it is such an opening that you cannot exhaust the songs and the dances. And once you know real diamonds, you will forget automatically those old stones that you used to think were diamonds.
To cling to the past is dangerous because it does not allow you to be in the present, and all that existence has is in the present. The past is only memory and the future is only imagination.
The present is the only reality.
All that I mean by meditation is to be in the present – no past, no future. Just let this moment be all, and you have come in contact with the heart of the universe. Great will be the blessings, and unknown treasures will be open to you. And things which are unsayable will be heard by you, will be lived by you.

Now, something religious…

One day while on holiday in Italy, Hymie Goldberg finds himself traveling in a train compartment with Pope the Polack, Mother Teresa and a beautiful young orphan girl. Suddenly the train enters a tunnel and the compartment is plunged into darkness. Then everyone hears the sound of a kiss, followed by a slap across the face. When the train leaves the tunnel, everyone looks at each other in stony silence.
Mother Teresa thinks to herself, “One of these filthy guys kissed my orphan, but she, being a good girl, slapped him.”
The girl thinks to herself, “One of these guys tried to kiss me, but in the dark kissed Mother Teresa instead, and she of course slapped him.”
Pope the Polack thinks, “That Jewish jerk kissed the girl and she slapped me instead – the bitch!”
And Hymie thinks to himself, “I hope there is another tunnel soon so I can kiss my hand and slap that Polack idiot again!”

============================================================

Osho,
More and more I see how my energy is either going very high or very low, how sometimes I get very excited, come down again and then feel embarrassed about what happened during this state of excitement.
Do you have a knack to give me for how to watch when the excitement comes, not to get carried away and not to get identified with depression, and how to find my grounding and balance?
Latifa, mind is almost like the ocean, waves upon waves. Some waves are higher, and between two waves there is a depression. There are two ways to get out of this continuous up and down process.
The easiest is that when you are ecstatic that is the moment to be aware. In depression, in agony, awareness becomes more difficult. When you are flowing with joy, blissfulness, that is the moment to be aware, but people do exactly the opposite. When they are happy who cares about awareness? And when they are in anguish, then certainly they start thinking it is time to be aware and get out of anguish. But nobody has ever been able to get out from anguish directly.
First, one has to get out from ecstasy. If you can be aware of your joyful moments in the first place, the depression, the downs will not come. The door to get out is from ecstasy. So this is the simplest way:
Be happy and be aware.
Rejoice and be aware.
Love and be aware.
Don’t put awareness aside saying, “This is a kind of disturbance; I am in such a great ecstasy.” Awareness becomes like a disturbance; it is not. It may appear like this in the beginning, but soon you will see it will take your ecstasy to higher peaks. Ultimately awareness and ecstasy become one. Then those downs, depressive moments, agonies disappear.
The second way which is unnecessarily followed by a few people is difficult, but your being German, perhaps the second may be right for you. Try to become aware when you are suffering – and it is not only you, many people around the world throughout history have tried that. If there was no suffering, they created suffering just to be aware of it. They would fast, and that created a suffering; they would live naked in the cold winters without clothes, and that created suffering. Man is very inventive – he will torture himself in many ways.
Once in a while, a person has become aware from that experience also; it is unnecessarily inhuman, but almost all the religions have been preaching that. Whatever is difficult is appealing to the human mind, and whatever is obvious and simple, you tend to forget it.
But here, you are not in Germany. And even in Germany, you are not going to be German. Once you are with me, you have to drop all these diseases of being German, of being Indian, of being Chinese…Just be human and it is enough.
I teach you the easy. I am not in favor of any kind of unnecessary torture. If it is inevitable that is another thing, but we have even been trying to make inevitable suffering into a transformation.
To me the easiest door is whatever you find joyful. Dance, sing…and while dancing and singing, be aware.
Don’t be lost and don’t be identified.
The old habit of the mind is to be identified with anything. Whatever is happening the mind gets immediately identified. The mind does not function like a mirror, it functions like a film. Whatever comes in front of it becomes imprinted on it. The mirror remains empty. People come and go, ups and downs…the mirror does not lose itself in any identity.
Here, I teach you celebration, rejoicing, because I know that is the door closest to your ultimate awakening. A man full of joy is close to existence. Greater is his joy, less is the distance between him and the heart of the universe.
In your agony you are alone; far away is the heart of the universe. Your agony has created the distance. So when you are in agony – it is human and once in a while it happens – remain alert. And if you have been able to remain alert when the dance was descending on you and flowers were showering on you, it won’t be difficult at all to be aware when something has gone wrong. You can be a watcher – standing aside, unidentified.
This is the way of the mirror. And this is the way of those who have known human nature more deeply than your so-called religions and psychoanalysts, your so-called wise people. But it is up to you. If you enjoy self-torture, then choose moments of misery for the practice of awareness. But if you are understanding and intelligent, you will choose the easiest and the closest way.
Anyway, whatever you choose the result is the same: awareness will make you free from identification. You can try both; a few people get lost when they are happy. Perhaps for them it is difficult to be aware when they are happy. The mind says, “What is the need of awareness? In such a blissful, happy moment don’t bring religion in. You are young, and you are healthy, and you are in love, what is the need for the church at this moment?” Yes, when you have become old, one foot in the grave then you remember God – but it is too late; then you pray to God – but it is too late.
Just the other day, Anando showed me a picture of a very famous Christian missionary, an old man of thirty years’ standing. He had been giving television sermons, and millions of people were listening to him every Sunday. Now he has been caught coming out from a prostitute’s house. He did the right thing: he appeared on the television, tears in his eyes…. I looked at the picture, and I could not believe that at this age he is weeping. Millions of viewers felt sympathy for the old man, and he is saying, “I will ask God to forgive me, and you to forgive me. I have been going to prostitutes all these years. Now for three months I will not speak as a penance.” But most probably during these three months he will visit prostitutes. What else will he do? God is always available. Today, or three months afterwards, you can ask forgiveness.
But with me there is no God. Nobody can forgive you and there is no point of any prayer. You have to change. You have to understand the mechanism of transformation and it is very simple.
In an early morning walk when the birds are joyous and the trees are glowing in the sun and you are feeling a peace, become alert. Whatever is happening should not happen in an unconscious state; just be conscious. That does not mean that you have to be verbally repeating inside yourself, “Look, birds are singing. Look how the trees are happy. Look, what peace prevailing…” Then you have destroyed everything.
You are not to verbalize.
You have to experience.
And whenever you find the moment which is worth rejoicing, in that moment, be alert. Slowly, slowly your alertness will become part of you. And the work of alertness is to destroy identifications.
Once in a while you will be down – dark clouds, life seems to be meaningless…for any reason. Your alertness gained, strengthened, crystallized in moments of joy, will come to your help. You will remain far away and you will know deep down: “All this is happening but not to me, only around – and it goes on changing. My awareness remains just like a mirror, only reflecting but not identifying.”
But old habits die with difficulty, with great effort; we have been taught them from the very beginning. If there have been other lives before, we are carrying conditions, calculated by scientists to be at least ten million years old. And the most dangerous conditioning as far as awakening is concerned, enlightenment is concerned, is identification.
Within a split second, you get identified, you forget that this too will pass. Just wait a minute…the old boyfriend has left? Feel blissful, “What a great opportunity.” That’s what I have been teaching: let the old go because the new is coming. It will take a little time. In that space, it is up to you to be miserable or to be awaiting with alertness.
But every day, it goes on. In the morning, your mood is bad and you know that this mood has been bad many times before; it does not remain, so why bother? Let it be bad. Why be concerned? Why give any attention to it because every attention is nourishment?
Just watch, let that old mood get shocked….
“What is the matter? Latifa has been always welcoming…something has changed. She is sitting silently, not even bothering that there is an old bad mood.”
But you don’t remember your own life and its pattern. These ups and downs are not happening to you, they are only happening in the mind – and you are not the mind. You can stand aside and watch the whole game. Choose any way but drop the old habit of again and again falling into the same trap. One time you can be forgiven because you were moving in an unknown territory, but the second time if you fall into the same trap, and the third time, and the thousandth time…! Then it seems that you have decided to fall into the trap whatever happens. It is not the trap, it is your decision – or perhaps you are not at all conscious and just stumbling in your darkness like a somnambulist. Even they do better.
But this old habit has to be changed. And there is not a question of any effort to change it. Don’t decide, “I will change.” A simple understanding, a simple clarity of the whole situation and the old changes. But even grown-up people behave like small children without maturity, without really proving that they are grown up. All that seems to be is that they are growing old, not growing up.

Little Ernie’s parents are horrified. Their four-year-old son is just learning to talk fluently, which is charming, but he uses the word fucking in almost every sentence – which is very impolite. They try every strategy to get him to stop, but nothing seems to work so they try bribery.
They tell Ernie that he can go to Janet’s birthday party if he stops swearing. His father has asked Janet’s mom to send Ernie home at once if she hears the filthy, disgusting word.
On Saturday at two-thirty Ernie sets off, but at three o’clock he is back again in tears.
“I told you not to use that disgusting word,” his father cried.
“I did not use the fucking word,” shouts Ernie. “The fucking party is not till next fucking Saturday.”

If we look at our own behavior, you will not find much difference. The same thing goes on and on. Let understanding prevail – a simple understanding. Just be aware of this silence. Don’t use words inside; don’t judge.
Let whatever is happening simply be reflected. And this has to be the method used to get unidentified with our ups and downs, and bring a balance to our life.

Osho,
It is said that all situations and people we run into are like a mirror to us. Do I attract them both unconsciously as well as accidentally? When somebody is aggressive towards me, how can I distinguish between whether it is me or him who causes it?
Life is very interdependent. It is very difficult to decide who is responsible for what. In truth, we are all responsible for whatever happens; we contribute in some way to it. If somebody becomes aggressive towards you, rather than thinking in the ordinary way that he is aggressive, start thinking from the standpoint, “What is in me that is making him aggressive? – he is not aggressive to everybody.” He is not aggressive to the trees; he is aggressive towards you. There must be something you are doing, some way you are behaving that creates aggression in him.
You may not be doing it to him. That’s what I mean, it is so interwoven. Perhaps you remind him of his father who used to beat him, and he was so small that he could not do anything. And when he sees you, he is not aggressive at you, you are simply symbolic. He is aggressive at his father who is no longer in the world.
So rather than reacting to his aggression, which will make things worse, try to understand. Ask him, “Why are you aggressive to me? Is something wrong in me that hurts you? Have I done something to you? – because I am not aware of doing anything to you. There must be some other reason for your aggression.”
That should be the way of the man of wisdom. And if you ask that person, perhaps tears may come to his eyes and he will start asking your forgiveness, “You have not done anything, you just remind me of my father. When I was small, I was beaten so much that I used to think that when I became big and strong, I would show this man…. By the time I was big and strong he was dead. So something has remained incomplete in me. The moment I see you, that sleeping aggression comes to me. Forgive me, you have not hurt me. It is not your problem, it is my problem.”
If people start behaving in this way, we will soon create a totally different kind of life. You fall in love with a woman – have you ever asked why you have fallen in love with a certain woman when there are so many women around? You never ask. Perhaps she reminds you of your mother? Perhaps the way she walks reminds you of your mother, and you loved your mother so much that the same love is revived again.
Before becoming a fool and falling in love, make a little analysis of what you are doing and why you are doing it. Perhaps that will save great misery in the world. Unconsciously, without understanding your inner sleeping desires, your tendencies, you fall in love with a woman, but you don’t know – you will not be able to love her, because she is not your mother. And as you come closer, you will see, “My God, she is not my mother.” And naturally, that woman has not married a son; she has married a husband. She cannot behave the way your mother may have behaved.
She may be expecting you to behave like her father whom she loved. And some trait in you – and those traits may be very small, very simple: perhaps your mustache is exactly the same – and that’s enough, it triggers the memory of the father who is no more. She has fallen in love with you, but not with you. If before acting people try to understand that whatever they are doing must have a reason within themselves, and that the other is not obliged to fulfill it…The woman may have the same hairdo; that does not mean she is the same kind of person. And if you love the hairdo you can purchase one from a shop which deals in wigs, made just exactly according to your mother – worship it, love it. That will be more sane because that wig will not hurt you, will not demand things which your mother has never demanded. But a new woman, where the only similarity is the hairdo, is not going to fulfill your desires. You are searching for a mother.
Now, psychologists are very much concerned that most problems are because we are brought up by parents. So the girl starts loving the father and the boy starts loving the mother – which they will never find. For their whole lives they will miss the women they are seeking or the men they are searching for.
Your question is significant. It reminds me of George Gurdjieff. He was only nine years old when his father died. And his father must have been a man of great wisdom. They were poor people. He called Gurdjieff close to him and told him, “I am sorry I am not leaving any heritage for you. I am leaving you alone in this vast world of competition, violence, greed. I want to tell you one thing; my whole life’s experience is contained in it. Perhaps you may not understand now, but keep remembering it; one day you will understand.”
And the advice was very simple. The advice was that if anybody is angry at you, don’t react immediately, don’t start fighting. Listen silently to what he is saying. Be very calm and cool. And when he is finished, tell him, “Please give me twenty-four hours to think over what you have said and then I will come with my reply.”
A strange advice but of tremendous psychological implications. Gurdjieff said in his old age that this simple advice changed his whole life because, “Sometimes I would find that his anger had nothing to do with me. I didn’t even have to reply to it; it was not addressed to me. Perhaps he was angry and it was just a coincidence that I happened to be close by – or I would find that what he was saying was right, I had done something wrong…” Then he would go and ask for forgiveness saying, “You were right.”
Gurdjieff says that it shocked people. They said “What kind of boy is this? Even if you hit him, he says, ‘After twenty-four hours, I will come to give you the answer. And if I don’t come that means I don’t have any answer for it. That means it is not a question addressed to me.’“

I have told you a strange anecdote….
In a world psychology conference a very famous psychoanalyst is delivering his thesis, his findings. And just in the front row, an old psychoanalyst, famous in his own way, is sitting beside a beautiful young woman who is new but has produced papers of tremendous insight into human behavior. She has been conferred honorary D.Litt’s from many universities – but she is so young and so beautiful.
She was attracting his attention, distracting him, but more than that…! That old fellow was playing with that young woman’s breasts. That is too much, and just in front…How can you read your thesis?
The psychoanalyst becomes angry. He says things which are not relevant. Even the conference thinks, “What has gone wrong? He has always been a very consistent thinker, but he is looking very disturbed.” And his disturbance is about this old man: “This idiot is playing with the breasts of the beautiful woman.” And certainly a deep desire is there that he would have liked to be in his place.
All this combination of things – and his whole paper was disturbed. He even forgot what he had come to say. He could not complete the paper. In the middle of his thesis, he left the podium and went directly to the lady and said, “You don’t object to this old idiot who is playing with your breasts?”
She said, “It is his problem. He is doing no harm to me. He is very soft, very nice. Why should I bother about his problem?”

It looks strange, but it is true; the problem is of the old man. And the young lady is certainly wiser than both the fellows. “Why should you be disturbed?” she asked. “You are not playing with my breasts; he is playing – it is his problem. I am not disturbed. There is no harm. In fact, he is being very respectful to a beautiful woman, but why are you disturbed? Certainly, deep down, you are thinking, ‘If I had been by the side of the woman…’“
Where can you find such a woman with such understanding…that you play with her breasts – and she does not know you and she allows you because she understands…? That poor fellow must have suffered in his early life. Perhaps he was not breast fed.
All the painters and poets and novelists go on continuously painting breasts. Strange, because the breast is simply a mechanism for the child to be nourished; it is not for old men! Women all over the world who have become a little liberated are against breast feeding because it distorts their breasts. It distorts the roundness of the breast because the child goes on pulling it downwards – and the child has to do it; he is milking the mother – and the breast becomes long.
Existentially, a long breast is very necessary for the survival of the child. If the breast is really round, the child cannot survive because he has such a small face. If he starts milking, his nose will close, he will not be able to breathe; either he can milk or he can breathe. In either case he is going to die. So naturally, he goes on pulling it longer – and no woman wants long breasts; certainly, they don’t look aesthetically beautiful. So there are many devices to keep at least the appearance of a round breast: bras…And even if a few women have to lose their breast in cancer surgery, they will replace it with a rubber breast which is far more perfect, looks really beautiful – but it has to be under the clothes.

A man entered into a circus manager’s office and said, “I have something to offer.”
The manager said, “I am tortured by so many people. What have you to offer?”
He said, “I have a very beautiful woman.”
The manager said, “Can she dance?”
He said, “Dance? You just see her act and you will forget all about dancing.”
The manager said, “Okay. Tonight, bring your woman.”
The woman had such long breasts, so heavy that she crawled on the stage and then tried to stand up.
The manager said, “But where is the dance?”
He said, “This is far more difficult than any dance. And you can see that everybody is laughing. Nobody has laughed at any dance.”
And then the woman went down again. She could not carry that much weight even just to stand.

There are women who are trying to make their breasts bigger with injections or smaller with injections. But this concern with breasts is as ancient as you can conceive: old statues, but the same concern…So you may be interested in a woman whose breasts look rounded, but they may just look rounded and behind the clothes is rubber, not real breasts. So it is perfectly good on the sea beach to talk romance and poetry and have film dialogues. But just on the first night of the honeymoon, everything is going to be a disaster. When you get hold of the breasts, they will both come off in your hands. And the woman can go to sleep telling you, “You can play with them.”
Problems are there, but problems come from within you and then they are projected on other people. The same is happening to other people. They have problems, they have repressed desires, they have incomplete experiences. And if by chance it happens that you fit with something in their psychological poverty, either they can fall in love with you or they can be angry or they can hate you.
There are people who say, “I hate certain persons – just to see them. They have not done anything; I have not even talked to them but just to see them is enough for me to hate.” It cannot be enough to hate but perhaps your experience of the past, of a certain man has damaged the image inside you, and that image fits completely with this man. Naturally, hate arises, love arises, anger arises.
But the man of understanding always looks inwards to find what the cause is: Why am I doing it? And if it is not harmful to the other, and if the other is also willing, that means the other also is expecting some experience of the same kind. Then things go perfectly well; otherwise, every moment problems arise. And you can create actual situations in which you can see how problems arise.
For twenty-four hours, watch your judgments about people – are they good or are they bad? Your responses to people, just watch from where they are coming. Are they coming from them or are they coming from within you? This whole world with all its misery and suffering is within you. This whole world can be a world of bliss and benediction if your inner being changes.
This is my definition of a religious person: he has changed his inner being, cleaned his inner being so he becomes just a pure mirror, reflects but does not react. He feels compassionate, even for those who are full of anger, feels compassionate for those who are sad, miserable, destroying their life by drinking alcohol or using other drugs. All that he feels is compassion. And out of that compassion comes a response: if he can help, he helps.
You cannot create a reaction in the man of wisdom; he never reacts. This is the difference between these two words – they look similar – reaction and response. Reaction is blind and unconscious and it blames the other. Response is conscious and clear and sees things as they are. If he is to blame, he accepts the blame; there is no need to fight. And if he is blameless, then too there is no need to fight: it is your mind; I have nothing to do with it.
I must have received thousands of letters from around the world. A few people say they love me – and they have not even seen me; they have not even read me. From where is their love coming? Perhaps their whole lives they wanted to be in revolt, and hearing about me they see their desire fulfilled – somebody is in revolt. But it has nothing to do with me. It is their own desire, their own projection.
There are thousands of others who go on condemning me for strange reasons. Just a few days ago, a man wrote an article in which he said, “If Osho had not been controversial, he would have been accepted as the greatest intellectual of the last part of this century.”
I asked Anando to write a letter to him and to inquire, “Can you tell us of any great man, just a single name will do, who was great and not controversial?” He has not answered. Then we published the letter – but he is hiding; there is no answer. Every great man, Gautam Buddha, Zarathustra, Lao Tzu…were to their contemporaries the most controversial people. Only people who are making shoes, who are cleaning the streets are not controversial.
The moment you say something original, it hurts many people because their prejudice comes into a clash with the original idea. They can’t see that they are angry not because of me, they are angry because they are prejudiced. If they were people of silence, they would have balanced thoughts about both: “Who knows, perhaps the original idea is right? It has to be given a chance.” And certainly it needs to be respected, because I am not imposing my ideas on you, I am simply expressing. But everywhere there seem to be thousands of locks on every mouth. It is all nonsense talk which says, “freedom of thought.”
There is neither freedom of thought nor freedom of expression. And these people who have been condemned as controversial are the cause of the whole evolution. The noncontroversial, the mediocre, the retarded…they have not contributed anything. They have destroyed much but they have never contributed anything.
So whenever something happens, remember, first look within yourself. Perhaps what is being said is right, and if it is not right then it is none of your concern, it is somebody else’s problem who is projecting it on you.

Just to break your silence because sometimes it becomes too heavy…

Paddy and Sean go hunting together in the Oregon mountains. After a while, Sean stops to take a piss, and a rattlesnake bites him on the prick. He calls out to Paddy and tells him to go to the nearest village and ask what to do.
Paddy runs off and after half an hour runs breathlessly into the doctor’s office and asks for advice.
The doctor says, “Take a sharp knife and make an opening in the wound and suck out the poison.”
Paddy rushes back and as he approaches, Sean calls out, “Paddy, hey, Paddy, what did he say?”
“I am sorry,” replies Paddy, “but he says you are going to die.”

Little Ernie asks his dad, “Dad, is it true that God exists everywhere?”
“That’s right, son,” replies his father, still reading his newspaper.
“Is he in the garage?” asks Ernie.
“Yes, son,” replies his father, “he is in the garage.”
“Is he out in the garden?” asks Ernie.
“Yes, he is, son,” replies his father.
“Is he under mummy’s dress?” asks Ernie.
“Yes, he is everywhere,” snaps his father getting a little irritated.
So little Ernie looks in the garage but he can’t find God. He looks out in the garden but he can’t find God there either.
So he goes into the kitchen and crawls under his mother’s dress.
“Ernie,” she cries, “what are you doing?”
“Quiet, mum,” says Ernie triumphantly, “I have just caught God by his beard.”