---
title: Sat Chit Anand 01
series: Sat Chit Anand 01-30
talk_number: 1
url: https://oshoworld.com/sat-chit-anand-01
language: English
duration: 01:27:18
author: THE MANTRA SERIES
scraped_at: 2026-01-03T09:20:03.863295+00:00
---
Osho,
Is there any definition of the ultimate experience other than satyam shivam sundaram: truth, godliness, beauty?
The experience of the ultimate is always the same, but the expression can be different. The expression depends on the mystic; the experience does not depend on him.
The first definition I gave you is the definition by the poetic, aesthetic, sensitive individual for whom satya – truth – can come only as beauty; truth and beauty create the ultimate peak of godliness. The poet cannot imagine that beauty will not be a part of the ultimate unity. His eyes are receptive to beauty. In his expression, truth comes to him and is transformed as beauty. Beauty is the god of the poet, of the painter, of all creative artists.
So the first definition was the definition from the artistic soul. Most of the mystics have been poets – not ordinary poets, concerned with the mundane, but poets of the sacred. This sensitivity of the poet is essential to arrive at the definition of the ultimate experience as truth, godliness, and beauty.
But there are also other mystics, who are not poetic because to be a poet takes a certain talent. Everybody can be a mystic – the mystic is our very being, the unfolding of the mystic rose within us – but not everybody can be a poet. Poetry is a talent, though it comes very close to mysticism. So either the poet becomes the mystic – then comes the definition satyam shivam sundaram – or the mystic suddenly finds himself filled with tremendous beauty and out of his spontaneity starts singing and dancing. He may not be linguistically right, but that is not his concern.
Meera, Kabir, Farid were not poets from the very beginning. They became poets when the experience happened. As they opened their hearts to the universe, perhaps a talent that was dormant in them suddenly became active; everything opened. An immense poetry started flowing through them, a poetry no poet can write, because the poems are not compositions but their heartbeats, their very life.
There are other people who have attained the ultimate, for example, Gautam Buddha or Socrates or Pythagoras or Lao Tzu. They were not poets. They didn’t have the talent of being a poet, either at the beginning or at the end of their experience. Their definition is bound to be different. The experience, remember, is always the same, but the expression will depend on the individual.
The second most important definition, which is in the same category as satyam shivam sundaram, is sat-chit-anand. Sat means truth; chit means consciousness; anand means bliss. Certainly, in any definition, truth is going to be the essential part that cannot be dropped. It is the experience of ultimate truth. In the second definition – just as in the first definition – sat remains the most prominent. But two new things have come in: consciousness and blissfulness.
Although the first definition is beautiful – tremendously beautiful – it will not be many people’s experience because the talent to be a poet is rare. The second definition is going to be the experience of many more.
Meditation brings you to the final peak of consciousness – that is chit, exactly in the middle. On one side is truth; on the other side is bliss. As meditation flowers, you will find that on the one hand truth has revealed to you all its mysteries and on the other that blissfulness is showering all its treasures on you. It is as significant a definition as the first, but you can see the difference: there is no place for sundaram, beauty. The person has no sensitivity toward beauty, but the person is absolutely alert and conscious of great blissfulness overflowing in him and a feeling, an indubitable feeling, that he has arrived home. That is his truth.
In Sanskrit, unlike other languages, words can be joined together. Sanskrit has an approach, and perhaps this approach has come from the enlightened ones. So many people have become enlightened in this country and they have left their impact on Sanskrit, on the language. They will not say sat-chit-anand the way I have explained it to you. I have cut one word into three, just to explain it to you, because in English there cannot be one word for all three. You cannot join truth, consciousness, blissfulness into a single word. The Sanskrit word is sachchidanand. All three words are joined together. Sat is there, chit is there, anand is there, but they are not separate and there is no gap: sachchidanand.
It is significant to remember that the experience is one orgasmic, organic, unitary experience. It does not come in parts as sat, as chit, as anand. It comes into existence in totality, and that totality is sachchidanand. To denote, to emphasize, the unity – neither sat can exist without chit, nor can chit exist without anand – they have used a joined word: sachchidanand. It is not only a question of language. Deep down it is an experience that they all come together. In fact there is no way to create demarcations: this is truth, this is consciousness, this is bliss. Suddenly they are all within you. In other words, truth is consciousness and bliss; or vice versa, bliss is consciousness and truth.
The division I made was just to make you understand. Now I want you to be aware that in the experience itself there is no division. It has the fragrance of blissfulness, it has the light of consciousness, it has the revelation of truth – all simultaneously and together. They are not steps to each other. It is not possible to drop one of them and experience the other two; they are an intrinsic unity, an organic unity.
This is also a very beautiful definition, and is applicable to more mystics than the first definition. Gautam Buddha would never have defined the ultimate experience in terms of beauty. Beauty somehow carries a sense of our ordinary life. You may say it is a much higher beauty but still something of the ordinary remains. The moment you say “beauty,” you come down to the body, you come down to the flowers, you come down to the sunset. The beauty the mystics are talking about is not the beauty of these small experiences but the beauty of the whole – a beauty of which we have no idea, of which we have not even dreamed.
The second definition I am giving to you today is absolutely a unity. Nothing of it connects with our unconsciousness and its world – neither truth, nor consciousness, nor bliss. In a way, it is purer; in a way, it simply makes it clear that you have gone beyond the mundane and entered the sacred. The whole vision has changed, not even a trace of the mundane is left. It can be said to be a more authentic definition than the first, and more mystics have defined their experience with the second definition.
Naturally, most probably, if you ever experience the ultimate, you will come to the second definition. Very few of you may experience beauty as that is a minority definition. But I respect minorities, so I took it first.
This is the majority definition: more logical, more perfect, but less sensitive, less human. The first was more human – at least there was a connecting link between our ordinary world and the extraordinary experience. In this definition, all bridges are broken. You are no longer part of the ordinary. You have simply transported your consciousness to the extraordinary which is not visible to the eyes, which is not tangible: you cannot hear it, you cannot see it, you cannot taste it.
But in the first definition, the word sundaram, beauty, gives a sense that your eyes are capable of seeing it; perhaps your hands can feel it, perhaps your ears can hear the beautiful music in it. The word beauty functions almost as a bridge. In the second definition there is no bridge but a quantum leap. You simply jump from mind to no-mind. Only no-mind can be aware of truth; only no-mind can be filled with consciousness; only no-mind can be showered with thousands of flowers of bliss. Nothing relates to your ordinary world, so in this way it is purer.
Both have their pros and cons, and I want you to be aware of them. But remember: don’t choose the definition. First choose the experience, then the definition will come on its own accord. If you choose the definition first, it may not fit your individuality and the definition itself may become a hindrance.
Go deeper into meditation. Experience is the thing that matters. Then how you express it is dependent on you. Most probably you will define it as sat-chit-anand: truth, consciousness, bliss. It is more universal; very few people are poets.
I am reminded of Rabindranath Tagore. He absolutely insisted that there is only one definition of the ultimate experience, and that is satyam shivam sundaram. He could not conceive of the ultimate experience not having beauty in it. He could drop anything but beauty. His poetic soul was even ready to say that you can drop truth, you can drop godliness, but please save beauty.
It happened that Mahatma Gandhi wanted the temples of Khajuraho… These are some of the most beautiful creations of man; there is nothing comparable on the whole earth. The temples of Puri and Konark, which are similar, have not achieved the perfection of Khajuraho. There must have been at least one hundred temples, very big temples, and you cannot find even a single inch which has not been carved, which has not been made beautiful. Naked men and women in different postures of love…
Naturally Gandhi was very much annoyed, and at first he wanted to demolish those temples. Seventy temples had already been demolished by the Mohammedans because Mohammedans have a fanatical attitude that God cannot be represented in a statue, a picture, or anything. This is perfectly okay if it is your idea, but to interfere with somebody else’s idea is idiotic. Somebody wants to represent his god in a statue – who are you to interfere? But every religion thinks it is responsible for the whole of humanity and wants to impose its idea on every human being. So when the Mohammedans came they could not believe it; they destroyed seventy temples of tremendous value.
But thirty of the temples were hidden in a thick forest, so they were saved. Gandhi wanted to do the same as those Mohammedans had done. He wanted to demolish them, but for a different reason. He was afraid that the temples would show the whole world that the Indians are not very moral people, that they are not puritans.
What kind of temples are these, in which each temple has thousands of couples carved in stone? Full-sized men and women, so beautiful that once you have seen a Khajuraho temple woman, a statue, no woman will look beautiful to you. Every woman will seem just a faded memory of something real. Those stones are so real…
I used to go to Khajuraho. It was very close to my university, just a hundred miles away, so whenever I had time I would drive there. The guide, who finally became a sannyasin, was himself ashamed to show them to people, but I told him, “You don’t understand. You need not be ashamed. These pictures, these statues, these sculptures are not obscene. There is not a single hint of obscenity, even though they are absolutely naked, in loving embraces, making love. There is not a hint of obscenity, unless your mind is full of obscenity.”

A European prime minister was going to visit Khajuraho. One of my friends was the education minister of the state in which Khajuraho lies. The prime minister of India told the education minister, “I am busy and cannot come; otherwise I would have come with the guest to show him Khajuraho. So it is your responsibility to take him there because you are the most educated minister in your state.”
My friend phoned me and said, “I am very much ashamed of Khajuraho; it is such an embarrassing place. And when outsiders who have only seen churches in the name of religion come, they cannot believe that this is a temple, a holy place. And I myself feel guilty, so I cannot explain, and I don’t know what to explain.”
I said, “I will come.” I went there with the guest and the education minister who was shrinking inside. You cannot conceive of any possible loving posture that is not carved there, in such beauty, such tremendous beauty, that it is almost as if the stones have come alive. It seems as though the woman is going to come out of the wall on which the statue is carved. So alive…
The education minister remained outside and I took the guest in. He was amazed at the beauty, that bodies can be made so beautifully in stone, can give such life to the stone, such warmth. He had not known that such a thing exists anywhere in the world. I explained to him, “These are on the outer side of the temple, but you should be aware that inside the temple there are no sculptures, no statues; there’s just absolute silence.”
He said, “This is a revelation, this is strange. Statues should be inside the temple. Why are they outside, and inside there is nothing, just silence?”
I said to him, “These temples were made some three thousand years ago by the greatest psychologists that have appeared on the earth.”
They were called Tantrikas; their whole approach was called Tantra. The very word tantra means expanding consciousness. They made these beautiful temples all around the country. Mohammedans destroyed them; it was just fortunate that these were in a thick forest, hidden. Only meditators used to go there; there is no village surrounding the temples. By a fortunate coincidence they were saved.
I told him, “The secret is, Tantra believes that unless you have gone through all sexual experiences to the point where sex does not matter to you at all… That is a transcendence of your energy. At that point, you are capable of entering the inner sanctum of the temple. You are ready for the nothingness of Gautam Buddha; you are ready for pure silence.”
Meditators used to meditate for months on those statues. It is a great strategy, because looking at all those statues, a moment comes when something in your unconscious disappears. Not just looking – at one time it was months, sometimes years, of training. But they were not allowed inside the temple until they became uninterested in these sexual scriptures. When their master saw that somebody had become completely uninterested – even when sitting in front of the most beautiful woman he was sitting with closed eyes – then he was allowed to enter the temple.
Now, those sexual thoughts are the major thoughts in your mind. Every three minutes the ordinary man thinks about sex at least once, and every five minutes every woman thinks at least once about sex. These are the very subtle mistakes which God made when he created the world; that’s why I say there is no God, to relieve him of all this responsibility. This is a disparity which is dangerous!
When we came out, the prime minister was very much impressed. The education minister was waiting outside. Although he had not been inside, he was still feeling embarrassed. Just to hide his embarrassment, he told the guest, “Don’t take much note of it. It was a small current of thinkers who created these temples, and we are ashamed – they are so obscene.”
The guest said, “Obscene? Then I will have to go back and take another look; I did not find anything obscene.”
Those naked statues look so innocent, so childlike; they are not there to provoke your sexuality. Obscenity is a very subtle phenomenon, it’s very difficult to make the distinction whether something is obscene or not. But this should be the criterion – I think this is the only criterion: obscenity is when it provokes sexuality in you and if it does not provoke sexuality but just a sense of tremendous splendor and beauty, it is not obscene. However, it will depend on individuals. The same statue may look to someone obscene, and to someone else a beautiful piece of art.
I told the education minister, “Your mind is full of obscenity. This guest from the outside is far clearer. He did not raise a single question about the obscenity of the temple.”

Mahatma Gandhi’s mind was full of sex his whole life. When India became free, he thought that now was his chance: either dismantle the temples, destroy them, or at least do what he had been insisting on from the 1930’s: if you don’t want them destroyed, cover them with huge hills of mud – the temples are very high. Then they would remain there, and if, once in a while, you want to show them to some special guest from the outside, you can remove the mud, clean the place, and then put the mud back again.
It was Rabindranath Tagore who opposed Mahatma Gandhi’s proposal, saying, “It is sheer stupidity. I have seen those temples; they have inspired me to great heights. Under their inspiration I have written such beautiful poems. And they are the greatest heritage of one of the most significant schools of psychologists, who penetrated into human psychology and life energy so deeply that they found a way, a device, to transform it and make men free of sexuality.” Because Rabindranath resisted, Gandhi could not cover them with mud.
It was Rabindranath who insisted that the only definition that is exactly right is “truth, godliness, beauty.” If something has to be dropped from the definition, you can drop truth, you can drop godliness, but you cannot drop beauty.
Beauty is the sky for the poet, for the painter, for the musician – how is it possible for the ultimate truth to be ugly? It has to be the most beautiful experience. But the definition will be applicable to only very few people. The second definition will apply to a vast majority of people.
There is one more difference that has to be remembered: the first definition is outgoing. Truth is at the center of being, then godliness surrounds it, and then there’s another circle of beauty. But that beauty is not beyond the beauty of the trees and the flowers and human faces; everything that is beautiful in the world is a link to the ultimate.
Rabindranath was the first man in history who said beauty is truth. Nobody has ever said that. There have been people who said truth is beauty, but nobody who has dared to say that beauty is truth, putting beauty on the highest peak. That will be possible only for those who can feel the sensitivity of the beautiful. It is not for everyone. The second definition is not so outgoing – it does not go out at all. Truth, consciousness, bliss – all are inside you. None of these three experiences takes you out.
In psychological terminology, the first definition can be said to be of the outgoing consciousness, expanding consciousness – just as when you throw a pebble into a silent lake, and ripples start moving toward the farther shore. The first definition is expanding, outgoing. Psychologists have a special word for it – they call it extrovert. And certainly the poet is an extrovert because he sees the beauty of the trees and the beauty of the stars and the beauty of the birds singing. He is an extrovert. The second definition is introvert. It concentrates on your very being. It is enough, there is no need to go out: truth, consciousness, blissfulness.
In still other words, it can be said that the first definition is that of the bodhisattvas and the second definition is of the arhats. I have explained to you these two kinds of enlightened people. The arhats simply become pillars of silence, joy, truth, but they never share it. They never bother to initiate anyone, they never guide anyone. The bodhisattvas, the moment they have attained, start spreading like ripples all around to the farther shores of humanity. They want to reach everyone.
Your individuality already contains an inbuilt program for whether you will turn into a bodhisattva or into an arhat. Nothing can be done about it; you cannot change it, you cannot decide it. You will have to pass beyond the mind, and only then will you realize who you are: a bodhisattva or an arhat.
Sat-chit-anand is absolutely inner, introvert – your interior subjectivity. It has nothing to do with anyone else. It is another thing if somebody gets attracted to you, it is another thing if many are magnetically pulled toward you, but the arhat himself does not make a single move to transform anybody or to give him a hand to pull him out of his ditch. If somebody is interested, he can come, but the arhat does not take on the responsibility of being somebody’s master. If you insist, he will say something to you, but as telegraphically as possible.
The bodhisattva functions totally differently: sharing is his joy and he wants this world to become more beautiful. He wants to contribute to the world in some way, so that when he leaves the world, he leaves it a little more beautiful than the world he had come into seventy or eighty years before. The arhat is simply not concerned with anyone. He is just a pillar of consciousness. If somebody can learn something from his lifestyle, that’s another thing. He is not a master; he is only a mystic.
This second definition has to sink deep in you because, finally, most of you will find this definition. Remember this beautiful word: sachchidanand.

Osho,
Is it true that you make things happen to us according to our needs in this very moment, or does your aura cause us to choose the happenings ourselves?
My mother is suffering from cancer and multiple sclerosis, and has been feeling strong healing energy in the last weeks. She thought you had been sending it. How do you manage to arrange all these learning situations and send all the necessary energy to your sannyasins all over the world?
There are a few things I would like put on record. First, I never do anything. Second, if you want, all my energies are available to you, but that is your doing. Third, it is possible if you are in deep trust and love with me to unconsciously become a transmitter to your mother of a healing energy.
But please don’t make me responsible for anything. This responsibility is very dangerous – it is walking on a razor’s edge. Today you find your mother is healing, and you praise me and love me and trust me. But no mother can live forever. The day she dies, your whole love, your trust in me, will simply disappear because I allowed your mother to die, because I did not give her the healing energy. That’s why, from the very beginning, I want my hands to be completely clean.
I don’t accept praise because I know that behind every praise there is the possibility of condemnation. All over the world I am already so condemned, at least leave a few people who don’t condemn me! But you may not be aware that this is how things go wrong. People start expecting, and if by some coincidence their expectations are fulfilled, they are immensely grateful. But it is only a coincidence. If they are not fulfilled, then I am “the god who failed.” They make me a god, only to declare later that I am the god who failed. I am simply enjoying my energy. It is overflowing and enough for anybody who wants to share it. But the whole doing is theirs.
So remember: it is your trust, it is your love, it is your devotion that may become a transmitting medium to your mother. Because you love me and trust me, because you love your mother and want her to be healed, it is possible for a subtle energy to reach her. But you are the doer – that is my emphasis. I am not the doer.
What you are saying is beautiful, and it will be difficult for anyone other than me to reject it. Just go to any so-called guru – India is so full of them – and if you say such a thing, he will reply, “That’s perfectly right. I am taking care of the whole world.” But as far as I am concerned, I cannot even take care of myself! I am certainly a lazy guy. I will not take such trouble to reach your mother. Otherwise it will become difficult for my sannyasins to die. And just as a symbol, I have made samadhis for the sannyasins who have died. So remember, I am not going to protect you.
When death comes, it is perfectly good. Let it come. I may even help death rather than you, because death will relieve you of all pain, all stupidities, all diseases and particularly the fear of death. Once you are dead, you are no longer afraid – even of death – and you will rest in your grave for eternity. So why should I prevent you? But if you go and say these things to somebody else, he will be immensely happy. These are the people who go on creating wrong concepts in people’s minds.
My thing is very clear: I am available. If you trust me, you can draw as much energy as you want. If you don’t trust me, you have closed the doors yourself. But it is always your doing, it is never my doing. I cannot take the credit for it; the credit goes to you. You must be in deep love with your mother and because you are in deep trust with me, you can become a medium for a healing energy to reach to your mother.
As far as I am concerned, my whole teaching is doing without doing, action in inaction. But this kind of misunderstanding happens.

Two cannibals, a father and son, are walking through the jungle checking their mantraps when they find a beautiful white girl who is in distress. The son, an impulsive boy, exclaims, “Look, Dad! A white girl. Let us eat her right now.”
His father, who has had more experience in the world and has been to the mission school, pauses thoughtfully and says, “No, son, let us take her home and eat your mother.”

Different people take different approaches…

When an Englishman does not get on with his wife, he goes to the pub; a Frenchman goes to his mistress, a Greek goes to sea, a German goes to war, an Australian goes to a cricket match, an Indian goes to the Himalayas, an American goes to his lawyer and a Japanese goes and commits hara-kiri.

Just different people, different understandings. But here with me… This one is for all of you.

Rubin Moskowitz went to one of the best restaurants in New York and treated himself to a huge meal with all the trimmings, finishing up with a Havana cigar.
Finally, the waiter brought the bill on a silver tray. It came to ninety-nine dollars and ninety-nine cents, so Rubin paid with a hundred dollar bill.
About five minutes later, he called the waiter back and asked for his change. Without altering his expression, the waiter left but returned a moment later with his silver tray. On it sat a penny and a packet of condoms.
Rubin was shocked and demanded an explanation. The waiter lifted his nose in the air and said, “Sir, it is the policy of our restaurant to encourage customers like you not to reproduce.”

============================================================

Osho,
Can one really miss you? When love and this incredible pull are there, can one really go astray?
Prem Anugraho, it seems almost impossible to miss the goal when you are just one foot away, but even then people have missed. How far away was Judas from Jesus? He was his most cultured, educated and sophisticated disciple. In fact, among all the others, he was the only one who was educated – and he was really close. But life always remains unknown; it is not something like mathematics or logic where you can come to a conclusion.
Just because he was so close, he missed. It is very illogical, but if you go deep down, you can understand the psychology of it. Because he was very close, he was hoping – perhaps unknowingly – that he would be Jesus’ successor. I am not saying he was intentionally trying to be the successor. In fact, it was obvious that there was nobody else except Judas to succeed Jesus.
In every way, he was qualified; in every way, Jesus showered his love and his blessings on him, but the day Jesus said “Nobody is going to be my successor. I have not come here to create a dynasty. My kingdom is of the other world – the Kingdom of God,” that distance of just one foot became a distance of thousands of miles. That same night, Judas betrayed Jesus. He sold him to the enemies for only thirty pieces of silver. Of course, it was done in a very emotional, hasty way – again unconsciously.
This is the trouble with man; his actions are not conscious. Hence you cannot condemn him. Like a blind man, he is groping in darkness, not knowing where he is going and why he is going. He becomes a little alert when it is too late, when he has acted. Then there is no way to undo it.
When Judas sold Jesus for thirty pieces of silver, he was not aware of what exactly he was doing and what it was going to lead to. On the day Jesus was crucified, Judas was in the crowd with tears in his eyes and he threw away those thirty pieces of silver. He didn’t think that this was going to be the consequence of an act done in anger, rage, frustration – he was not thinking that it would mean crucifixion. Twenty-four hours after Jesus’ crucifixion he hanged himself in a tree, committed suicide.
Christians don’t talk about Judas much, but his psychology should be understood more clearly as he is not alone. It happens almost always, with every great master. Strangely enough, those who were very close have gone far away; those who were far away – had never thought, dreamed, of being very close – came close.
There is a very subtle psychological background to it. Gautam Buddha was betrayed by one of his cousin-brothers; Mahavira was betrayed by his son-in-law. In both cases the situation was the same as with Judas: because they were so close, they naturally hoped – without being conscious of it – that they were going to be successors.
Now, nobody can be a successor in enlightenment. It is not a worldly treasure, you cannot inherit it. You cannot become enlightened just because your father was enlightened. You cannot become enlightened just because you are very close to somebody who is enlightened. The distance of one foot or the distance of one mile or the distance of one light-year makes no difference – distance is distance.
I insist on this so that you will not miss. I understand your love, your gratitude, your deep commitment. You are asking, “Can one really miss you?” It should not be so. One should not miss; there is no reason for it. But man is so unconscious that he does not function reasonably. He functions irrationally. He functions without any understanding of his own actions, intentions, hidden desires, ambitions.
You are saying, “When love and this incredible pull are there, can one really go astray?” One should not go astray if one is conscious, but the possibility cannot be denied. You have to forgive me, the possibility cannot be denied. The closer you come to a master, the more you are lost, the more you are dissolved. In the fear of dissolution, the fear of your personality being lost, you may start backing off.
You have to understand that this fear is there. Even the moth that is magnetically attracted toward a flame does not go directly into the flame. I have been watching moths – strangely enough, they never go directly into the flame. They first go round and round, perhaps hesitating, perhaps having another thought, perhaps taking time – a little more time – before they take the jump. The jump into the flame is going to be their death on one plane, and the other plane on which they will be reborn is not yet there – it is not guaranteed.
Only your trust is the guarantee, your love is the guarantee. Other than that, you don’t have any solid foundation. You are gambling by taking a jump. And the ultimate is available only to the gamblers, not to the businessmen who are continuously counting pros and cons, whether this will be profitable or this will be a loss. These people will go on counting for millions of lives. They may come across a Gautam Buddha, a Jesus or a Socrates, but seventy or eighty years are not enough for them to come to a conclusion.
Only a gambler, in a single moment, can take the jump. I hope you will be able to take the jump. Nobody can prevent you except yourself. You have asked a very significant question, a question that implies the very quantum leap of the disciple to the devotee, the quantum leap from personality to individuality, from a dewdrop to the ocean.
Have you ever seen a lotus flower with its leaves just above the water? In the night, dewdrops gather on the leaves. They look so beautiful in the early morning sun, far more beautiful than any pearls, far more alive, far more radiant. But slowly they slip from the leaves, finally dropping into the ocean. A dewdrop slipping from a lotus leaf is the situation of a disciple. So close to the ocean and yet – because of the closeness itself – a tremendous fear arises: to pull oneself back.
You are saying, “And this incredible pull…” Just because of this incredible pull, one can start resisting, because you don’t understand all the subtle workings of your mind. Nature, as it is, has to be understood if you want to transcend it.
In all the medical “-pathies” developed around the world – homeopathy or ayurveda or acupuncture – except allopathy, nobody has exactly understood the inner function of nature in man’s body and mind. I say except allopathy because others may be helpful, not in a small way either – if you look at their help, it is tremendous – but they are not scientific.
In almost seventy percent of cases, ayurveda will be successful, acupuncture may be successful, homeopathy may be successful, naturopathy may be successful. But remember the seventy percent – it is no more than that because seventy percent of diseases are false. They are just in your mind, they don’t really exist. That’s why you don’t need real medicine; any hocus-pocus will do. And seventy percent is not a small percentage so I would not like these “-pathies” to disappear from the world. I want them to be recognized, because seventy percent is big. Strangely enough, those seventy percent of the cases are the most difficult as far as allopathy is concerned.
Allopathy finds itself in difficulty: how to deal with a person who has no disease but believes he has? Allopathy has no way of helping such a person – only thirty percent remain to be helped by allopathy. It is a strange world. Thirty percent are helped by the most scientific approach and seventy percent by all kinds of hocus-pocus – superstitious approaches which really don’t make any change, but they help. The most scientific approach of allopathy is based on a deep understanding of nature: the body has a resistance of its own. Because of this fact, naturopathy condemns allopathy.
Allopathy goes on injecting viruses into patients because the allopathic understanding is that the moment the body gets a virus, it immediately creates antibodies. It immediately starts fighting, it has a resistance of its own. The whole body immediately goes on red alert to destroy the disease. Naturopathy condemns it because it thinks people are being poisoned with diseases. You are supposed to take out diseases and you are, on the contrary, putting poisonous viruses into people’s bodies. Naturopathy cleans people’s bodies by fasting, by strange methods that you cannot believe. But they can help only those people who are not suffering from any real disease.
It is the same situation with the mind. A scientific approach to the mind will make it clear. The closer you come to the master, in deep love, in an incredible pull, your biological mind – which is thousands of years old – immediately creates an anti-pull as a protection, as a defense. You are moving toward danger: because of the danger of the death of your personality, the mind immediately pulls back.
You always keep a little distance to people you love, but you can come very close to the person you don’t love because there is no fear, no question of merging or melting. You can come close to your enemy without any problem. You are not going to melt into him, so you can rub shoulders with your enemy without any fear. But with a friend, the mind always keeps a little distance. Coming too close is risky; you may not be able to come back to your old personality again – the risk is real.
You ask me, “With this incredible pull, can one really go astray?” It’s just because of this incredible pull that you may go astray. Just to avoid it, you may take a different route. So if you are clear about it, missing can be avoided. As far as I know, neither Jesus nor Mahavira nor Gautam Buddha ever told their disciples that it is possible to miss. They all took for granted that those who had come to them had simply come to them. But I see deeper into the nature of man, and their disciples prove what I am proposing.
Jesus never thought, even dreamed, that Judas would sell him for thirty silver pieces. He loved the man so much and Judas loved him so much – it seemed almost impossible. That’s why after twenty-four hours Judas felt so repentant that the only way he saw to get out of this guilt was to commit suicide. To go on living with this guilt was more difficult than committing suicide. He also could not believe it. He loved Jesus so much. How could he have done such a thing?
The whole psychology of man has not been explored and because it has not been fully explored, there are corners – dark corners – that you go on forgetting. You simply remain attentive to the lighted spots of love and trust, but you forget completely that there are nooks and corners in your being where there is no light, no love, no trust. They are also part of you; in a strange way they are more powerful than your love and your trust.
On what grounds can I say that? I say it on a very fundamental ground – your love is spent, your trust is spent, but your dark spots are unspent. Their whole energy is gathering. They are the antibodies against your love, against your trust. They are your doubts, they are your distrust, they are your hate – and they are accumulating.
You go on sharing your love, you go on sharing your trust. What about your hate, what about your distrust, what about your doubt? These go on accumulating. Naturally, these phenomena are the phenomena of darkness. So they hide in dark corners in your being, just waiting for the chance when they can take revenge with full vengeance.
Any moment, when you start wavering a little, hesitating a little – to go one step more or wait – those forces which are repressed in you immediately take possession of you. And they are so powerful that they can pull you away from the source that was going to be a rebirth to you. They can pull you away from your love, from your trust, from your commitment. They can pull you away from the ultimate revolution that was going to happen within you.
But if you are aware, alert, watchful, not allowing any dark corners inside you, making every nook and corner of your mind full of light, then of course it is impossible to miss, impossible to go astray.
Anugraho, your very name means gratitude, and to me gratitude is the only prayer. But small words like gratitude contain so much that you should go deeper into them, so that you can become aware of the whole territory. Your gratitude should not remain a small lighted spot in your being; it should become your whole being. Only then are you absolutely safe from going astray, from missing the message, from missing the master.
Remember, I am not a missionary. I am not trying to convince you of any ideological, intellectual or philosophical theories. That is very simple. It is necessary for you to understand that not a single philosopher was betrayed by his students. I have been wondering about that: what happened? Jesus was betrayed, Mahavira was betrayed, Buddha was betrayed – what happened to the great philosophers like Aristotle, Hegel, Kant? They had thousands of students. But nobody betrayed them because they were only students, far away. They never came close because they didn’t even become disciples, what to say about devotees? They never came so close, where the distance is almost negligible, nonexistential. That is the reason why they were not betrayed.
Their whole philosophical teaching was just intellectual. They were giving you arguments in support of their system of thought – and they were great intellectuals. At the most you could argue with them, but you could not win. The students who were at the side of Plato or Aristotle or Hegel or Kant were not great intellectuals. They could raise questions, they could argue a little bit, but those philosophers were tremendously logical and they had worked out their systems in such minute detail that it was impossible to win an argument with them. Every argument meant that finally the students would be even more convinced.
But it was just a communication from one head to another head. There was no question of coming close to the heart; there was no question of love or trust. I am not trying to convince you of any ideology, I am trying to impart to you a new being, a new transformation. It is more than mind can do; it is much more than words can express. It is something that goes on happening without words, without mind.
Slowly, slowly, the more you start feeling my presence, the more you become accustomed to my silences of the heart, the closer you will move. The final stop will be when you have come too close. Just for a moment you will have to think whether to go one step more or a few steps backward or move away – it is too dangerous. The moth has come very close to the flame – any closer and death is certain.
The ancient seers of the East describe the master as death: a strange definition! When I first came across it… Death? But slowly, slowly it became clear. To me they were right, yet their definition is only half. I say, the master is death and resurrection. Just to stop at death is very dangerous. It will give a totally different idea to the disciple, making him even more afraid. He has to be assured of a resurrection.
That is not possible only with intellectual argumentation, but by opening your heart to the disciple, inviting him within. By and by his fear will disappear. He will start feeling a new energy arising in him, a new life and a new way of seeing things, a new approach to looking at the world. And everything becomes so psychedelically beautiful, so colorful, so blissful. Then he does not care, he knows he is on the right path.
It is not a conviction, but a realization that one is on the right path. Each moment the silence is becoming deeper, each moment the joy is becoming wider, greater. Each moment new flowers are continuously blossoming, new fragrances are surrounding you. Each moment you are coming to something tremendously valuable. But you cannot figure it out unless you have entered it.
A missionary is an ugly phenomenon. I am absolutely against anybody being a missionary. He neither knows anything, nor can he help anybody toward knowing or toward being. A master is a totally different thing. A missionary can be prepared in a school, in a college. There are colleges around the world where missionaries are prepared.
Just a few days ago I was telling you about a Catholic missionary college where a professor asked a student, “When you have become a missionary, how are you going to deliver your sermons in the church?
“For instance,” he said, “when you are talking about heaven, let your face show a radiance, let your eyes light up, let your whole being, your body, indicate that you are thrilled.”
The student asked, “That’s okay, but what about when we are talking about hell?”
The professor said, “For hell, your normal face will do. You don’t have to make any effort.”

A Catholic is trying to convert a Jew. He is really taking on a very difficult job. I am the only person who is deeply conversant with the Jews. Half my sannyasins are Jews. It has never happened before and it will never happen again; Jews are difficult people.
A Catholic trying to convert a Jew tells him that if he becomes a Catholic his prayers will certainly be answered, because the priest will give them to the bishop, who will give them to the cardinal, who will give them to the pope, who will shove them up into heaven through a hole in the Vatican roof – which just matches a hole in the floor of heaven – where St. Peter will take them to the Virgin Mary, who will speak on their behalf with Jesus, who will put in a good word for them with God.
The whole channel of all the right people!
The Jew repeats this whole story with an astonished air, ending with, “You know, I guess it must be true, because I have always wondered what they do with all the shit in heaven. They must throw it down through that little hole in the Vatican roof, where the pope gives it to the cardinal, who gives it to the bishop, who gives it to the priest, who gives it to you – and now you are trying to give it to me!”

Converting anybody just with words is an absurd activity. It is not conversion, it is just salesmanship. Authentic conversion comes by experience, but experience is only possible if you allow yourself to become vulnerable, receptive, to someone who has arrived. Perhaps it was possible with Jesus, but it is not possible with the pope.
Just look at his picture! Can you think this man can radiate anything that will thrill your heart? And he is God’s representative, he is the infallible representative of God. Look at his face! He is just a stupid Polack; everybody knows it. You cannot make a Polack infallible simply by choosing him as pope; that goes against all the laws of existence.
But if it happens in your life that you come close to a man who is at home, who has arrived, then don’t be worried about taking any risk. Every risk is a great opportunity to have a taste of the infinite, to become one with the eternal mystery of existence. Hence I say again: there is no need to miss, but people are unconscious and go on missing. There is no need to go astray, but people are not alert, so it is very difficult to prevent them from going astray.
When somebody turns back, goes away, the master can only look on helplessly with tears in his eyes, because the master cannot interfere in your independence, in your freedom. Even if it is the freedom of going astray, the freedom of going away, he will allow it. He respects you and loves you and he cannot enforce anything on you.

Osho,
What is the difference between the master seeing the disciple and the disciple seeing the master?
The master sees you not only as you are, but also as what you can become. In your seeds, he sees the spring and the flowers. When you see the master, it will depend from what distance you are seeing. If you are just a student, you will see his beautiful words, arguments, ideology. If you are seeing him as a disciple, you will see him much more in his silences than in his words, much more in his presence than in his presentation, much more in his eyes than in the ideas and the philosophies he is talking about, much more in his gestures, in his grace. But if you are looking at him from the space of a devotee, then you will see only a mirror in which your ultimate being is reflected.
As far as you are concerned, what you see will depend on where you are, where you are standing, at what distance. As far as the master is concerned, whatever your distance, he sees only two things: what you are right now and your potential, which can explode any moment. In your bud he will see the open flower, with the fragrance released.
But there are many who are not even students, who are just spectators or curiosity-mongers – in them the master sees nothing. They are so far away in darkness that it is impossible to see who they are and what they can become. Their distance is too great and they are surrounded with such darkness. Nor will they be able to see anything in the master. Perhaps a faraway echo of his words, but nothing more.

Hymie Goldberg entered the synagogue and began to pray, “Dear God, please let me win the lottery.”
Then he left the synagogue and went home. Nothing happened that day so he returned to the synagogue the next day.
“Please, God,” beseeched Hymie, “please, won’t you let me win the lottery?”
He went home and again there were no results, so he went back to the synagogue the following morning.
“Almighty God,” Hymie wailed, “I beg of you, let me win the lottery!”
Suddenly, he heard God’s reply, “Hymie, meet me at least halfway,” God thundered. “Buy a lottery ticket!”

Even without a lottery ticket he wants to win the lottery, just by asking God! Obviously, it’s only to such people that God has ever spoken. They irritate him so much that he forgets that he’s not supposed to speak. Now this fellow will torture him every day, and he is not even purchasing a ticket.
With the master also you have to meet him at least halfway!

Osho,
According to you, what is the most hilarious thing in the world?
According to me the most hilarious thing in the world is man. Among all the animals, trees, mountains, rivers, oceans, stars, clouds, man is the only hilarious animal.
I will give you a few examples:

Hamish MacTavish became a sergeant with a Scottish Highland regiment. One day he walked into the pharmacy and deposited an old condom on the counter. “How much for a repair job?” he asked.
“Well,” replied the chemist, “with washing, drying, patching, lubricating and re-rolling it comes to thirty pence.”
“My God,” said MacTavish, “how much for a new one?”
“Fifty pence,” replied the chemist.
Tucking the condom back in his kilt, MacTavish walked out saying, “I will talk it over with the lads at the barracks and let you know our decision tomorrow.”

One day, Paddy, who worked in the local brewery, fell into a gigantic barrel of beer and drowned. When his wife was informed of the accident she asked if she could see the scene of the tragedy.
At the brewery, the foreman explained to her, “He was climbing this ladder when he slipped and fell into the beer and drowned.”
“How terrible!” exclaimed Maureen. “It must have been an agonizing death.”
“I would not say exactly agonizing,” replied the foreman. “He managed to get out twice to go to the bathroom!”

An American, an Englishman and a Frenchman are discussing a good example of savoir faire.
“Well,” said the American, “if you came home and found your wife in bed with another man and you did not kill the son-of-a-bitch, that would be a good example of savoir faire.
“Nonsense, old chap,” says the Englishman, “if you came home and found your wife in bed with another man and you said ‘Please carry on, sir,’ – that is savoir faire.”
“Non, non!” cries the Frenchman. “If you came home and found your wife in bed with another man and you said ‘Please, sir, carry on,’ and the man was able to continue – that is savoir faire.”

Except man, nothing is hilarious in the world. Just look around you. There are so many examples, it is not that there are only a few. In fact every man – if he watches himself – will find himself behaving in a hilarious way in many situations. Or if you are alert enough and a witness, you will find so many people… When there is so much hilariousness going on, you cannot believe why the world is so sad; it should be a continuous festival of laughter. That’s what my concept of an authentic humanity is: it will be hilarious, enjoying every moment. It will not be serious, it will not be saintly. It will be utterly human and absolutely respectful of its humanity, its laughter, its dance, its song, everything that human beings are prone to.
Be more alert and watch and note down whenever you see something hilarious happening – and particularly in my place. Where do you think I get all these jokes? My people just go on watching each other and creating jokes and informing me. I never go out. But people are learning watchfulness, so they come across so many hilarious things in themselves and in others. They go on preparing jokes for me.
I’m never short of jokes because in my place, twenty-four hours a day, there is nothing else to do. It is a continuous carnival.

============================================================

Osho,
Sitting in front of you, I feel something tremendous is happening to me which I don't understand at all. I feel so thankful, but I don't know why and for what. Tears are coming, but I cannot see any reason. I leave discourse with unsteady knees, as if I have done twenty-four hours' hard work. But what happened? Is it a matter of my undeveloped awareness that I don't grasp what is happening, or does my mind want an answer where there is no answer?
It is one of the perennial questions that you have asked. One day or another, every seeker on the path stumbles on the same question. It is the mind which wants to know everything, because the knowing mind becomes powerful through what it knows. It then becomes its own territory. But existence consists of three layers.
One is that of knowledge – that which is already known. Mind is perfectly at ease with it. The other is the territory of the unknown which, sooner or later, will become known. What is known today was unknown yesterday; what is unknown today is bound to be known tomorrow. Mind is uncomfortable with the unknown, but only a little. It knows that it is still beyond its territory, but it cannot remain beyond its territory much longer. The first territory belongs to all the religions of the world. That’s why they are all past-oriented. They don’t have any tomorrows, only yesterdays.
The second category belongs to the scientific world. It is perfectly at ease with the yesterdays because tomorrow is going to be based on yesterday, but its focus is on the unknown. That is the adventure of science: to go on conquering the unknown and making it known; in other words to demystify the universe. That is the basic purpose of all scientific research. There should be no mystery in the world; everything should be known. Science is the mind’s final growth, therefore it cannot go beyond mind. The very word science means knowledge. Hence science does not divide existence into three categories, but only into two: the known and the unknown.
Then there is a third category, which I call the unknowable. We are the pilgrims of the unknowable. To move into the unknowable feels very scary to the mind because in no way can the unknowable be made part of knowledge. It can never become the dominion and the empire of mind. It will always remain a mystery.
You can live it, but you cannot know it. You can experience it, but you cannot reduce your experience into knowledge. You can dance it, you can rejoice in it, but you cannot transform its basic quality of being mysterious into knowledgeability – knowledge is absolutely unmysterious. This is the world of the mystic. This is the world of sat-chit-anand – truth, consciousness, bliss.
These words are absolutely unknown to science, and these words are absolutely scary for the mind. It neither knows the truth nor does it want to know the truth; lies are so beautiful and comfortable. Truth is dangerous for the mind because the mind’s whole basis is false and phony. The moment truth arrives, the mind has to leave; its time is over. The arrival of truth is instant death to the mind. Its whole empire simply disappears.
The mind is not interested in consciousness. In fact, the mind tries in every way to remain as unconscious as possible. Down the ages, every society and every culture has condemned alcohol and other intoxicating drugs, but to no effect – they have survived and they go on growing more and more influential. The reason is: mind wants to drown itself in unconsciousness, which is its only relaxation. Otherwise there is always tension because the unknowable is very close. The mind wants to forget all about the unknown, all about truth.
You will be surprised to know that science is not interested at all in discovering the truth. It is interested in discovering relative truths. Relative truths are simply relative lies. You can use those words as synonyms – just try.
If you say to someone “I love you relatively,” what will it mean? It will simply mean that you love many more people too. Relatively, you can say “I love you too.” You hate many people relatively; you just don’t hate that person. With love, you are really saying “I love you, relatively,” but no lover has ever made such a statement. Every lover says “I love you totally, absolutely.”
Science is only interested in the objective world, where you can never come to the ultimate truth because from the very beginning it boycotts the subjective world. So its truth is always going to remain relative. The scientist is interested in objects but he is not interested in himself. To be interested in oneself means to be interested in truth, to be interested in consciousness, to be interested in bliss. But those are fearful, dangerous paths for the mind – any one of them. In fact, all three come together as three aspects of one experience. The moment you experience truth, you also experience a tremendous explosion of consciousness and, at the same time, an immense overflowing of bliss from your own heart.
In this flood of light, the mind finds itself even incapable of opening its eyes. It is a bird of darkness – like the owl which in the day closes its eyes and in the night its day begins. The overflowing bliss becomes almost like a flood. Bliss will take away all the dead wood that the mind has collected as knowledge; consciousness will dispel all the dark corners in which the mind is hiding – repressing desires, repressing anger, greed, lust and a thousand and one other things that have been condemned by society.
The mind’s greatest fear is not death. Its greatest fear is enlightenment. Death is nothing to be worried about. It cannot take away anything from the mind, but illumination is going to destroy the mind completely.
Your question is really the mind trying to figure out what is happening to you. And what is happening to you is beyond the capacity of the mind, which is why you are afraid, shaky, worried. I will read your question: “Sitting in front of you, I feel something tremendous is happening to me, which I don’t understand at all.” Neither do I! Nor has anyone ever known what it is – no Gautam Buddha, no Jesus Christ, no Socrates. Nobody has ever known what it is, but they have all drunk of it, felt its sweetness, its fragrance, its music. Everything is so vast, so tremendous, they cannot reduce it into words so that mind can figure out what it is.
Unless something is reduced to language, the mind is incapable of understanding it. The mind is a linguist, full of words and language. That is its only treasure but if something cannot be brought into language, it remains outside the world of the mind. But the mind is only a small part of you: you are far bigger. Hence you can experience many things which the mind cannot understand.
You are saying, “I feel so thankful…” You are experiencing the inexpressible. All that you can do is feel grateful. You cannot even say what you are grateful for because that “what” is part of the mystery of existence. It is a good indication that what is happening to you is bringing thankfulness. And thankfulness or gratefulness is far more important than any knowledge because it transforms you; knowledge only informs you.
You can find great scholars, full of knowledge, but their lives are empty and poor. Nothing happens in their lives. Underneath the load of their knowledge, they have not lived. They are simply carrying the load because that load makes them respectable in a world of ignorant people. If those same people were surrounded by mistakes, they would be laughed at.
Mohammed used to say, “A man of knowledgeability is just a donkey carrying holy scriptures.” He may feel very proud among other donkeys who are carrying mundane things: one carrying salt, another carrying mud, another carrying sand, another carrying wood – naturally the donkey who is carrying holy scriptures is a priest among the donkeys. He is a great scholar among the donkeys and all the donkeys are going to be respectful to him; he is no ordinary donkey.
It’s the same with your scholars, great professors, great priests, great rabbis – they have wasted their lives on books. I am not against books, but you should remember that is only one dimension; it is not your whole life. If your whole life becomes full of books, you are just a bookcase, otherwise utterly empty. Books can enhance your life. If you have some life, if you have some love, you may be able to find in poetry something which even the poet may not have been aware of. If he was just a man of the mind, then what he has written is only a composition of words according to the rules of grammar and language. But a mystic can read in those words something he pours into them, something which is not there.
One of the significant qualities of the mystic is thankfulness, without even knowing for what. “But I don’t know why and for what” – that’s exactly the right thing. Full of gratitude for the unknowable, full of gratitude for that which is beyond the capacity of the mind. You are touching new horizons, you are flying close to the stars. The mind cannot reach there. That’s why there is thankfulness.
“Tears are coming, and I cannot see any reason.” They are not tears of rationality. In fact nobody has heard of rational tears, nobody has ever experienced that tears are flowing from his eyes because two plus two is four – my god, two plus two is four brings tears! Knowledge cannot bring tears. Tears are indicating something very deeply significant – you have touched something which can only be expressed by tears or laughter or dancing. They are all irrational; you cannot explain them rationally.
I gave Shunyo a small antique Rolex watch for Veeresh. I told her, “Find him and give it to him.”
She came running back to me saying, “Veeresh is really crazy. When I gave him the watch, he simply started crying and dancing. I could not believe it! He did not say anything, he is simply dancing outside!”
Because she was searching for him, she asked Anando to also look for him. After Shunyo had given the watch to Veeresh, Anando found him and she could not believe it either – “What has happened?” Just tears and laughter together, and he was dancing, jumping. She brought him close to my room, to inform Shunyo.
Anando said, “It is strange. What has happened to him?”
Shunyo said, “It is nothing, just that Osho has given him a watch.”
It is irrational, but a man who knows only reason knows only a desert of a life. He does not know the roses. He does not know the beautiful sounds of the birds, which don’t mean anything – they are irrational. In fact, even to call them songs is not quite right. The birds are just making sounds for no reason at all, just out of tremendous gratefulness to this beautiful morning, to the sun, to the trees; just for another day to breathe, to fly in the sky, to love, to sing and dance. They are making sounds because they don’t know how to thank the universe in any other way.
When you also experience something of the heart, you will find a tremendous desire to cry. That crying is not out of sadness. Those tears are more valuable than any heartbeat. Those tears are still warm, those tears are still alive, and those tears are saying that you have touched something beyond words, beyond mind. They are of immense joy and gratefulness, sensitivity and helplessness – helplessness because you cannot express what you are experiencing in words. In fact, anything that is great in life has no reason.

Once Picasso was painting by the side of a rosebush and for almost an hour a man stood there, watching. Finally he could not resist the temptation and said to Picasso, “Excuse me, sir, but I cannot see any reason in what you are painting. I have looked at it from every side but I can’t figure out what it is.”
Picasso looked at him and said, “Just look at the roses. Go to them and try to find out why they are there. I am harassed so much, but nobody asks the birds, nobody asks the peacock ‘Why this tail, with so many beautiful colors?’ Nobody asks the cuckoo – whose sound is so sweet, almost incomparably sweet; nobody asks the trees ‘Why are you green?’ But every idiot comes to me and asks, ‘What are you doing? What is the meaning of it?’
“Go to God and ask him, ‘What is the meaning of this whole universe?’ I am a small creator, he is the big creator. Just go – perhaps he knows the reason.”

But I know that if you meet God, he will not know the reason either. What reason can he supply for why he painted the peacocks feathers so beautifully? What was the reason? Why has he given a long white tail to the birds of paradise? You will find one here in my garden. It comes and goes seasonally. Just two days ago, it came again. For a few months it had disappeared. It has such a white tail, so snow-white, and the bird is very small and black. Such a small bird and carrying such a long white tail – it does not make any sense. Because of the tail, the bird can hardly fly; he simply jumps from one tree to another tree. Now what reason could there be? But he is so beautiful, just the combination of colors is so beautiful.
Beauty need not be rational; neither bliss needs to be rational nor silence. Meditation is not a rational endeavor: it is basically irrational. To be more accurate, it is suprarational: it goes beyond reason and all its concepts.
Picasso was right. He was simply saying that nobody asks God. Everybody goes to pray in the church, in the synagogue, in the temple, and nobody asks him, “What is the purpose of it all?” The sun goes on rising every morning, creating such a beautiful sunrise over the oceans, over the mountains, creating so many beautiful colors on the horizon – for a strange reason which I don’t know.
I was a student in a university which has, perhaps, the best location in the whole world – certainly in India. I have visited many universities, but the University of Sagar, a very small place, has some special quality to it – not the university, but the mountain and the lake. The university is on the mountain, a small mountain, but the lake is very vast, miles long.
I have seen the horizon being painted every morning by God, every evening by God in many places around the world, but I have never seen as many psychedelic colors as those at Sagar University. I have never seen such colors as when the sun rises over the lake and when it sets over the mountains. It spreads so many colors, absolutely without reason, just out of sheer abundance!
After seeing the mornings and evenings in Sagar I have been searching for the same colors, but I have not found them anywhere. Every place seems to be poor as far as mornings and evenings are concerned. Sagar is a small place. The only remarkable thing is that it has a university in one of the most beautiful places. But why should God be so generous? There is no reason.
Even if you meet God, he cannot explain anything to you. That’s why I have removed the very hypothesis of God. There is no need of God, because to accept God is to put so much burden and tension, worry and concern on the poor fellow – it is better that he is not. It is not that I’m against God; it is just out of my love and compassion. I feel he should not be. My own way of denying God is totally different from an atheist’s – they are against him. I am absolutely for him, but he is not there.
Picasso was right when he became angry.
Another time it happened…

A very rich woman, super-rich, asked him to make a portrait of her. He said, “I don’t paint portraits.”
She said, “The price is not a question at all – whatever you demand – but I want a portrait from you, just because you don’t do portraits. I want something unique; nobody in the whole world except me will have a Picasso portrait. I’m ready to pay whatever price you ask, but you have to do a portrait.”
For a moment, Picasso thought to himself, “Ask such an enormous amount that the woman will escape.” So he said, “Five million dollars.”
The woman said, “I will give you six. Start painting; I am already prepared.”
Now he was caught, so he had to paint the portrait. When the portrait was complete, the woman said, “Everything is beautiful, but just tell me one thing: where is my nose? I cannot find it.”
A nose is the very center of your face. If you can find the nose, then you can figure out where the eyes are, where the mouth is, where the ears are – everything. But without finding the center…
The woman said, “Just tell me about the nose, everything else I will figure out.”
Picasso said, “I told you already that I don’t do portraits because this kind of problem always arises later on. I don’t know where your nose is. I knew when I was painting, but now all that I know… It is a beautiful painting, so many beautiful colors – who cares about the nose? Just don’t tell anybody that this is your portrait.”

Picasso, in a certain way, has come closer to mysticism than any other painter because whatever he has painted is not to be understood, only to be experienced. His colors, his combination of colors, are just unbelievable. He has defeated God many times. But don’t ask the meaning, don’t ask the reason, don’t bring it to the mind – just enjoy!
You know it already: when you are enjoying a really good ice cream – what do you call it, tutti-frutti? – you don’t ask the reason, you don’t ask the meaning. And when you go to Sarjano’s place for pizza, do you ask, “What is the meaning of it?” Taste is enough. I don’t even know what pizza is because I have never tasted it but I feel saliva coming into my mouth – what about you? And I can promise you I will never taste pizza because I love to keep a few things mysterious!
You are saying, “I leave discourse with unsteady knees…” – I also leave in the same way, somehow I manage to reach my room! You are saying “…as if I had done twenty-four hours’ hard work.” The reason for unsteady legs is that you are drunk with something that is not chemical drugs or alcohol, but something of consciousness, something of truth, something of bliss, which can make you as drunk, or even more drunk, as any alcoholic beverage.
And now you are asking me, “But what happened?” Don’t ask such questions. Something really happened. If you ask questions, there is a danger that it may stop happening; it is a very shy phenomenon. Allow it to happen, enjoy as much as you can, and don’t be worried about unsteady knees. The more you stop asking questions, or figuring out what is happening, the less you will feel that you have worked hard for twenty-four hours. To ask about the unanswerable creates great tension. It really creates the feeling of hard work and failure because you can never succeed. Even if you work your whole life you cannot succeed.
“Is it a matter of my undeveloped awareness that I don’t grasp what is happening…?” No! With developed awareness you will find your knees becoming even more unsteady. It is simply what you recognize yourself, “Does my mind want an answer where there is no answer?”
Yes, stop doing that!

Dolores marries old Mr. Pincus because she figures she will get his money without having to put out much. On their wedding night she giggles when he takes out a condom and lays it on the night table.
“Darling,” she murmurs, “don’t you think you are being a little cautious? After all, you are eighty-eight.”
But Mr. Pincus only sniggers and moments later takes cotton wool from the drawer and stuffs it up his nostrils. He then takes out a pair of earplugs.
“Darling,” she says, “I understand the condom, but what are you doing now?”
“Honey,” he replies, putting in his ear plugs, “you might as well know now that there are two things I can’t stand in life. One is a woman screaming, and the other,” he says as he snaps off the light, “is the smell of burning rubber.”

Hymie Goldberg had worked hard all his life and become very rich. But now he’s on his deathbed with his wife Becky by his side, and he is dispersing his worldly possessions.
“My Cadillac,” he begins, “with the push button motorcycle-cop detector, I leave to my son Sam.”
“Better you should leave it to Joe,” says Becky. “He is a better driver.”
“All right,” whispers Hymie. “My Rolls Royce I leave to my daughter Linda.”
“You had better give it to your nephew Willie,” interrupts Becky. “He is a very careful driver.”
“All right. Give it to Willie,” continues Hymie. “And my twelve-cylinder Jaguar, I give to my niece Sally.”
“Personally,” says Becky, “I think Judy should get it.”
Hymie raises his head and shouts, “Becky, please! Who is dying? You or me?”

Osho,
The deeper and deeper I go into meditation, the fatter and fatter I am getting. Am I in danger of exploding?
First a small story…

Once there was a Japanese meditator called Wu, whose master lived in a little house on the other side of the river. One morning, after a particularly “good” meditation, Wu felt so overjoyed that he dedicated a small poem to his master.
He wrote, “At the peak of the mountain, the sun is rising in the East. Sitting here in my lotus posture, the three worldly evils cannot affect me.”
He folded the paper and gave it to his servant to take to the master. The master looked at the paper and wrote a few words on it, telling the servant to take it back to Wu. Wu was most upset to have his poem returned, especially when he opened the paper and found three words written underneath it, “Fat, fat, fat.”
Wu immediately ran down to the river and swam across as fast as he could to his master’s house. Prostrating himself in front of the master, he said, “Oh, master, I wrote you this poem as an expression of my love for you and look what you have done!”
“So,” said the master, “you sit on top of the mountain and feel that the three worldly evils cannot affect you any longer, but three little words are enough to blow you right across the river.”

Don’t be worried about your getting fatter.
You are saying, “The deeper and deeper I go into meditation, the fatter and fatter I am getting. Am I in danger of exploding?” I hope so! That’s the whole purpose of your being here – exploding. But becoming fat is not because of meditation. Perhaps you are meditating too much and not doing enough exercise. You will have to do one of two things. I hate exercise myself, but then you have to reduce your calories. I have to live on only six hundred calories per day. That is now. A few days ago I was living on twelve hundred calories per day.
If you don’t want to exercise, then you will have to cut down on the stuff that you go on putting in your mouth. Meditators are known to become fat because they forget completely that meditation is sitting silently, doing nothing, and the fat grows… So either start doing some exercise or cut down on your food.
Gautam Buddha had to cut out one meal completely from his disciples’ diet. They could eat only once a day, not twice; and of course not five times a day with different names: breakfast, lunch, coffee break, supper, and the last – just a little bit before you go to sleep. He had to cut down from two meals, which are common in India, to one meal. That means fifty percent.
Mahavira was even more… He was teaching longer periods of meditation than Gautam Buddha. Gautam Buddha had an alternating system: one hour meditation, one hour walking. That repeated walking one hour and meditating one hour kept the balance. And then only one meal a day. But Mahavira had no such alternating system. People were in meditation for eight hours, ten hours, twelve hours. He also insisted on one meal, but he made another condition: you had to eat it standing. Also you could not use plates; you had to use only your hands. So whatever fits into your two cupped hands – that’s all. And eat it standing, because when you are sitting you are at ease, comfortable.
We make our meals as comfortable as possible: comfortable chairs, table, beautiful plates, candlelight, some fragrance, flowers, and then you go on, course after course. So if you are meditating as well, then naturally you will become fatter and fatter.
There is also a reason for this fatness other than food: a meditator slowly becomes less and less interested in sex. That has two by-products. One is: the little gymnastics that you used to do in sex are dropped and that may have been your only exercise. Secondly, the moment you drop sex, you become more interested in food. People who drop sex automatically start eating a little more.
The way life starts creates this connection. The child becomes aware of his mother’s breast and the food that comes from it at the same time. Later on the breast becomes a sexual symbol, but the association with food is very deep in your unconscious. The people who drop sex – here it is otherwise; here sex drops people – start eating more to substitute because eating is connected with man’s sexuality. So you have to be aware: exploding is perfectly good, but that is an exploding of consciousness, an explosion of your inner being, not an explosion of your body.
People are already afraid of coming close to me, and if you do this kind of exploding, then I am going to lose all my crazy people. So please, be kind toward yourself and be kind toward me. Cut down on your food, create an alternating system: meditation, walking, jogging, running, anything that gives your body enough exercise to absorb your food. This is tremendously significant: if you can create an alternating system your meditation will go even deeper, because when the body is tired, it quickly relaxes. When it is not tired, it does not relax quickly.
That is one of the reasons why rich people cannot sleep. Their bodies are not tired. Sleep is part of relaxation. Laborers, beggars, sleep so deeply that even emperors feel jealous. Because they are working the whole day, their bodies are so tired that it is impossible for them not to fall asleep immediately.
You will be surprised to know that there are aboriginals in India, in Burma, in Thailand, and in other Far Eastern countries, who don’t dream. The reason is that their work is so hard, they are so tired, that by the time they go to sleep they fall so deeply asleep that they miss a layer of dreams. The first layer is of your waking consciousness; the second layer is of your dreaming consciousness; the third layer is of your dreamless sleep; the fourth layer is your awakening, enlightenment. Because their lives are so hard – just to have a little food, just to survive – they don’t dream.
When they first came in contact with the Christian missionaries… Christian missionaries are now being trained in psychoanalysis. Christianity is the most cunning religion in the world. Seeing that the old style of priesthood was getting out of date, they started sending their missionaries to learn psychoanalysis. They could see that in the future psychoanalysis is going to replace the priesthood. The psychoanalyst is the future priest. He is already taking the priest’s place. He has become the most highly-paid professional in the world – and all he does is analyze your dreams.
So when these missionaries, trained in psychology, reached the thick forest in Burma, in Thailand, they could not believe what they found. When one of them asked the aboriginals, “What did you dream last night?” the aboriginals looked at each other and said, “What does he mean by ‘dream’?” They had never dreamed. They have not dreamed for two reasons.
One, their life is not of repression. A repressed person dreams more because the mind has to get rid of whatever is repressed in dreaming. It is a kind of catharsis – the mind unbinding itself. Secondly, it is only those who cannot go to the deeper layers of sleep who are stuck in the dreaming layer. Once in a while you slip into the deeper layer, where there is no dream. But you surface again.
Your sleep graph is not the same the whole night. Sometimes you are very superficial, sometimes you are going very deep. Sometimes you are again superficial, just on the verge of waking. Sometimes you go very deep, almost close to death. On one superficial layer is your life and on the deepest layer is your death, and just below your superficial layer is the dreaming layer. Many aboriginals completely miss dreaming.
You will be able to go deeper into your meditation, into your relaxation, because relaxation is essential for your meditation. Make it a point to jog, jump, run, and then when you feel tired, utterly tired, sit down or lie down and meditate. Then you will find that you are not getting fatter and your body is not going to explode, but your consciousness is going to explode into the tremendous phenomenon we call enlightenment.
The East has never bothered about dreams but the East has been concerned for thousands of years with consciousness. It is a strange phenomenon. The West became concerned with consciousness only one hundred years ago, and immediately it jumped on dreams. The whole psychological endeavor became dream analysis. One wonders what happened. The East has been concerned for at least ten thousand years with consciousness. Its whole genius has been focused on searching deeply into consciousness – more than has happened anywhere else. This has been the only contribution to human evolution as far as consciousness is concerned.
The East is poor. It has not developed science, it has not developed technology because it has put all its intelligence into one direction and that is consciousness. But the strange fact is: even after ten thousand years, Eastern psychology has nothing to do with psychoanalysis-type psychologies, which are concerned with dream analysis. What is the reason?
The reason is Christianity. Christianity is the most repressive religion in the world. It represses everything. And because of that repression the layer of dreams becomes thicker and thicker and thicker. Now Western psychoanalysts say that if a man sleeps eight hours per night, he dreams for six hours. For only two hours, once in a while, he goes a little deeper and does not dream. Otherwise, for six hours he is dreaming. What happened to the Eastern explorers of consciousness? They did not come to such a thick layer – six hours! And, strangely, the conclusion of Western psychology is that if you are not allowed to dream that amount of time, you will not feel refreshed in the morning.
They have done some experiments. One man is disturbed whenever he is dreaming. It is very easy to know when a person is dreaming. Whenever a person is asleep without dreams, there is no movement of the eyes under the eyelids. You can see that there is no movement. The moment he starts dreaming, he is watching a film and his eyes start moving. You can immediately check whether the person is dreaming or not – very simple.
So one person in this experiment is disturbed. Whenever he moves his eyes he is immediately woken up, then allowed to sleep again. When he goes to sleep, again he will dream. The whole night the disturbance continues. He can only sleep for those two hours when he does not dream. Another person in another room is being disturbed differently. Whenever he is not dreaming, he is disturbed, he is woken up – and then allowed to dream six hours without disturbance.
This has been repeated many times in many psychological labs around the Western world and the conclusion, the result, is very strange – nobody had ever thought such a result would come out of it, not even the psychoanalysts had thought of it. The result is that the man whose dreams are disturbed is disturbed the whole day. He feels tired, tense, sad, depressed. He feels that he has not been able to sleep, he is utterly tired and because of the continuous disturbance the whole night, he wants to sleep again. The other person, whose sleep time was disturbed but not the dream time, has no problem. He gets up rejuvenated, fresh, with no tiredness.
The conclusion is that you need dreams more than sleep. Your body, your physical well-being, depends on dreaming, not on sleep, which has been the traditional concept. Traditionally it has been understood that dreams are a kind of disturbance. Now the situation is totally different: dreams are not a disturbance, they are a tremendous help. But this is the Western mind and the experiment is confined to Western people. They should not apply their conclusion to the whole of humanity. Their conclusion belongs only to the Christians. A meditator starts dreaming less and less, and once you are at the very peak of meditation, dreams disappear.
Primitive people, aboriginals, don’t dream at all. The East has not paid any attention to dreams because it would have been futile. There was not such a repressive attitude in the East before Christianity came. All the repression that you see today in India or in other Eastern countries is not part of its heritage. It has been brought by Christian missionaries. Although Hindus are not Christians, Christian ideology has penetrated every religion in the world. They may not have been able to convert everybody to Christianity, but they have fed their ideology into every mind.
Just see: Hindus were perfectly at ease with the temples of Khajuraho. They never thought that they were pornographic. And today? Even if you wear slightly fewer clothes than you do now, that’s enough to disturb the Indians. It is not Indian culture; it is Indian culture polluted by Christianity. Before, Indians were never worried. All Indian gods have their wives but the Christian god has no wife.
Before Mohammedanism – which is a by-product of Judaism, just as Christianity is – India was a totally different world, absolutely unrepressed. There was no question of repression at all. With Mohammedans, repression started entering the Indian mind, and with Christianity it became absolute. The Mohammedans invaded India about thirteen centuries ago. Alexander the Great had started the influx of invaders just two hundred years after Gautam Buddha, but there were no repressive ideologies preached to people then; people were more innocent. Hence, a method like vipassana – which is a Buddhist method – was possible for meditation: just by watching the mind silently, meditation happens.
Meditation was not something arduous or difficult, but to the Western mind or even to the Eastern mind as it is today – absolutely overtaken by Western ideology – watching the mind is not easy. So much garbage and so much crap has been forced into the mind that you go almost crazy just watching it. It is a film which begins, but never ends. You can go on watching day in, day out, year in, year out and the mind is always ready to supply new images, new dreams.
It is because of this I had to create a few devices – Dynamic, Kundalini, and others – before you could enter a silent witnessing meditation like vipassana. I have made devices to help you cathart, throw out your garbage rather than waste time in watching it.
It can be thrown out by latihan – tremendously beautiful – but it is not a meditation; it is only a clearance. It can be done even better by Dynamic Meditation than by latihan – because latihan has some dangers which I have cut out of the meditation. Sometimes latihan people go mad because they cannot stop.
It is an Indonesian method which became immensely successful in the fifties in Europe and America. It never became successful in the East because in the East – particularly in Indonesia, which is a backward country – there is nothing to cathart! The man who invented Latihan was Bapak Subuh. He called his philosophy subud. He has taken the word subud from Buddha, which means “the great awakening.” But latihan cannot bring the great awakening. It became fashionable in the West and then disappeared completely because it created many people who had to be put into mental asylums, for the simple reason that no stop is built into the process.
Once you start latihan you are overtaken by the process of catharsis, and it goes on and on and you don’t know what to do; you are almost without control. But I have divided Dynamic Meditation into different sections. Latihan has to be done alone; Dynamic Meditation has to be done under instruction. Under instruction, after each ten-minute section, the process is changed. Then once you have learned it you can do it alone. So you are always in control. It never becomes so big as to take all control into its own hands. These devices are needed just to clear the rubbish that Christianity has created, and to bring you to a state of naturalness, simplicity.
From there the only way is witnessing, which Buddha called vipassana. Vipassana means “looking at.” If you want to do vipassana, or any silent meditation, Dynamic Meditation becomes absolutely essential. Christianity has poisoned your mind, and that poison has to be thrown out. To throw it out, you have to go completely crazy; otherwise that craziness remains inside you and won’t allow you to get into silent, watching, witnessing meditation.
So do some Dynamic Meditation, do some jogging, do some running, swimming and when you feel utterly tired, when you feel an intrinsic need to relax, you are free from Christianity. Then you can sit silently, then you can watch your mind – and not much is there. You have thrown out almost ninety-nine percent of it. Maybe here and there a few pieces are clinging because they are very old and have become glued to you – just watch them.
Watching is a process of ungluing those small pieces hanging here and there in the mind. Once they also disappear, you don’t have a mind, you have a vast sky opening. That is the explosion, and that explosion will bring you to sat-chit-anand: to truth, to consciousness, to bliss.

============================================================

Osho,
When I look at my life, it is richer and more fulfilled than I could have ever expected. I am filled with gratitude through all the love, understanding and sheer joy that being with you has brought me. Why then, Osho, do I think of death so longingly?
Devageet, there are many things which have to be understood before you can see the answer to your question arising in your own consciousness. There are questions I cannot answer, but I can manage a situation around you, around your question, so that the answer arises within you. And only such answers are significant. It is a roundabout way. I could have given the answer directly, but then it wouldn’t be your answer. And I want every answer to be your own.
Your question is yours: it has an individuality, a certain beauty, a certain aliveness. It comes out of your heart, just as a flower comes out of the juices of the tree. It is not something imposed from outside; it is something that grows from the very roots up to the top. Just as your question is yours, my whole effort here is that your answer should also be yours. So while I am answering you, this is the first thing to be understood: my answer is only a device to trigger your answer. I don’t want my answer to become your answer; then it will be borrowed and dead.
Your question is very significant. It is not an ordinary question out of curiosity. Its significance also lies in its depth, in its existential meaningfulness. This question cannot be asked by each and everyone. Unless you have touched a certain depth within your being, only then is this question possible. Every question shows the heart of the questioner. Just by looking at your question, I can see what is happening within you. It must look very strange and absurd because you are saying, “When I look at my life, it is richer and more fulfilled than I could have ever expected.”
This is the first thing to be remembered: whenever something beyond your expectations is fulfilled, you will always find a deep desire to die because, who knows, tomorrow may not bring the same contentment, the same joy, the same beauty, the same experience. It is better to die at this peak rather than in despair, in sadness, in misery. Why not die in a moment of celebration? Why not make death also a celebration? But that is possible only when you are at the peak of fulfillment; it is not possible when you are in the valleys and in darkness.
So whenever you feel fulfilled, contented, more contented than you ever expected, you will find arising in you a natural, very spontaneous desire: this is the right moment to die, at the highest peak of my life. What more can there be? Why go on living? It is risky to live because one can always lose this height. It is risky to live because one can become accustomed to this joy, this happiness; one may start taking it for granted. It may become just an ordinary thing. One may forget that it is extraordinary and happens only very rarely to very, very few human beings. You may not be aware of all these considerations, but these are the reasons why the desire to die at such a moment arises.
You are saying, “I am filled with gratitude for all the love, understanding and sheer joy that being with you has brought me. Why then, Osho, do I think of death so longingly?” It is one of those contradictions of existence, those mysteries of existence. For example, the poor man is never frustrated because he has something to hope for: tomorrow may bring good news. There is a possibility that tomorrow he may not be poor. It is the rich, the super-rich man, who becomes frustrated, because tomorrow is not going to be something different or new, something more than he has already. Tomorrow has become absolutely hopeless; hence the frustration.
People in poor countries don’t suffer as much as far as the mind and consciousness is concerned. As the country becomes rich, logically one would expect that the people should become happier, more contented. Now the misery has gone: there is no starvation, there is medical care. Everything is good: you cannot expect more. But suddenly there is a sadness that starts settling in the rich countries, in rich societies. The sadness comes because they start forgetting the misery of starvation and they cannot see the future bringing any new meaning, any new flowers. Everything will now be static, routine.
Hence more people commit suicide in rich countries than in poor countries. Logically it should be vice versa: in poor countries people should commit suicide, but they do not because they still have hope. Life today may not be meaningful, but who knows about tomorrow? Things change. They have seen poor people becoming rich, they have seen all kinds of changes happening. There is no need to feel hopeless because all the possibilities are open. They just have to make an effort. If they fail, it doesn’t matter; they must make more effort. But the idea of suicide does not arise at all.
I have moved among the poor for decades. It is almost impossible to find a poor man asking about suicide, about meaninglessness, about frustration, about anguish, about angst. These are not their questions at all. These questions arise only at a certain stage of affluence, luxury, comfort. More people go insane in rich countries than in poor countries. The ratio is large, the difference is great.
Even if in a poor country somebody does commit suicide or go insane – which is very rare – his reasons are totally different from the reasons of a rich man. The poor man may commit suicide, but not out of frustration, not out of meaninglessness, not out of discontent. He knows nothing of contentment and he is not tired of his discontent, because there is always a possibility that discontent may become contentment, the poverty may change. The people who commit suicide in poor countries are either retarded – they cannot manage to live, their minds are not able to cope with life and its situations – or they commit suicide because they are blind, crippled, paralyzed. But these are not the reasons in a rich society.
The same is true of your spiritual life. You feel it as a question. I feel it as the sheer outcome of your joy, fulfillment, contentment. To me it is a beautiful experience, not a question, not a problem to be solved, but something to be understood. It is indicative that you are coming closer and closer to the ultimate sat-chit-anand, to the truth, to the explosion of consciousness, to the highest peak of bliss. Just before one is coming close to home, one starts feeling as if one has arrived. But it is only “as if.” It is so beautiful that one cannot think things can be even better.
But I want you to still be discontented. I want you to still hope because I know there is much more that is possible for you than you can conceive. I can conceive it because I have known much more and I know that there is no limit to growth. But this point comes to every seeker and searcher at some stage. And this has to be passed, otherwise it can become a danger. It has to be transformed into an indication. It is simply an indication that you have come to the very limit of your mind.
But you are more than your mind. Beyond the mind, there are no limits at all. Then there are skies upon skies, and as you move over one peak, you have another peak immediately confronting you. This existence is inexhaustible. And when I say this, I am saying it with absolute authority, because I have passed through the moment about which you are asking. I have also felt at one time, “What more can there be? Why go on unnecessarily breathing, why go on every day getting up, knowing perfectly well that what has to happen has happened?” Now it is sheer habit that every evening you have to go to sleep, every morning you have to get up. What is the point of it all?
But I have lived through a very strange space. I have never accepted any limit to anything. When this moment came to me, I insisted that I could not accept that this is all. Life must be much more. And what is the harm in searching? You can die tomorrow or the day after tomorrow. What is the hurry? Why today?
So the first thing is: you are free to die any time. There is no problem, but it is better to inquire more, to investigate more, to explore more. And I promise you that soon you will be surprised to find that at the moment when the desire to die was so strong, you were simply passing through the boundary line of your mind, going beyond the mind into the no-mind. In fact, once you have passed this point, you will know for the first time what real life is.
Fulfillment, contentment, feeling richer are all irrelevant. Life is much more. It cannot be confined to these small words: gratitude, love, understanding, sheer joy. Once you have passed through all of them, you will be surprised that there is so much to existence for which no word exists in any language, and which mind has no capacity to understand. Certainly it is not contentment – contentment is a very poor word. It is not just joy, it is not just love. It is so much more that I can only say that these words are like a teaspoon, and with the teaspoon you are trying to empty the ocean.
It happened…

One of the great philosophers of Greece, Plato, was a contemporary of Diogenes. They were continuously in controversy because Diogenes was a mystic and he knew things which Plato could not even dream of, although Plato was a great philosopher. In the books and the histories of philosophy, you will find Plato, but you will not find Diogenes. But the real thing was with Diogenes not with Plato, who was a great thinker, a giant intellectual. Diogenes was a simple, childlike, innocent man, but he knew something which thousands of Platos together could not know.
One day, when Plato was on a morning walk by the side of the sea, he saw a man. It was early in the morning, a little dark – the sun had not risen yet. He could not figure out who the man was. This man was Diogenes and in a spoon he was bringing… He would go to the ocean, take the water in the spoon – he had made a small hole in the sand – pour the water into the sand, and then go back.
Plato, standing there, saw him doing it. He looked like a madman. For a moment he thought, “I should not interfere.” But such is the mind – it becomes curious. “Maybe he is not mad; perhaps he is doing something meaningful and I am not aware of it. And what is wrong if I ask him?” So he said, “Please forgive me for interrupting. I don’t want to interrupt you – you may be involved in some great work – but what is going on?”
Diogenes said, “I am trying to empty the ocean.”
Plato said, “My God, with that spoon?”
Then the sun was rising. Diogenes started laughing and said, “Plato, are you doing anything else?” Then Plato recognized Diogenes. He used to live naked, but that day he was covered with a cloth, just to hide himself, so Plato did not know him at first. Otherwise he might not have interrupted.
Plato was simply stunned, he could not answer. Diogenes said, “That’s what you are trying to do. Your mind is nothing but a teaspoon and with it you are trying to exhaust the oceanic existence. What I am doing is just to remind you. I know it is not possible. You should also remember that what you are doing is impossible.”

It is fortunate to come to such a point when one feels so happy that one would like to die. But my suggestion is to wait a little, because I know something more than that. I have passed that point, and the day I passed that point, for the first time life opened all its mysteries to me. Since then, not for a single moment has the desire to die arisen in me, for the simple fact that now I know there is no death. There is more life and more life and more life – there is no end to this inexhaustible existence.

Hymie and Becky are on holiday in Florida when one night a hurricane hits the coast. Becky gets extremely upset and cannot sleep a wink. Hymie, however, is sleeping soundly.
“Hymie,” cries Becky shaking him awake, “the house is rocking as if it’s going to blow away.”
“Relax,” says Hymie, “go to sleep. We are only renting it.”

All the houses that you have rented have blown away many times. This time also you are renting a house, and it will blow away one day. But you are going to continue.
You are an eternal pilgrim. Your pilgrimage is not going to end anywhere. The pilgrimage itself is the goal, there is no goal to the pilgrimage.

The elderly man goes to visit a physician for a check-up. The doctor notices that his hands are shaking like leaves in the wind. “You must drink a lot,” says the doctor.
“No, I don’t,” says the old guy, “I spill most of it.”

Come to such a point when you start spilling most of it. Don’t be contented so early. It is not even the beginning yet.

Osho,
Once a week I cook unfertilized fried eggs for the whole commune's breakfast in order that everybody's brain becomes sharper and more intelligent. However, after cooking one thousand fried eggs, I don't feel like eating any myself. Is it okay for me to drop improving my brain and just enjoy its lack of activity?
A writer had been out too late the night before, and in the wrong places. Nursing a magnificent hangover, he stops at a small restaurant for breakfast. “What will you have?” asked the waiter.
“All I want is two fried eggs and some kind words,” says the bleary-eyed writer.
Presently, the waiter returns with two pale-looking fried eggs. “Here are your eggs, sir,” he says. “And now for the kind words: don’t eat them.”

Osho,
The other morning in discourse I was overwhelmed by your clarity and your beauty and grace, and felt so grateful and vulnerable. Thank you, Osho. I also realize that I am still not seeing your total radiance and splendor. This brings sadness and frustration. Osho, is it true that without being enlightened we cannot see you as you really are – sat-chit-anand? Can we only catch a glimpse?
One has to learn a little patience. Everything that has ever happened to any human being is going to happen to you because you have all the potential. You contain all the Gautam Buddhas, all the Jesuses, all the Socrateses. You contain the whole potential of humanity within you. And if you can see in me a certain clarity, beauty, grace, and if you can feel grateful and vulnerable, then you are on the right track. That’s how one starts growing slowly.
It is true when you say, “Osho, I also realize that I am still not seeing your total radiance and splendor.” But you are fortunate even to see a glimpse; there are millions of people in the world who will not be able to see even that glimpse. On the contrary, they will only see everything evil that man has ever imagined but no glimpse of splendor, no glimpse of clarity, no glimpse of grace. They see only fear, danger – danger to their morality, danger to their religion, danger to all they think is valuable.
There are millions of people who would like to destroy me. It is really a miracle that I am still alive in spite of those millions of people whose deepest desire is expressed by the United States Attorney General. He told a press conference, “Osho should never be seen by anyone, never be heard by anyone. In short, I want him to be completely silenced.” That’s all he wants.
The way he said it was so absolutely violent that the journalist who was interviewing him asked, “Do you want him to be murdered or assassinated?”
For a moment the Attorney General remained silent and then said, “Not exactly. But we have more sophisticated methods to silence him.” Now he is not simply speaking his own mind. He is expressing the minds of many.
So you should be happy, not sad, that you don’t belong to those millions. You should feel fortunate, not frustrated, that at least you are capable of seeing a faraway glimpse of the Himalayas. Just a little patience, a little closeness, a little more love, a little more gratitude, a little more openness, and you will start moving toward the ultimate splendor. It is not my property. It came into existence when I was no more. It is the property of existence itself.
So don’t be at all sad. There are many present here who have come far closer than you, who have looked into me more deeply than you. They are not in any way more special than you. They have just been patient – years of patience, years of silence, years of meditation, but this is nothing compared to the eternity of time. One day you will find that you have come so close that you can touch the beauty, you can touch the truth, you can dance in the music of eternal consciousness. You can be showered by flowers of bliss.
Yes, sat-chit-anand – truth, consciousness, bliss. All are possible to you. In fact, they are your birthright. You just have to claim them; the claim needs a little patience.
There is a Sufi story…

A king was passing by a nursery that belonged to a poor gardener. He looked at the poor gardener and stopped his horse. He had stopped for a special reason. He had wanted to stop many times. He used to pass through that beautiful place where the poor gardener’s nursery was because it was the most beautiful way to the palace.
Today he could not contain his curiosity. The curiosity was that the man looked so old; certainly he had passed a century. Perhaps he was one hundred and twenty or even more. He looked so old and yet he was preparing small plants and working the whole day on those plants – plants of trees which take at least one hundred years to grow to their full height.
Their life span is long; they live at least four thousand years. After one hundred years they are still children. They can count on a life span of four thousand years, but only after one hundred years do they start flowering – not before that. And after one thousand years, they start giving fruit.
The king was puzzled: this man seemed to be at least one hundred and twenty years old. “Is he mad, or what? He cannot expect to see the flowers of those trees, to say nothing of the fruit. And he is working so hard in his old age, the whole day in the hot sun” – it was a desert land.
He stopped and went close to the old man and said, “I watch you every day, and I see how hard you work, but a question… Every day I go on repressing it, not wanting to interfere. But you will have to forgive me – I want to ask one thing: Do you think you will be able to see the flowers of these plants?”
The old man laughed. He said, “No, I will not be able to see the flowers of these plants. But do you see, just behind my hut, those huge trees, thousands of years old? They are the same trees. They are giving me fruit, they are giving me flowers.”
The king said, “I can see them, but I still don’t understand. What do you mean by talking about those trees?”
The man said, “If my parents or my forefathers had also thought that they would not be able to see the flowers, to say nothing about the fruit, those trees would not be there. I am not thinking about myself. I am thinking about my forefathers and about future children. I owe them something.
“If my forefathers were so patient that they could be happy that some children whom they could never know would enjoy the fruit and the flowers of those beautiful trees… Do you think I am a worse human being than my forefathers? Can’t I think also of someone, far away in the future, being thankful to me?”
The king wrote in his biography, “The old gardener has shocked me with his patience, with his infinite love and compassion and trust.”

Somebody, someday, is bound to see the flowers, and as far as your inner growth is concerned it is not a question of somebody else seeing the flowers – you are going to see them. Can’t you be patient – just a little patient?
Just today I received a letter from Amrito, one of my old sannyasins in Holland. He is a famous Dutch writer, with all possible qualifications, degrees, honorary degrees. He has written many books, including at least eight books on me. Today I received a letter saying he is writing another book on me and in just a few days is coming here for my blessings. The title of the book is Ten Years of Preparation. Ten years ago he became a sannyasin, and still he calls those ten years just a preparation.
This patience is needed. In a hurry, you can get only seasonal flowers. They come and go. The deeper your patience, the greater will be your growth, there is no need to be frustrated or to be sad. Not even a single sannyasin, if he is honest and sincere in his search, is going to fail. Success is absolutely sure and guaranteed.
But you have to remember that it is not the path of the curious, it is not the path of information gatherers. It is the path of those who are ready to go through the transformation, who are ready to drop their personalities, their defense measures, who are ready to open their hearts to receive the light that is rising on the horizon. It is simply a case of receptivity, sensitivity, sincerity, and an honest search.
Your success is sure.

Miss Bradshaw, a comely high school teacher, had saved money for several years and was finally aboard a sleek ocean liner for her long-anticipated trip to Europe.
Aboard ship she wrote: “Dear Diary…
Monday: I felt singularly honored this evening – the captain asked me to dine at his table.
Tuesday: I spent the entire morning on the bridge with the captain.
Wednesday: the captain made proposals to me unbecoming to an officer and a gentleman.
Thursday: tonight the captain threatened to sink the ship if I do not give in to his indecent proposals.
Friday: this afternoon I saved one thousand, six hundred lives.”

Just wait. It is only a question of saving your own life, not the lives of one thousand, six hundred people. Here I am not the savior; here everybody is a savior – not of anybody else, but of himself. For the first time in the whole history of mankind we are making a new effort to give the respect, the dignity and the responsibility to every person to save himself.
For centuries this dignity was not given to human beings. Krishna was trying to save Hindus and Christ was trying to save Christians. Everybody was trying to save somebody else. And they have not been able to transform the world. Krishna failed, Buddha failed, Jesus failed, Moses failed. When I say they failed, I don’t mean they failed in their own enlightenment, I mean they failed in their promises to humanity. They were absolutely successful as far as they were concerned.
But the moment they started telling people, “I will save you, I am the savior, I am the prophet, I am the messenger, I am the incarnation of God,” then they misled people. People stopped seeking, searching on their own. They just hoped that if they believed in Krishna, in Buddha, in Jesus, then it would not be their responsibility to transform themselves into a new and higher state of consciousness. This has not happened. It is in this sense that I say that all the saviors of the past have failed. And I don’t want to belong to the failures. I am not a savior. I have saved myself – I think that’s enough. Now you save yourself.

Osho,
I have never been near so much authentic laughter as I have here in your presence. As I make myself available to the laughter happening around me, I notice myself withdraw and become serious. Inside I long to let go and to become a part of the laughter around me, but my mind and body resist.
Why do I feel incapable of authentic laughter? And, is there a way for me to regain my natural capacity to let go in a belly laugh?
Anurag Saleen, you are a victim, but you are not alone. Almost the whole of humanity is a victim: victims of pretensions, victims of having to wear masks, victims of not being natural. Being unnatural pays because society gives respect to the false; society is not respectful to the authentic and to the real. The false can be controlled, and society is deeply interested in controlling everybody. But the authentic cannot be controlled, so society is very much afraid of those people who are authentic, real, themselves, because they cannot be enforced into slavery, into obedience, into being oppressed or exploited.
The desire for reward keeps society respecting the false and because the false is respected, each small child slowly starts following the false. Parents teach this, teachers teach this: the whole effort is to mold you in a certain way that is acceptable to everybody. The end result is a phony world, where nobody is real, where smiles are false, where love is only a word.
Just today I received news from England. A survey has been made of people aged between five and twenty-five. A single question was asked, “What two values do you think are the most significant and important in life?” And it is shocking to see the answers from the five-year-olds right up to the twenty-five-year-olds. The answers are: money and success. These two things are the most important in life: not love, not laughter, not meditation, not blissfulness, not even God – money and success.
But in a world where money and success are everything, you cannot be authentic – it is dangerous. You will have to repress your individuality and compromise at every step for success, compromise at every step for money.

I am reminded of a young man. His name was Subhash Chandra. He became a great revolutionary and I have tremendous respect for him because he was the only man in India who opposed Mahatma Gandhi. He could see that all this mahatmahood is simply politics and nothing else. Indians believe themselves to be very religious. It is just a belief – nobody is religious. Mahatma Gandhi was playing the role of a saint simply to become the leader of the majority in the country as all those who thought they were religious were bound to be in favor of Mahatma Gandhi. Just one single man, Subhash, opposed him and immediately the phoniness was apparent. What happened was this:
Mahatma Gandhi used to say, “I am beyond love and hate. I am beyond anger, violence.” That was his whole philosophy to go beyond violence and become nonviolent, become so loving that you love even your enemy.
Subhash was well-known for not being in agreement with Mahatma Gandhi, although he was in the same party. There was only one party which was fighting for the freedom of the country, so all freedom lovers were in that party. Subhash stood as a candidate to be the president of Congress, and immediately Mahatma Gandhi’s phoniness was revealed.
On the one hand he was teaching that you have to love your enemy, but on seeing that if Subhash became the president of Congress, he would be dangerous to his philosophy and to his leadership, he became a totally different kind of man. Subhash did not believe in hypocrisy, and there was a possibility of his winning. The only man who could defeat him was Mahatma Gandhi himself, but that would bring him down, right down, from his great saintliness.
So what he did was this: he supported a certain man, Doctor Pattabhi Sitaramayya, as his candidate. He thought that because he was declaring him as his candidate, the doctor would certainly win. Subhash was very much loved by young people, by the young blood, but this fellow, Doctor Pattabhi, was absolutely unknown. He was an obedient follower of Mahatma Gandhi, so he would serve him, but he was not known to the country.
Subhash was almost a lion. He fought and, unbelievably, he won. Gandhi forgot all his philosophy. He did not participate in the gathering where Subhash was declared president. In fact, Subhash proved to be a far greater man. Seeing that Gandhi was trying to create a split in Congress – which would be a split in the movement for the liberation of the country – he resigned from the presidency, just so that the movement would remain united. He sacrificed himself completely and not wanting to get into a fight, he moved out of the country.
He had shown this sincerity from the very beginning. He was educated in England, belonged to a very rich family of Bengal, was going to be one of the top bureaucrats. He was trained for the Indian Civil Service in Britain, as were all top bureaucrats, most of whom were English. Very rarely was an Indian chosen – not more than one percent. Otherwise, on some small excuse, Indians were rejected.
Shree Aurobindo was rejected and you will not believe on what grounds. He had come first in every subject, he was one of the geniuses of this century. Only in horse riding he could not succeed. But what has horse riding got to do with being a top officer? This was the strategy: he was a scholar and he became world famous, but he was rejected. Every method was tried to reject Indians.
But they could not manage to reject Subhash. He managed to overcome all their strategies, so very reluctantly Britain accepted Subhash for the Indian Civil Service. One thing more remained, which was a formality: every ICS officer had to appear for a personal interview before the governor-general. It was just a formality once you had passed the examination. Subhash entered the office of the governor-general.
Bengalis always carry an umbrella – no one knows why. Whether it is raining or not, whether it is hot or not, even in winter when there is no need. They may just carry it by their side, but they will carry it – an umbrella is absolutely necessary for a Bengali. If you see anybody carrying an umbrella, you understand that he is a Bengali. Now, there is no need to carry an umbrella into the office of the viceroy; at least you should leave it outside. But Bengalis will not leave their umbrellas anywhere.
Subhash kept his hat on, carried his umbrella into the office, and took a chair. The governor-general was very angry. He said, “Young man, you don’t understand manners. Who passed you in the ICS examinations?”
Subhash said, “What manners?”
The governor-general said, “You have not taken off your hat and you have not asked my permission to sit down.”
The governor-general was not aware what kind of man Subhash was. He immediately picked up his umbrella and hooked it round the governor-general’s neck. They were alone in the office, so…
Subhash told the governor-general, “If you want manners, then you should also learn manners. You remained sitting; you should have stood first as I was a guest. You did not remove your hat, so why should I remove mine? You did not ask my permission to go on sitting, so why should I ask your permission? Who do you think you are? At the most you can reject me for the ICS, but I will not leave it in your hands. I don’t want to join the service.”
And he went out of the office, leaving the governor-general almost in shock – he had never dreamed that anybody could do such a thing.

Society is afraid of anyone who has dignity, self-respect. Society wants you to be obedient, to be servile, to be compromising, to be always ready to surrender in every situation. It does not want you to be rebellious. But individuality is intrinsically rebellious; you cannot do anything about it. The only way is to keep it under a blanket of personality, to cover it from every nook and corner, and not allow it even a window to breathe.
So everybody is suffering inside. A closed, invisible wall of personality is surrounding you that does not allow you, Anurag Saleen, to gain your naturalness, your spontaneity, to have a belly laugh, even though here nobody is preventing you. In fact, here it is impossible to go on holding yourself, controlling yourself, and not be spontaneous and relaxed. This is not your usual society. All these people are rebellious individuals. But even here, you are carrying your mind, your unconscious, your conditioning. You will have to put it aside. Others may not be able to help in your ultimate salvation, but others can help you have a belly laugh.
So whoever is sitting by the side of Anurag Saleen, please help her. Tickle her! It is just a question of breaking her barriers. So tonight, I am telling this joke for Anurag, wherever she is. If she does not want to be helped by others, she should relax and have a good laugh. Otherwise, if you see anybody who is not joining in, tickle. There may be others besides Anurag who will be helped.

Hymie Goldberg is drafted to fight in Ronald Reagan’s latest war with Iran. However, he manages to convince the draft board officer that he is half blind and is sent home.
That evening, Hymie goes to the cinema and when the lights come on he notices that a member of the draft board is sitting next to him. Without a moment’s hesitation Hymie taps him on the shoulder and asks, “Excuse me, madam, is this the train for New Jersey?”

Now look for Saleen. And if you find anybody who is not laughing, tickle them. Don’t be shy.

============================================================

Osho,
Finally I have come home to myself with a silence and serenity never known before. I feel like a flower bud ready to open, yet I do not feel in touch with the energy of love and joy that would allow this flower to bloom. It is almost as if I have not yet fully opened my heart to myself.
Osho, am I missing something, or is it just a matter of time?
Flowers don’t open to themselves – otherwise they could have opened in the middle of the night. They open to a rising sun in deep welcome, in gratitude and prayer. They open to the songs of the birds.
You are trying to do something utterly stupid. You are trying to open your heart to yourself. Do you understand what it means? How can you open your heart to yourself? Who are you other than your heart? If you are trying to open your heart to yourself, it will close more and more. You are the center of the heart. The petals will have to come close to you, become a bud; even the open flower will start closing.
This is something very significant to understand: you can open to existence, but not to yourself. You are the one who is the barrier. But you seem to be accustomed to the old human habit of making somebody else responsible.
I will read your question: “Finally I have come home to myself with a silence and serenity never known before.” Remember – underline the word myself. When one really comes home, no self is found. Gautam Buddha has to use a negative word, anatta. Anatta means “no-self.” When you really come home, you are not to be found at all. If you are still finding yourself, you have not come home. Your absence is the home. Your ego is taking you astray, and just to prevent you from coming home it will give you the sense that you have come home, it will give you some false substitute of a home. But this has to be remembered as a definitive criterion: when you come home you never come to yourself. You come to the ultimate. You come to sat-chit-anand. You come to truth. You come to consciousness. You come to bliss.
But in the world of truth, consciousness, and bliss, where are you going to find this rat you call “myself”? I knowingly use the word rat because rats have been found, scientifically, to survive under any conditions. They eat almost one-fifth of humanity’s food. One-fifth – twenty percent – is a large portion, while half of humanity is starving. And rats grow fast; their birthrate is higher than India’s. They don’t believe in birth control at all; they are all followers of the Vatican Pope; they are all Catholics.
There has been a very revealing result of an experiment somewhere on a small island in the ocean where both America and France have been testing atomic weapons, nuclear weapons. The whole island has no population, except rats. All the trees have died. There is a tremendous amount of atomic radiation there which can kill any human being – but the rats have not died. They quickly became immune to any radiation. It was thought that in the Third World War all life would disappear. Now it is known that rats will live on, Third World War or no Third World War. All kinds of poisons have been used on rats to save crops. The rats did not die, but the people who ate those crops died.
Your ego is just like a rat. It has the immunity and the ability to adapt to any situation. You want serenity? You want silence? You want to come back home? Whatever you want, just name it and your ego will give it to you. But anything that is centered on “myself” is going to be wrong.
Remember: no-self is your reality, your authentic reality. And how can you be silent with yourself? The self is the cause of all chaos in you, the self is the cause of all anxiety and misery in you. How can you be silent and find serenity? Your ego is deceiving you. If one has to beware of any enemy, it is the ego, it is the self. You have not come home yet.
You say, “I feel like a flower bud ready to open, yet I do not feel in touch with the energy of love and joy that would allow this flower to bloom.” From where are you going to be in touch with the energy of love and joy? From yourself? Yourself is a false entity; it has no energy and no love. If you want energy and love for the nourishment of the bud that you feel, then you have to be open to all dimensions of existence and allow existence to reach to you: in the sunrays, in the songs of the birds – just listen to their chit-chat – to the trees, to the mountains, to the moon, to the stars, to all living beings, particularly to human beings.
You have to become a receptacle. The ego never wants to be a receptive entity – it goes against the egoistic structure, it goes against its pride. The ego can give, but it cannot take. But it has nothing to give. Unless you take from existence, you have nothing to give. Before giving you have to learn getting.
Be open to existence, to the starry night, to the day full of flowers, full of the rays of the sun, to human beings, who are all potential buddhas. Throw open all your doors and windows and the bud will start opening on its own accord. Do you think any gardener goes to a bud and tries to open it? If you try to open a bud forcibly, it will be crippled, distorted, something aborted. If you do not allow it to open on its own accord, you will destroy all possibility of having a beautiful flower. Every bud opens on its own accord. It just has to grow and be ready when the sun rises. Just wait for the sun.
Again, you are saying, “It is almost as if I have not yet fully opened my heart to myself.” I wonder that you could not see your question and its utter stupidity. To open to yourself? That is almost like trying to fly by pulling on your shoestrings. Rather than opening the bud, you may destroy it. You will fall flat on the earth and forget all about buds and flowers.
The ways of the ego are very subtle and very clever. Then you say, “Osho, am I missing something” – you are missing everything – “or is it just a matter of time?” Don’t throw the responsibility on time. What does poor time have to do with you? Time will not open your bud.
You need to be aware that the simple process of opening is always toward the beyond. Opening cannot be toward yourself – that’s an absurdity. If you understand what I am saying, then you will be aware that you are full of words which you don’t understand.
The question you have formulated has not arisen in your being. You have tried hard to make it very beautiful. You have used good words, but words are empty unless they have content. You cannot deceive me; in your question I can read your whole biography – not only the past but something of the future too. If you go on this way, you will never reach what you call your home and you will never blossom. You will never know what spring is.
You will have to change your whole approach. Right now you seem to be very knowledgeable. But knowledge is all rubbish. You don’t have any experience of anything, even of the bud you are talking about. There is nothing like a bud in you. In this wrong situation which surrounds you, there cannot be. Your ego is too strong – it would crush any bud. Your ego is just like a bulldozer. Poor rosebuds cannot stand against a bulldozer.
If you change from all this knowledgeability and accept your ignorance about the path, about the workings of your mind, then meditation will still be missing – and meditation needs patience.
Right now, without meditation, you are already a bud. You are already hoping to open unto yourself, which is really unique because in the whole of history, no mystic has talked about opening unto “yourself.” Everything is possible – you just have to remove the hindrances: the greatest hindrance is the ego; the second hindrance is knowledgeability without experience; the third hindrance is imagination without seeing clearly that there is no bud yet. I can see this. I don’t know where you are, who you are, but I can see through your question – the bud cannot be there. Your question is very revealing. You have not reached home, perhaps some caravanserai – an overnight stay – but in the morning you have to move on.
Home is when everything stops – time and mind – and nothing moves. Home is an eternal moment which begins but never ends. Home is when there is absolute nothingness: no self, no I. Only in this nothingness can buds of silence and serenity grow. And if you are open toward the universe, then it showers nourishment, and all buds start opening on their own accord.
Meditate, so that you can go beyond mind and self. Certainly meditation will take a little time because you are so full of bullshit. First you will have to clean the ground. Your misunderstanding is tremendous.

Chiang Kai-shek, the dictator of China before Mao Zedong came to power, was one of the most powerful people on the earth. When Mao removed him from power he escaped to Formosa, a private resort for the dictator.
He changed the name of Formosa to Taiwan and made it the capital of China. The whole of China was gone, but he made this small island the capital and continued to remain the dictator. There was no China in his hands, yet because of American support, Mainland China was not represented in the UN. Chiang Kai-shek’s Taiwan represented China in the UN for many years – you cannot believe what kind of politicians are sitting on your chest.
This man Chiang Kai-shek when he was dethroned in utter desperation, old age, sickness – he had passed ninety – was being interviewed in Taipei by an American reporter from Newsweek.
“And when was the last time you had an election, General?” the reporter asked.
Chiang Kai-shek winked and said, “Just before bleakfast.”

People’s egos are such, even at the age of ninety. That idiot is saying he had an erection just before breakfast.

There is a loud knock on the door and the psychiatrist hurries to answer it. “Doc,” says a frightened voice, “I must talk to you about my brother. He breaks thermometers, drinks the mercury and throws away the glass.”
“What?” shrieks the horrified shrink. “He throws away the glass? That’s the best part!”

There are psychoanalysts who are far more insane than their patients but because they have qualifications, certificates, the ego goes on playing its games. The ego enjoys degrees – PhD’s and DLitt’s – very much, but psychoanalysts never look at the fact that they are either neurotic or psychotic themselves. It is a known fact that they go mad four times more often than any other profession. It is strange. These are the people who are supposed to help humanity out of all kinds of neurosis, psychosis, but they themselves go to the mental asylum four times more than any profession in the world.
And every psychiatrist – it is hilarious – once in a while goes to another psychiatrist to be psychoanalyzed. After six, eight months, they themselves need psychoanalysis. Now on what grounds can these people help those who are in real need of help? But the ego never even suspects that something may be wrong. It always pretends to be right.
The meditator is the only person in the whole world who begins his first step with a deep feeling of “I am ignorant. I don’t know anything.” With this ignorance, innocence comes side by side. With this ignorance, all the crap of your knowledge and words and imagination drops away. With this ignorance, slowly, slowly you settle into being just like a child, with a clarity, a purity, a silence, an alertness.
All that is needed is a deep recognition that you know nothing, a recognition that your ego is not you. You are simply the silence which has been taken over by the ego. You are a land conquered by an enemy and you are being identified with the enemy.
Everything is possible, but you have to begin from the right point with humbleness, with openness, with receptivity – and a silence and a patience and a trust will arise on their own accord. Yes, many, many flowers will blossom in your being too, but first you have to put things right.

Osho,
Some people do things instinctively. Is instinct the same as intuition? Or is instinct animal-like and intuition only human?
Osho, please comment on the difference, if there is a difference.
Instead of two words, you will have to understand three words, because you have a past and you have a present and you have a future. Instinct is what belongs to your animal past. It is very old, very solid. It is the inheritance of millions of years. And when I say it is animal-like, I am not condemning it. With the word animal the priests of all religions have associated some condemnation, but I am simply stating a fact, no condemnation at all.
Our past was an animal past. We have passed through all kinds of animals. Our evolution has been from fish to man, passing through all the species of animals. It has been a long, long journey to arrive at mankind.
Intellect is human: it is our present. That’s how we function, through intellect. All our sciences, all our businesses, all our professions, whatever is going on in the world – our politics, our religion, our philosophy – are all based on intellect. Intellect is human.
Instinct is almost infallible because it is so old, so ripe, so mature. Your eyes are blinking; are you doing it? They go on doing it by themselves. Your heart is beating, your breathing is going in and out: this is instinct. It is not up to your intellect to look after all these essential things of life. They are in the hands of instinct because instinct is absolutely infallible. It never forgets to breathe, it never forgets anything.
But intellect is very fallible; it is very new, a very recent arrival. It is just groping in the dark, still trying to find out what it is, where it belongs. And because it does not have roots in experience, it substitutes experience with beliefs, philosophies, ideologies. They become the focus of intellect, but they are all fallible because they are all man-made, manufactured by some clever guy. They are not applicable in every situation. They may be right in one situation and in another situation they may not be right. But intellect is blind, it doesn’t know how to deal with the new. It always brings the old answer to the new question.

Paddy and Sean are sitting opposite the local whorehouse in Dublin, discussing the virtues of the Catholic faith. Suddenly Gideon Greenberg, the local rabbi, approaches the door, looks left and right, then hurries up the stairs.
“Did you see that?” roars Paddy. “I’m glad I am a Catholic.”
Ten minutes later, the Anglican priest approaches the door, looks around quickly, then dashes up the stairs.
“Another hypocrite,” laughs Paddy. “Thank God I am a Catholic.”
A few minutes later Sean nudges Paddy and says, “Hey, man, look! Father O’Murphy is coming this way.”
The two men watch in stunned silence as the Catholic priest disappears up the stairs into the whorehouse. Suddenly Paddy jumps to his feet, crosses himself and shouts at Sean, “Where is your respect? Stand up and take off your hat. There must be a death in the house!”

Now the whole thing has changed. Intellect lives through prejudices; it is never fair. Just by its very nature it cannot be because it has no experience. Instinct is always fair and shows you exactly the natural way, the relaxed way, and the one that the universe follows. But strangely, instinct has been condemned by all religions and intellect has been praised. Of course, if everybody follows instinct, there is no need of any religion, no need of any God, no need of any priest.
Animals don’t need God and they are perfectly happy. I don’t see that they are missing God. Not a single animal, not a single bird, not a single tree is missing God. They are all enjoying life in its utter beauty and simplicity, with no fear of hell and no greed for heaven, no philosophical differences. There are no Catholic lions, there are no Protestant lions and no Hindu lions.
The whole of existence must be laughing at man, at what has happened to man. If birds can live without religions and churches, mosques and temples, why can’t man? The birds never fight religious wars, neither do the animals nor the trees. But if you are a Mohammedan and I am a Hindu, we cannot coexist. Either you have to become converted to my religion or – be ready – I will send you to heaven immediately! The fact is, if instinct is praised, religions lose any rationality, any reason to exist. Hence they praise intellect.
And the third thing, which is your future, is intuition. These three words have to be understood.
Instinct is physical. Your past – based on the experience of millions of years, infallible – never commits any mistake and does miracles in you of which you are not even aware. How does your food become blood? How does your breathing go on functioning even when you are asleep? How does your body separate oxygen from nitrogen? How does the instinctive world of nature go on giving to every part of your body what it needs? How much oxygen is needed in your head for the mind to function? The exact amount is sent through blood running all around the body, distributing fresh oxygen, taking out the old, used, dead cells, replacing them with new ones and taking them back to places from where they can be disposed of.
Have you ever thought why you don’t feel pain when you cut your nails, or why you don’t feel pain when you cut your hair? They are dead cells of your body and this is the way instinct disposes of them. If they were living, then they would hurt just as if you had cut your finger. You would feel wounded and you would feel immense pain. But when you cut your hair, you don’t feel anything because the hairs are already dead.
The scientists say that what instinct does for man, we are not yet capable of doing. And in a small body the instinct does so many miracles. If someday science is going to do the work of a single human body, it will need at least one square mile of factory space for a single human being and tremendous machinery. And still it will not be infallible. Machinery can break down, stop, or the electricity can go off.
But for seventy years continuously, or even one hundred years for a few people, or even one hundred and eighty years for very few people, the instinct goes on functioning perfectly well: the electricity never goes off. Not a single mistake is committed; everything goes according to plan. The plan is in every cell of your body. Scientists are trying to read it, but because it is in code language, nobody knows how to read it. They are still trying to figure it out.
The day we can read the human cells, we will be able to predict everything about a child, even before it is born, even before it is in the mother’s womb. The father’s sperm has a program and in that program your age, your health, what kind of diseases you will have, your genius, your intelligence, your talents, your whole destiny is contained.
On the other polarity of your being, beyond the mind – which is the world of intellect – is the world of intuition. Intuition opens its doors through meditation. Meditation is simply knocking on the doors of intuition. Intuition is complete; it does not grow. Just like instinct, you have inherited it from existence.
Intuition is your consciousness, your being; intellect is your mind; instinct is your body.
Just as instinct functions perfectly as regards the body, intuition functions perfectly as far as your consciousness is concerned. Intellect is just between these two – a passage to be passed, a bridge to be crossed. But there are many people, many millions of people, who never cross the bridge. They simply sit on the bridge thinking they have arrived home.
The home is on the further shore, beyond the bridge. The bridge joins instinct and intuition. But it all depends on you. You may start building a house on the bridge – then you have gone astray. Intellect is not going to be your home. It is a very small instrument to be used only for passing from instinct to intuition. So only the person who uses his intellect to go beyond it can be called intelligent. Intuition is existential, instinct is natural. Intellect is just groping in the dark. The faster you move beyond intellect, the better.

When Billy Graham sang “All I want is Jesus,” five thousand people joined the Protestant church.
When Pope the Polack sang “Ave Maria,” ten thousand people joined the Catholic church.
When Frank Sinatra sang “There’s a gold mine in the sky,” one hundred thousand Jews joined the Air Force.

Intellect functions that way. And Jews are intelligent people – if there is a gold mine in the sky, why waste time here? Immediately join the Air Force!
Intellect can be a barrier to those who think there is nothing beyond it. Intellect can be a beautiful way to those who understand that there is certainly something beyond it. Science has stopped at intellect. That’s why it cannot figure out anything about consciousness.
Intellect without an awakened intuition is one of the most dangerous things in the world. And we are living under the danger of intellect because intellect has given science immense power. But the power is in the hands of children, not in the hands of wise people. Intuition makes a man wise. Call it enlightenment, call it awakening; those are simply different names for wisdom. Only in the hands of wisdom can intellect be used as a beautiful servant. And instinct and intuition function together perfectly well: one on the physical level, another on the spiritual level.
The whole problem of humanity is getting stuck in the middle, in the mind, in the intellect. Then you will have misery, you will have anxiety, you will have agony and you will have meaninglessness. You will have all kinds of tensions that seem to have no solution anywhere.
Intellect makes everything a problem and knows no solution at all. Instinct never creates any problem and does not need any solution because it simply functions naturally. Intuition is pure solution. It has no problems, whereas intellect has no solution, only problems. If you rightly see the division, it is very simple to understand: unless instinct is available, you are dead. Unless intuition is available, your life has no meaning – you just drag on. It is a kind of vegetation.
Intuition brings meaning, splendor, joy, blessings. Intuition gives you the secrets of existence, brings a tremendous silence, serenity, which cannot be disturbed and which cannot be taken away from you. And with instinct and intuition functioning together, you can also use your intellect for right purposes. Otherwise you have only means but no ends.
Intellect has no idea of any ends. This has created today’s situation in the world. Science goes on producing things but it does not know why. Politicians go on using those things, not knowing that they are destructive, that they are preparing for a global suicide. The world needs a tremendous rebellion that can take it beyond intellect into the silences of intuition.
The very word intuition has to be understood. You know the word tuition. Tuition comes from outside, somebody teaches you – the tutor. Intuition means something that arises within your being. It is your potential; that’s why it is called intuition. Wisdom is never borrowed, and that which is borrowed is never wisdom. Unless you have your own wisdom, your own vision, your own clarity, your own eyes to see, you will not be able to understand the mystery of existence.
As far as I am concerned, I am in absolute favor of instinct. Don’t disturb it. Every religion has been teaching you to disturb it. What is fasting but disturbing your instinct? Your body is hungry and asking for food, and you are starving it for spiritual reasons. A strange kind of spirituality has possessed your being. It should be called simply stupidity, not spirituality. Your instinct is asking for water, it is thirsty; your body needs it. But your religions…
Jainism does not allow anybody to even drink water in the night. Now as far as the body is concerned, it may feel thirsty, particularly in summer in a hot country like India – and Jainas exist only in India. In my childhood, I used to feel very guilty because I had to steal water in the night. I could not sleep without drinking at least once a night in hot summers. But I used to feel that I was doing something that should not be done, that I was committing a sin. Strange and stupid ideas are being forced on people.
I am in favor of the instinct and this is one of the secrets I want to reveal to you: if you are totally in favor of instinct, it will be very easy to find the way toward intuition. They are the same, just functioning on different layers: one functions on the material level, the other functions on the spiritual level.
But intellect goes on creating repressive methods for the instinct. Celibacy, for instance, creates perversions – homosexuality, sodomy – because it is not part of your instinctive program. To accept your instinctive life with absolute joy, without any guilt, will help you to open the doors of intuition. They are not different, just their planes are different. Instinct functions beautifully, silently, without any noise. So does intuition, but even more silently, far more beautifully.
Intellect is a disturbance. But it depends on us whether we make it a disturbance or use it as a stepping-stone. When you come across a stone in the street, either you can think it a hindrance or you can use it as a stepping-stone to a higher plane. Those who really understand use intellect as a stepping-stone. The masses are under the control of religions which teach them to use their intellect as a repressive force for instinct. They get involved in fighting with instinct and forget all about intuition. Their whole energy becomes involved in fighting with their own life force. And when you are continuously fighting with your instinct…
A Jaina monk is supposed to remain naked all the year round, even in the winter months, even in the cold night. He cannot use a mattress, he cannot use a blanket, he cannot use anything to cover his body, day or night. He has to fast. The longer he fasts, the greater a saint he becomes in the eyes of the same kind of conditioned people – thirty days, forty days…
Jainism is the only religion in the world which allows you to leave the body if you want to, but you cannot do it quickly by jumping into a river, or by cutting off your head, or by drinking poison. These methods are too simple. Jainism believes in austerity, arduousness. No shortcut is allowed; you have to fast to death.
If a healthy young man fasts, it takes ninety days for him to die, ninety days of utter agony. He can neither sleep nor can he be at ease for a single moment. And every day he goes on becoming thinner, every day two pounds disappear. By the time ninety days have passed, he will be just a skeleton. Only then will he die. These ninety days he suffered hell unnecessarily – but this is thought to be spiritual: this is fighting against the body; this is conquering the body and the material. This is the spirit conquering the body.
Just a few months ago a Jaina monk committed suicide like this: they call it santhara. I wonder why a government that is against suicide takes no notice of these people. They should be prevented. They should be put in jails with others who attempt suicide. What does it matter what means you use for suicide? Whether you die within nine minutes or ninety days does not matter. If you allow the Jaina monks, then why should you prevent others?
The prevention is also very beautiful. If someone is caught committing suicide – if he has already committed it, then nothing can be done – then he will be sent to the gallows. Strange punishment! That’s what he was doing himself, so why waste unnecessary years in court cases, judges, advocates before finally sentencing him to death for trying to commit suicide? The poor fellow was doing it himself, without any expense to the country.
After that Jaina monk, one of his disciples, an old woman, started… Because her master had gone, she did not want to live. And these people are surrounded by thousands who respect them because this is the greatest sacrifice and the greatest victory of spirituality over materialism. From all over the country, thousands of people will come to touch their feet – and all that they are doing is simply committing a crime. But they are not criminals, they are saints!
It is the same situation in all the religions, with different superstitions. They turn the energy of your intellect against your instinct and that spoils all possibilities of opening the flower of your intuition. That is the mystic rose that will lead you to the ultimate ecstasy and to immortal life. But people seem to be absolutely in the hands of the dead past. Whatever the old scriptures have told them, they go on doing it, without ever considering the whole science of man.
These three are the layers of the whole science of man. Instinct should be allowed a relaxed flow. Never, for any reason, disturb it with the intellect. Intellect should be used as an opening for intuition. It has just to give way for intuition to take over your life. Then your life is a life of immense light, of luminosity. It becomes a constant festival.
But it seems the majority of the world consists of very retarded people. They never think about their life themselves. Whatever they are told, they do. They never bother whether it comes from right sources or wrong sources. You may be born a Catholic or a Hindu or a Mohammedan, but your birth does not ensure that your religion is right; your birth and your religion have no connection. But right up till now, wherever you are born decides your religion. The child has not chosen the religion; the religion is imposed on him. And the constant repetition of all kinds of lies makes him more and more unintelligent, superstitious, retarded, idiotic.

Paddy and Sean are eating their lunch on the construction site. Suddenly Paddy says, “Yuck! I just ate a worm with this apple.”
“Well,” says Sean, “drink some water and wash him down.”
“To hell with him,” replies Paddy, throwing away the apple core. “Let him walk himself.”

All over the world you are surrounded by these kinds of people. You have to stay alert and not get trapped in the same imprisonment as everybody else.
If being with me you cannot be unimprisoned, unfettered, then you will not find any other place on the earth where you can be free. To me, freedom is the most fundamental value. Only in freedom can you grow to the highest peak, can you become an Everest. Only in freedom will your intuition blossom and bring immense treasures to you.

============================================================

Osho,
Sitting with you in discourse a feeling of magnificence and utter luxuriousness, which feels so different from material luxury, keeps on arising in me. Would you like to talk about the luxuriousness of being with a living master?
There are two worlds side by side: the world of matter and the world of consciousness. The world of matter is known to the mind, but the world of consciousness is only known when the mind disappears. We are all born as a mind, but existence gives us every opportunity and every challenge to go beyond it. Very few dare, but those who dare are the only people who have known life in its immense beauty, its luxury, its joy, its music, its harmony, its eternal silence and peace. Only those few people have really lived; the others are somehow just dragging themselves from the cradle to the grave.
The mind can never know what authentic luxury is. It cannot know anything of the real; it knows only about the unreal, about the world that is made of the same stuff as dreams are made of. The mind has its own limitations, but there is no question of condemning the mind. Your eyes can see but your eyes cannot hear; there is no reason to condemn the eyes because you cannot hear the music. “Why can’t you hear the sound of the running water? Why can’t you hear the songs of the birds and the tremendous silence of the stars?” Eyes can only see, there is no question of any condemnation. Ears can only hear. It is absolutely absurd to condemn the ears because they cannot see the light of the sun and the moon, because they cannot see the rainbow and its colors, the flowers and their tremendous beauty.
All five senses have their own windows to existence, and our mind is all five senses combined. These five senses are the five doors or windows of the mind into existence. But because these five senses only go outward, you can see what is outside you but not what is inside you. You can touch what is outside you but not what is inside you.
All senses are doors opening to the outside world, but the world of consciousness is within. The mind has no way to even have a glimpse of the world that is hidden inside you. They are side by side; there is not a difference of miles or even a few steps. They meet on a boundary line, they are running parallel – and just as parallel lines never meet, they never meet. You would have to jump from one line to another line.
The mind hankers for luxury, for comfort, for joy, for love. It tries to make things that it longs for happen, but they are bound to be just outward things: a beautiful house, beautiful furniture, a beautiful garden. Everything that you can think of, the mind can manage – but only on the outside. It is only a very faraway echo of the inner beauty, of the inner luxury, of the inner richness. But the inner, which is so close, remains almost closed to millions of people. Their whole lives they are playing with toys and never come to know the real. And the real was not far away. It was just a change of gestalt.
This word gestalt is German. No other language has exactly the same word, hence it is used in all the languages without being translated. But it can be explained so that you can see what it indicates.
Just thirty or forty years ago a psychology came into being and became very fashionable. It was Gestalt psychology. It has faded now, but there is some significant meaning in the very word gestalt. The psychology may prove true or untrue – that is not my interest. My interest is in the simple word gestalt. That psychology has contributed a tremendously beautiful word.
In Gestalt psychology books, you will always find a picture to explain the meaning of gestalt and sometimes you will find that kind of picture in children’s books: a line drawing of a beautiful young woman. What is expected of you is to go on staring, without blinking, at the beautiful face of the woman. And suddenly you see something has changed. Nothing has changed: you are the same, the book is the same, the picture is the same. But in a strange moment, in a strange way, something has transpired between your vision and the lines of the picture. Instead of a beautiful young woman, you see a very ugly old woman. You cannot believe it when it happens for the first time.
Then go on staring – it will happen again: the old woman will disappear and the young woman is there. You cannot see both together. That is a very significant point to understand. You can’t see both together because they both consist of the same lines. When you start to see the beautiful woman again, the gestalt has changed; you are seeing the same lines in a different combination. But because they are the same lines, you now cannot see the old woman. When you then start seeing the old woman, once more the gestalt has changed, your vision has changed. The same lines that were making the beautiful woman, the young woman, are now constituting the old woman.
So you can see both, but only separately. Why does it happen? It’s because your mind is in a constant change; it cannot remain at the same point for long. It is not accustomed to being static; it is a dynamic force. So when you are staring at the beautiful woman, the mind gets bored. It wants some change, but you don’t allow any change. You go on focusing, staring, then the mind finds a way of its own. It changes the gestalt, it changes the combination of the lines until suddenly you see an old woman.
I think you will understand the meaning of gestalt: the meaning is a sudden change in your vision. That which was not in front of you, that which you were not seeing, suddenly becomes visible. And that which you were seeing suddenly disappears – and you can’t see both together.
I would like you to understand something parallel, a gestalt, in the history of world philosophy. There have been philosophers like Shankara, in India, Bradley in England, Hegel in Germany, and many more all over the world. These three can be said to be the most representative of a certain gestalt. They all say that the world is illusory, it is only an appearance. It is not a reality, it is no more than a dream. The real is experienced only in your innermost being. Except for your inner being, everything that you see is just ephemeral.
In India they call it maya. The word maya means: as if you are seeing a magic show in which nothing is real. Or it can also mean a mirage – what happens in a desert when you are very thirsty, tired. Suddenly you see far away a beautiful small oasis, trees, a lake. You see not only the lake, you see the reflection of the trees in the lake. It is impossible to deny the reality of an oasis. But as you come close the oasis goes – simply where, you cannot say. It simply disappears. There are no trees, there is no lake and there is no reflection of the trees.
The people, the travelers, the caravans that have been passing through deserts know very well where the true oases are and where there are only ephemeral oases. But to the new traveler, it is impossible to make a distinction; they look exactly the same. The desert creates such an illusory reality, and because of your thirst you tend to believe in it. If you hadn’t been thirsty, you might not have believed. You would have suspected, doubted, you would have questioned. But you were so thirsty that this was not the time to disbelieve in the oasis.
To disbelieve in the oasis is simply to accept death because of thirst. You are so thirsty you start trusting, believing in that which is just created by the rays of the sun, reflected from the sand of the desert. When the rays reflect back, they move, they shimmer – just as water shimmers. Those shimmering rays going back to the sun create the illusion of water. In those shimmering rays a kind of mirror effect is created, and because of that mirror effect anything that is around it is reflected. This mirage is another meaning of maya. The world as seen by Shankara, by Hegel, by Bradley is rejected as only appearance, not authentically true. It is as true as a dream, but not more than that.
There is another school of philosophers. In India, the greatest of that school is Brihaspati. In Greece, the greatest of this other school is Epicurus and in Europe, Karl Marx. These three are representative of materialism. They say just the opposite. They say matter is the only reality and consciousness is illusory: what you see as objects, material – that is the only true world. Your body is true, but you are not true. Your consciousness is only an ephemeral effect, a by-product, just like the mirage in the desert.
It’s strange that these two philosophies have always existed side by side. And strangely, neither a single materialist has ever crossed the line to become a spiritualist nor vice versa – they remain parallel. Not a single person has been convinced by the arguments of the other. My own standpoint is beyond both. I can see that both are too attached to one gestalt.
One is saying that the young woman is real and the old woman is just false. The other is saying the old woman is real and the young woman is just false. But as far as I am concerned, the young woman and the old woman are not separate. Either both are true or both are untrue, because they are made of the same lines. If you deny that the old woman is real, take away all the lines that make the old woman and you will find the young woman has also disappeared. Or vice versa: if you think the old woman is real, then take away the unreal young woman’s lines and the old woman will disappear. They are really two ways of seeing the same reality.
To me there is no division. To me it is a question of transcending the duality of parallel lines, of not getting caught up in any gestalt, but going beyond both gestalts and seeing, as a witness, the matter and the mind – and that you are far away from both. Then a new world of luxury, a new world of grace, a new world of magnificence opens up.
What you are saying is immensely important. Your question is one of those few questions which everybody has to understand because everybody will have to encounter the reality implied in the question. You are saying, “Sitting with you, a feeling of magnificence and utter luxuriousness, which feels so different from material luxury, keeps on arising in me.” Trust in it. Settle more and more deeply in it because you are on the right path. What is happening to you, sitting here with me in communion, is just your own inner world opening.
If you love me and you trust me, then there is no need to keep your heart closed. There is no need to keep your defenses up, there is no need to keep a distance, there is no need to have any fear. If love cannot destroy your fear, if trust cannot take away your security measures, then it is not worth calling it love, it is not worth calling it trust. The whole experience of being with a living master is that the disciple slowly, slowly relaxes, drops all his defenses – there is nobody who is going to hurt him – and because there is no fear, he starts coming closer.
The whole world lives in fear, in such deep fear that we have created hidden defense mechanisms. For example: in the West, people shake hands and it is thought to be a friendly gesture. It is not! It was basically out of fear that people started shaking hands with the right hand. The right hand is dangerous – you may be carrying a weapon. It is better to shake hands and be completely sure that the other is not carrying any weapon. It is a very strange world – shaking hands was a gesture of enmity not of friendship. That’s why the left hand is not used in shaking hands because the right hand is your active hand. If you are carrying something dangerous, it will be in your right hand.
In the East, people were more alert and conscious because they were more cowardly than in the West. The whole philosophy of nonviolence has made them cowardly. They have found an even better way. When you shake hands you come too close. Coming too close is dangerous, as even the left hand can be used to wound you, to shoot you.
Unfortunately there are “leftists” and their number is not small – ten percent of the whole population. Most of them have been forced to use their right hands. That’s why you don’t see so many left-handed people because in school the teachers force them saying, “Write with your right hand; the right hand is right and the left hand is wrong.” And they become a laughingstock. So the children start using their right hand, although it is difficult for them because they were born “leftist.” But slowly, slowly, if you try, the right hand starts working. It will never be as good as that of the born “rightists.” It will always remain secondary. But in a right-handed world, what can you do?
Ninety percent of people are right-handed. Only ten percent of people are left-handed. They are such a small minority that most of them disappear into the right-handed crowd. Very few remain left-handed their whole life. It needs a little individuality, it needs a little courage to declare, “If my left hand is active, I am not going to unnecessarily force the right hand on my nature.” But there are very few people who will take that stand against the whole of society.
Coming too close is dangerous, but still the left hand is left out. It can carry a small knife and that may be enough to kill you. The East has found a better way. Rather than shaking hands, it puts both hands together, to show you that both hands are empty, and there is no need to come very close. You are there, I am here, you are showing that both your hands are empty, I am showing that both my hands are empty.
Slowly, slowly in the East it took on not only a meaning of friendliness, but even a meaning of spirituality, “We are bowing down with folded hands to the godliness within you.” But the reality was just the opposite. It was a defense measure to make you aware, “I am not your enemy, I also want assurance that you are not my enemy.” But you still keep your distance. Who knows? The person may be hiding a knife in his clothes, he may not show it in his hands. And it has happened; it is not that it is only a fear.
Even great kings, hugging another king – as if in deep friendship and love – have killed. When they were hugging, they were also carrying a knife, a small knife in their hands. And it was enough – if you wound the person in the right place, you can kill him even with a small knife. There are many cases on record. So-called great emperors and kings have behaved in such an ugly way, inviting another king as a friend and then killing him. If emperors can do that, what about ordinary people?
I am just telling you one example – there are of course many more – of a defense that you use without knowing it, which has just been handed down by the older generation.

My grandfather used to have a dog and he never went anywhere without the dog. Even if he was going to a marriage ceremony, to a party, he went with his dog. His dog would be sitting by his side. I would be sitting by his other side.
I said, “This looks very bad: I am reduced to the category of your dog! When you want me to come with you, at least you can leave your dog at home.”
He said, “You are too young to understand.”
I said, “When will I be old enough so that I can understand? Just tell me. I have been listening to everyone: ‘You are too young.’ Always too young. When will I be able to understand?”
He said, “That’s a good point. In fact, we use this strategy just to avoid unnecessary inquiries.”
So I said, “Just tell me today. I’m old enough to understand.”
He said, “The reality is I always take my dog with me if I am invited to eat food anywhere. First I give it to the dog. Unless I’m sure that there is no poison…”
I said, “You are taking it too seriously. Who is going to poison you?”
He said, “You don’t know. I have seen people poisoned.”

I now realize that he was right. After I was poisoned myself, I remembered the old man – he was right. If I had had a dog with me… But I am not allowed to have a dog. That is the difficulty, my doctors don’t allow it. They say I am allergic. No defense at all!
And then when I read that Gautam Buddha was poisoned, and it was food poisoning… My grandfather was dead, but I thought if he had been alive, I would have gone to him and asked his forgiveness for laughing at him. If Gautam Buddha had had his dog with him…
You are living in a very murderous society, where every kind of crime is happening. Naturally man has learned to close himself from every side, out of sheer defense. But when you come to a master, there is no need to have any defense. And slowly, slowly, as you become more and more in tune with the master, your defenses drop – windows open, fresh breezes and fresh sunrays enter.
The master is not a master if he is not a fresh breeze. A master is not a master if he is not a sunrise to your being. A master is not a master if he does not come into your heart as a song, as a dance, as a celebration – there cannot be anything more luxurious, more graceful, more delicious.
Slowly, slowly you start learning a new lesson. It is not only to the master that you have to be open, you have to be open to the trees too; they are not going to harm you. You have to be open to the stars too; they are not going to harm you. This vast universe is here. You have just to be open to this whole universe and suddenly all the stars descend and come close to you, dancing within your heart. The trees start having a certain communication with you – and the flowers smile.
There are strange stories – I used to think they were only stories, but slowly, slowly my own experience told me that they were not stories.
About Mohammed the story is: when he was in the desert of Saudi Arabia, wherever he went a cloud always moved over his head. It seems to be very unlikely that clouds would be so sensitive. But every contemporary source… Mohammed is not very ancient, only fourteen hundred years have passed, not long. All contemporary sources of Mohammed describe this fact. Even people who were opposing him have described the miracle: “We may be in disagreement with his philosophy and religion but we cannot deny the fact; we have seen it with our own eyes. Wherever he goes in the desert, a cloud is always moving with him, giving him shade, always keeping him in the cool shade.”
About Gautam Buddha there are stories. Perhaps they are historical facts. Perhaps one day – sooner than you think – science is going to authenticate these stories, which up to now have been thought to be only mythological. It is said that when Gautam Buddha sat under a tree – just to rest – even if it was not the season, flowers would immediately blossom, and many flowers would shower on Gautam Buddha.
As scientists understand more and more about the sensitivity of trees, it seems possible that the openness of Gautam Buddha may have had a deep effect on the very heart of the tree. Even the poor tree could not resist the temptation to welcome Gautam Buddha with a few flowers, although it was not the season.
This whole existence can become a luxury. You just have to learn the art of being open.

In the university where I was teaching for almost nine years, there was a long row of trees between two university buildings: one for the arts faculty, the other for the science faculty. Between these two buildings there was this row of very beautiful trees. They gave deep shade, and in the summer they had so many flowers – red flowers – that the trees seemed to be on fire. When there are hundreds of these trees, it looks as if the whole forest is on fire. So many flowers come to them simultaneously that you cannot see the leaves anymore, just flowers, such beautiful flowers.
There were at least two dozen trees between the two buildings and just a small road joining them. The idea must have been to cover that small road with these lush, green, beautiful trees – cover the whole road between the two buildings – so that there would be shade, even in the hottest summer.
No one knows what happened. When I joined the university all the trees were alive. I had chosen the most beautiful tree to park my car under. Nobody was parking their car there because a parking lot was available on the other side of the building. I was even told that this was not the place to park.
I said, “Unless you show me any ordinance from the university that I cannot park my car under this tree, I am going to park my car there. Even if I have to leave the university, I will leave, but I’m going to park here as long as I am part of the university.”
The vice-chancellor understood, “It is unnecessary to quarrel with this man. He may resign just for this reason, and there is no harm. Let him park there.”
It was just outside his office – he could see me and my car from his window. My idea to park the car there had a reason. Because I was mostly out of town without leave, I told my chauffeur, “Every day at eleven thirty, before the vice-chancellor comes to the university at around twelve, park my car under the tree. That will keep him thinking that I am in the university. And just after he leaves you can drive the car back home.”
It was because of his window that I had chosen that tree. He was not aware of the fact that it was really the window not the tree. I kept insisting, “I love this tree and I will keep my car under this tree as long as I am in this university.” And he used to look out of his window and remained happy, thinking that I was in the university.
Slowly, slowly some kind of disease happened to those trees. All the trees died, except the tree I was parking my car under. All the other trees died completely: they were without leaves, barren, and new leaves never came. The vice-chancellor was very much surprised.
One day, when I was parking the car, he came to the window and called me, waved to me and said, “It is very strange. I am sorry I was preventing you from parking your car. Not only me, but many people feel that it is just because of you and your car that this tree has remained alive. All the other trees have died, not a single exception, just your tree.”
It had become known as my tree. Nobody else dared to park his car there; everybody knew that it was my tree. And the vice-chancellor himself said, “I am sorry that I was preventing you. If you had listened to me, this tree also would have died. And it is the only tree I can see from my window.” I myself did not think that it had anything to do with me.
Then I left the university. After two years I went back again, just to meet the vice-chancellor, my friends and colleagues. I was passing through the city and I thought…
When I went there, I saw that my tree had also died. I also became a little suspicious – perhaps the vice-chancellor and those other people were right. When I reached his office he reminded me. He said, “I knew it would happen. The day you resigned I looked at the tree and I felt that it was going to happen. And within three months – just three months – the tree died.”

I had left the tree absolutely young, a luscious green, full of flowers. Perhaps there was something happening in the being of the tree: some love, some trust, some opening, some friendliness.
Modern researchers say that trees are more sensitive than human beings. They go through the whole range of emotions: fear, love, anger, compassion. They go through all these emotions far more deeply than human beings.
So it is not only a question of being open to a master. It is really a question of being open. The master is only an excuse. Use the master as an excuse, so that you can learn the language of trust, the language of openness, the language of communion with existence. Then you will find that your life will become inwardly rich – every day more and more. And you will find a grace in your being that you were never aware was possible.
I am in favor of this luxury, this richness. People have always misunderstood me – perhaps that is my destiny. I have been condemned all around the world as the guru of the rich. If understood in my sense, I am certainly the master of the richest, the most sensitive, the most loving, the most luxurious people in the world. But those who have been condemning me, they are condemning not in my sense. They cannot even understand that inner luxury is possible. To them luxury means outside things; richness means money. But to my people it has to mean the inner, always the inner. Whatever I am saying is for the inner, not for the outer.
On the outside, there is nothing of much value, just the mundane world, with all kinds of greed, struggle, competitiveness, violence. The outside is ugly. I would like the outside also to be beautiful and rich and luxurious, but it can happen only when the inside has changed. The first and the foremost change has to be inner. The outer will follow.

A shipwrecked sailor, who has been living alone on an island for five years, wakes up one morning to see a ship anchored close by and a small boat coming toward the shore.
He races to the beach and is greeted by an officer who steps out of the boat and hands him a packet of newspapers.
“What are these for?” he asks, amazed.
“With the captain’s compliments, sir,” replies the officer. “He suggests that you read what the newspapers say about the world first and then tell us if you still want to be rescued.”

What do you think: did the man decide to be rescued or not? I have been thinking about him, but I cannot imagine that he decided to be rescued. If you read five years of newspapers, the only conclusion will be to get rid of this world. It is not worth living. It is not worth being with these people. As far as I am concerned I have forgotten the world of the newspapers completely.
I have found my people. I have found my world. I have found a small planet of my own, where love is the only law, where laughter is prayer, where dancing is divine, where every moment is sacred, and where to be natural is the only spirituality. Because I could manage to find my people, I am alive. Otherwise, I would have managed long ago to be crucified by all kinds of idiots, who are always willing… They would have been very happy and I would have been very happy because it does not seem to be worth living in this world. And what I have done is very difficult, is almost unprecedented: finding my own kind of people who can understand me, who can have a rapport with my innermost being. Otherwise there is nothing but misunderstanding in the world.

A very proper Englishman goes into a bar one night, sits down, but does not order a drink. The bartender, an unusually friendly guy, asks him if he would like a drink on the house.
The Englishman shakes his head.
“I tried liquor once,” he said. “Did not like it.”
Still trying to be friendly, the bartender asks him if he would like to join a couple of the boys for a few hands of poker.
The Englishman shakes his head. “Tried gambling once,” he says, “didn’t like it. In fact, I would not be sitting in this place at all, but I promised my son I would meet him here.”
“I see,” says the bartender. “Your only child, I assume.”

Because he tries everything only once and then – finished!

Osho,
Watching your people arrive in larger numbers every day makes me feel so humble, and full of joyful tears, knowing that we all have this one thing in common: our love for you.
It is such a gift to be just one of all these loving smiles who sit at your feet each day in Chuang Tzu.
Osho, again and again, thank you for being here.
Jivan Mary, I am reminded…

Mulla Nasruddin was coming home. The sun had set. There was still some light, but it was getting darker every moment. He was passing by the side of the graveyard when he saw, far away, a few people coming on horses. He could make out that they had swords. He immediately concluded that there was danger: “It seems my last moment has come.”
So he jumped over the wall of the graveyard and there was a freshly-dug grave. To avoid the dangers that were coming, he lay down in the grave, closed his eyes and stopped breathing.
But those people had already seen this fellow, and they also saw him jump over the wall. They thought, “He seems to be a thief or something.”
It was a marriage party, and in many places in the East – particularly Mohammedan countries – when people go to a marriage party, they go on their horses and carry their swords.
This again reminds me of shaking hands. In the beginning, the marriage party was really a party of enemies who were going to force some family at the point of a sword to give their daughter to their son. It was not a friendly affair. In the beginning, marriage was an invention, a question of conquering, forcing a certain family, whether they were willing or not; it was a power struggle. This must have happened thousands of years ago, but even now the marriage party still carries swords.
In India, being a very nonviolent country, the whole marriage party does not carry swords. The man who is going to be married doesn’t carry a sword, but a small knife – just symbolic.
I have asked many of my friends when they were getting married, “Why do you go on carrying that small knife? I don’t see any point in it.”
They said, “Neither do we see any point in it, but traditionally…”
I said, “At least you should have inquired. There must have been some reason, some time back.”
Then I told them, “This is just the last remnant of a historical fact. Thousands of years ago, women were thought to be commodities and they had to be conquered. There was no other way except force. It is ugly to carry these knives because they are symbolic of that old, primitive, barbaric stage.”
They said, “But our parents, family, everybody will be very annoyed and even the other party will not like it. They have also forgotten that this is a symbol of antagonism, not a symbol of any friendship or love.”
It was a marriage party, but Mulla thought, “So many swords, there is danger.”
And those people thought, “This man seems to be a thief or something. Suddenly, when he saw us, he jumped over the wall.”
So they all came nearer, jumped over the wall and looked all around – “Where has that man disappeared to?”
Mulla was looking at them silently. Because one cannot continue to stop one’s breathing, once in a while he was breathing and then watching to see what would finally happen.
Finally they walked all around the grave and they saw that this was not the way a man had to be buried. He was uncovered, fully dressed, had his shoes on, even his umbrella with him. They had never seen a dead body carrying an umbrella, wearing shoes, and then lying like this. The cold night was coming… Who were the people who had left the body uncovered?
Mohammedans don’t make graves like Christians, their graves are just pure mud. They just pour the mud on top of it, that’s enough. They are poor people. They cannot manage to have marble – at the most a small stone on which they put the name of the person, that’s all.
But what kind of thing was this? When they looked closely, they saw that once in a while the body was breathing. When they were all surrounding him silently, Mulla opened one eye. They could not believe what kind of fellow he was, and they were very angry.
They asked him, “Why are you here?”
Mulla said, “I can ask you the same question. Why are you here? Perhaps you don’t know the answer, so I will answer from both sides. I am here because of you! You are here because of me!”

Jivan Mary, I am here because of you. You are here because of me. It is absolutely irrational, but truth is truth!
You have not asked any question, so I decided that, since for many days I have not given you any sutras to meditate on, I should use this great opportunity that Jivan Mary has given me.
A few sutras for her, for all of you, to meditate on…

A woman who looks like a dream usually gives a man insomnia.
Some people sleep with one eye open; others wake with both eyes shut.
If at first you don’t succeed, try someone else.
Two is company, three is the result.
The best way to make your dreams come true is to wake up.
Sometimes the best way to liven up the party is to leave.
It is better to be in the missionary position than never to have any religion at all.
The only time most people look like their passport photographs is during a hijack.
In these days of jet travel, the only journeys that take a long time are the ones from your house to the airport.
A husband who gets his breakfast in bed is in hospital.
Married life is like sitting in a bathtub – after a while, it is not so hot.
Marriage is like a violin. After the beautiful music is over, the strings are still attached.
Nobody is ever satisfied. Poor men wish they were rich, rich men wish they were handsome, bachelors wish they were married, and married men wish they were dead.
The fastest way to discover your bad habits is to move in with your lover.
God gave black men rhythm because he made such a mess of their hair.
And the last:
Sex is the most fun you can have without laughing.

============================================================

Osho,
Sat-chit-anand… Meaning or no meaning, just the sound of it touches my heart deeply.
Sat-chit-anand is one of those few expressions in all languages of the world which have descended from the highest peak of consciousness. They are pure music, they are absolute poetry; they are no ordinary words. If they touch your heart without even knowing the exact meaning, the reason is that they are re-echoing the soundless sound of those who have entered that space. Sanskrit can be proud that it has never been a living language used in the marketplace.
Sanskrit lovers try to prove just the contrary. They try to prove that once it was a living language which people spoke, just like any other ordinary dialect. But I insist on my difference. I want to know why they insist on Sanskrit being a living language used by ordinary people. They think if a language is not used by ordinary people, then it loses something of importance, it is a dead language. Certainly it has never been used by the people, but it is not a dead language. It is the language of the mystics. It is the language of those who know.
It is not worldly, that’s true. It is something otherworldly – and this is not a criticism. In fact, the extraordinariness of the language is that it was only used by very few people of tremendous understanding. Their every word has immense significance because it is coming out of a deep experience of the reality of their own being. The so-called living languages are mundane. They are for the marketplace, for day-to-day use: naturally, they cannot contain something of the beyond. Perhaps Sanskrit is the only language… It is also the mother language of all the civilized languages of the world.
Sanskrit is rare in the sense that the people who formulated it were not thinking of the material side of existence, but were more concerned that the words used would reflect something of consciousness, heights of consciousness, of love, of compassion, of ecstasy. Their words are mantras, sacred, they are coming from the very source of our life. This is possible.
You say, “Sat-chit-anand… Meaning or no meaning, just the sound of it touches my heart deeply.” It is a soundless sound; or, in other words, the sound of silence, the sound of the ultimate experience, the sound when you are no more – only the universe remains.
Certainly you can avoid meaning. You can say “meaning or no meaning” because meaning is of the mind. But sat-chit-anand has a significance which goes far higher than meaning. It is just a fragrance which has left the flower. The flower is visible – part of this world, part of matter – but you cannot catch hold of the fragrance. You can feel it, it can touch you deeply, it can reach your innermost core – but still you cannot figure out the meaning of it. You cannot figure out what it is in reality.
The meaning is irrelevant here; significance becomes the relevance. Not that it has no meaning, but basically it has only significance. And the significance is that the very sound, sat-chit-anand, penetrates the heart, breaking down all the barriers, all the bars and all the defense mechanisms. It resounds within your being, creating a subtle harmony, a deep peace, a strange feeling of fulfillment, of being at ease with the world, with the universe, with existence itself – at ease not only with existence, but with yourself too.
It is a pure silence, as if water can be condensed to ice, and the ice can be again melted into water. That is the reality of such beautiful sounds. They can be condensed to meaning, but their basic reality is to melt within you and to reach each fiber of your being, to each cell, to give it a dance.
These are the mystic sounds. They are very few. I have talked to you about satyam-shivam-sundaram, sat-chit-anand, hari-om-tat-sat, om-mani-padme-hum, om-shantih-shantih-shantih. These five I have chosen as the most significant, as the most deep-going. I will try to give you the meaning also, because that meaning will help the significance to become deeper. That meaning will not only touch your heart, it will also touch your intelligence – and you have to be touched in your totality to be transformed.
I will begin with the last one. That is the sound every Eastern scripture ends with: om-shantih-shantih-shantih. It means “The soundless sound, or the sound of silence, peace, peace, peace” – just giving you the sense of the whole scripture in these few telegraphic words. Every scripture in the East ends the same. It may be Hindu, it may be Buddhist, it may be Jaina – it doesn’t matter. They are all different in their philosophies. They are all different in their theologies. They are different religions, continuously in controversy for at least ten thousand years. But strangely, they all end their scriptures with “the sound of silence: peace, peace, peace.” It seems they are all different roots of this experience.
They may differ about their roots, about the description of their roots. They may quarrel, they may contradict each other, but as far as the end is concerned, when they reach the highest peak of consciousness, all that is found is the sound of silence and utter peace, so deep that they have to repeat it three times: peace, peace, peace.
The fourth is used by the Tibetans, although it takes almost all the words from Sanskrit: om-mani-padme-hum. It is a very mystic statement. It says: “The sound of silence, the diamond in the lotus.” You cannot conceive a more beautiful thing than a beautiful diamond in the most beautiful flower on the earth, the lotus. They are trying to convey to you the beyond in some way comprehensible to the mind: the sound of silence – om – the diamond in the lotus. I have loved it from my very childhood. Just the words “the diamond in the lotus” have managed to express the beyond in the most beautiful way.
The third is hari-om-tat-sat – “the sound of silence, this is the only truth.”
The second is sat-chit-anand – “truth, consciousness, bliss.”
And the first is satyam shivam sundaram – “truth, godliness, beauty.”
These five, I can say to you, belong to the universal religious consciousness, not to any organized religion because they have come from individual mystics. They have poured their heart, they have poured their enlightenment, they have poured their awakening into these five mantras.
There is no word in English to translate mantra. It means a sacred word, not of any use in the day-to-day life experience, but only significant when you go beyond this visible world and enter the invisible consciousness. A mantra is a secret key. It opens the door to the ultimate.
But the meaning is also significant because you are in the mind. The sound may have gone deep into your heart, thrilled you, but still it is good not to leave the mind completely out of your experience because it can become a disturbance; it can become very vengeful.
Don’t antagonize your mind. It can disturb everything. Have you watched how it disturbs your body? When you are in anger, your whole body is disturbed: your stomach is disturbed, your blood pressure goes up, suddenly you start perspiring – even in an air-conditioned place. There have been many cases of heart attacks in intense anger. The heart suddenly stops. The mind can disturb the body on the one hand, on the other hand it can disturb the heart. Very few people know its disturbances in the heart because it is not a common experience.
But if you don’t know the meaning, if the mind is not satisfied, soon it will start creating suspicion, doubt, skepticism. Soon it will start saying to you that you are being irrational – and you will be affected. If the mind is not in cooperation, the impact of sat-chit-anand on your heart will start disappearing. My whole effort is to transform your total being, not leaving anything outside because nature does not intend it so. When the mind can be persuaded to go along with you, there is no need to create an opposition. I am against any kind of unnecessary conflict and split in your being. It is better to create a bridge between mind, body and being.
And the meaning is also tremendously beautiful. Sat means truth. Man’s longest search has been for that, because without knowing the truth, we know nothing. Truth is the very meaning of our existence. Without knowing truth we are just accidental, we don’t have any meaning.
Perhaps something has gone wrong in nature and we are the product of it – freaks. Unless you know the meaning of yourself you cannot have a deep relationship with the cosmos. The meaning is going to become a bridge with the cosmos. Unless you feel some meaning, some truth in your being, you are not yet aware of a deep communion with the whole.
Truth is the experience of being in deep communion with the eternity of existence, with the wholeness and the perfection and the grandeur and the magnificence of that which is. Truth simply means that which is. It is pure isness – and the revelation of this truth to you is only possible if your chit, your consciousness, rises to its ultimate flowering.
It is consciousness that is going to discover the truth. Hence, meditation is emphasized. Meditation will not give you the truth, but it will give you more and more consciousness, and, finally, consciousness gives you two things: on one hand, truth, and on the other hand, a tremendous bliss. You become almost like a bird with two wings. Truth is your one wing, bliss is your other wing – and you are pure consciousness.
In this experience you can fly like an eagle across the sun into the unknown. Then this whole universe belongs to you; then wherever you are, you are at home; then whatever you are, you are in utter peace – whatever happens is beautiful and brings tremendous gratitude to you.
Prayer becomes your very heartbeat. You don’t pray in synagogues, in churches, in temples or in mosques. Those are for the irreligious; those are for the hypocrites; those are for the pretenders. The authentic religious man has prayer in his heartbeats. He is continuously feeling a tremendous gratitude to all that existence has made available to us – life, love, laughter.

Osho,
Is man really the most hilarious animal?
Would you give us a few more examples?
Devageet, this is more like you. The other day you were asking about death. That is not at all a reflection of your individuality. You are a man who can understand laughter as one of the most religious qualities. It has never been accepted by any religion as a religious quality. But I am never in agreement with any superstition, however old and ancient it may be. And I don’t care at all what others have believed, lived. I trust my own experience more than any holy scripture, more than any great saint or sage.
My experience about laughter is that it is the most purifying, the most healthy, the most rejuvenating, the most refreshing, and the most total experience. It can be your first experience of totality. You can laugh totally. And there is another beautiful thing about it: it is not only of the mind. The mind may trigger it, but soon it spreads all over you. It is overwhelming. There are beauties upon beauties as far as laughter is concerned. When you are laughing, one of the greatest things is that the mind cannot think. If you are alert, you can experience a space of no-thought, which is the experience of meditation.
Laughter gives you a childlike innocence. It helps to unburden you of unnecessary seriousness which all the religions have been burdening you with. They have even taken away the smiles from your lips – what to say about laughter? They have been preaching seriousness. They are afraid, as if God will feel offended if you laugh. And I cannot conceive of God in any other position, in any other posture, than laughing. If he exists at all, he must be laughing twenty-four hours a day at the hilariousness of humanity. We don’t know the whole of humanity, we know only a few people here and there. God must be watching all over humanity, and so many circuses going on.
Friedrich Nietzsche said, “God is dead.” But the question is, “Who killed him? Or, if he died naturally, what was the disease?” Sometimes I have this idea: perhaps, laughing since eternity, he just popped off as there is a limit to everything. You must all feel compassionate toward poor God. But in another way, he enjoyed more than anybody else.
He may have been disturbed once in a while – “What kind of man have I created?” It is a well-established fact that after man he stopped creating. Seeing man, he must have become aware – “I have committed a mistake. Now it is time to stop creation.” He did not stop at horses, he did not stop at buffaloes, he did not stop at millions of species of birds and insects and animals and trees. But suddenly, since the day he created man, nothing has been heard of him. He became so worried about what he had done, he either died from too much laughter, or, seeing what these creatures he has created in his own image were doing, he committed suicide.

A beautiful young woman is strolling through the zoo, and finally stops in front of the monkey cage. Seeing no monkeys around, she asks the keeper, “Where are all the monkeys today?”
“They are inside their house, miss,” he replies. “It is the mating season.”
“Will they come out if I throw them some peanuts?” she asks.
The keeper scratches his head and says, “I don’t know, miss. Would you?”

The great novelist has been locked away in a mental asylum for years. But at last there seems to be some hope of recovery. For three months he sits at his typewriter in his room, writing a new novel. Finally he announces that it is complete and brings it to the top shrink who grabs it eagerly and starts to read, “General Jones leaped on his faithful horse and yelled, ‘Giddyap up! Giddyap! Giddyap!’”
Then the shrink thumbs through the rest of the book. “Why, there is nothing here but five hundred pages of git ups!” he says.
“I know,” says the writer. “Stubborn horse.”

Lord Dottingham returns home from fox hunting a little earlier than usual and finds Lady Dottingham in bed with his best friend, Sir Arthur Carpley. His lordship stands stiffly in the bedroom doorway and loudly berates his wife for her unfaithfulness.
With thunder in his voice he reminds her that he had taken her from a miserable existence in the London slums, given her a fine home with servants, expensive clothes and jewels.
As Lady Dottingham is by this time crying loudly, his lordship turns his wrath on his supposed friend. “And as for you, Carpley,” he shouts, “you might at least stop while I am talking!”

Osho,
The other day I fell in love with Milarepa. It was so beautiful, but after ten minutes it was gone.
Osho, is this the way things really go?
Lolita, I wonder that the love affair continued for as long as ten minutes. With Milarepa, things are more speedy. Of course, this is the way things really go. But with Milarepa they go with express speed. His love affairs are just hit and run.
He is really a great guy – my musician. Only music seems to be his really permanent love affair. Everything else is just in the margin; ten minutes are more than enough. And he never repeats any mistakes; he commits mistakes every day, but always new ones.
I have sometimes thought about the word mistake. Who made that word? That’s what he goes on doing. Take this Miss, take that Miss. He understands exactly the meaning of the word miss-takes.
For you I feel really sad, but there is no problem. Here almost all are Milarepas. My people are the misfits of the world; this is a gathering of the misfits. But they fit with each other perfectly well, so don’t be worried: fall in love again. Remember the American motto: “Try it again, and again, and again.”
I don’t know if it is ever going to happen, but the trying is beautiful in itself. Hoping that it is going to happen keeps you alive, keeps you young. The day a woman thinks it is not going to happen, she becomes old – and no woman wants to become old.
I have heard…

A politician was asking a friend at a meeting of women, “How do I keep them quiet just for five minutes? Because I feel so embarrassed – I am delivering my election campaign speech and they are all talking. Nobody is listening. But they are voters so I have to talk to them, but how to keep them quiet?”
The friend said, “It is not difficult. The first thing is: you should shout loudly ‘Who is the oldest of you all?’ Then there will be utter silence, and in that silence deliver your speech.”

They say that a woman takes at least six years passing from thirty-five to thirty-six. So don’t be worried. You are young and you have the tremendously beautiful name of Lolita, a romantic name. I think some other Milarepa is going to meet you after this meeting. Many Milarepas may already be thinking, “Who is this Lolita?” Even Milarepa himself may be thinking, “Have I committed a mistake?” But this is the way things happen.

During the geography class, the teacher looks at little Ernie and says, “What is the matter, Ernest? Why are you looking so unhappy?”
“I didn’t get no breakfast,” Ernie replies.
“You poor dear, but to get on with our geography lesson” says the teacher pointing to the map, “where is the Mexican border?”
“In bed with Mama,” says Ernie. “That’s why I didn’t get no breakfast.”

Mrs. Applebottom becomes angry with the French maid, and after a series of stinging remarks about her abilities she dismisses her. But the French girl will not allow such abuse to go unanswered.
“Your husband,” she cries, “considers me a better cook and housekeeper than you, madam! He told me so himself.”
Mrs. Applebottom looks at the girl scornfully and makes no comment.
“Also,” says the angry girl, “I am better than you in bed!”
“And I suppose,” snaps Mrs. Applebottom, “my husband told you that too!”
“No, madam,” says the maid, “the chauffeur did.”

But in a way, Lolita, you are fortunate that you got rid of Milarepa in just ten minutes. I know a few other great lovers who got into trouble with Milarepa and for years they went dragging on. And Milarepa is not one to look back.

A man pinned under his wrecked car is being questioned by a policeman.
“Are you married?” asks the cop.
“No,” replies the man, “this is the worst fix I have ever been in.”

You are out of the worst fix. Rejoice. But never stop falling in love, because unless you fall in love, how are you going to rise again? Falling is a strategy of rising again and again. Finally, when you are risen the way Jesus Christ has risen, there will be no need to fall again with any Milarepa. Love is good, love is nice – even for ten minutes. Don’t count the minutes. A single minute of love is equal to eternity; ten minutes is equal to ten eternities.
Try my other Milarepas, Lolita. It is a little difficult because other Lolitas have already made them so fed up that the moment they see anybody coming closer to them to fall in love, they escape. Any excuse and they fly away.
I receive letters every day from my sannyasins asking, “What has happened to your male sannyasins? In the whole world it is the man who hangs around a woman, chases her. In your commune it is just the opposite. It is the woman who has to chase the man and the man seems to be utterly enlightened.”
But the men are enlightened because of you all – poor sannyasins have never been chased by so many women. So rather than getting into another hell of an affair, they simply close their eyes.
Even a man like Devageet is thinking of dying. I did not tell you the real reason that day, but I cannot keep secrets!

============================================================

Osho,
What is misunderstanding?
Misunderstanding is obviously the mother superior of mistakes. Man lives almost half awake, half asleep. Hence whatever he understands is only half. With each of his understandings there is a shadow, a deep unconsciousness which continues to misinterpret, to distort, to confuse whatever small light, whatever small consciousness he has got.
His consciousness is certainly very small – just a thin layer, not more than skin-deep, but his unconsciousness is thick, deep, nine times larger than his consciousness. That dark night is within you; it has never seen the light of the day. So whatever your consciousness tries to see, to hear, your unconsciousness, which is nine times larger – its weight, its pressure is tremendous – distorts it.
You think you have understood something, but finally it is always a misunderstanding. The misunderstanding is not coming from outside, neither is it coming from your conscious mind. It is coming from your darkness within. Unless that darkness disappears, there is no way to get rid of misunderstandings. Understanding is almost equal to wisdom, almost synonymous with awakening. It is a transformation of your whole unconsciousness into consciousness, as if suddenly the sun has risen and the whole night with all its darkness has disappeared.
Ordinarily we think that we sometimes misunderstand, but that most of the time we understand. I want to emphasize: all the time you misunderstand. It is not your fault, it is just the very situation. Because you are only a very thin consciousness with such a thick layer of darkness, you cannot do anything else than perhaps sometimes understand something.
Almost all the time, everything is distorted, but not distorting it is not under your control. What is under your control is to start getting deeper into your being, bringing more awareness to the dark parts of your being. Awareness is just like light. As the light goes deeper into you, the darkness, the unconsciousness, will disappear. The moment you are fully conscious, no misunderstanding will be possible.
People who are awakened have been asked again and again, “Can the awakened one misunderstand?” And the answer has always been “No.” It is impossible for the awakened one to misunderstand. It is just not possible. Just as the man with eyes goes through the door, not through the wall, a man of fully enlightened being naturally understands everything as it is, its true nature. In other words, the moment you are your true self you will be able to understand everything in its true authenticity. Before that, you cannot avoid misunderstanding.
It is good to understand that you cannot avoid misunderstanding. That will help you in many ways: it will make you humble; it will take away your arrogance; it will take away your so-called knowledgeability; it will put aside your ego, which depends on all kinds of misconceptions. It will bring more innocence to you – and in innocence, meditation becomes easier.
When the ego is not there a great barrier is removed. When you are humble you can see that by the very nature of your being – as you are now – in ten situations, nine times there is misunderstanding. Perhaps one time there may be understanding. But you cannot figure out when it is understanding and when it is misunderstanding. Your light is so dim; everything is vague. One moment, just like a flash of lightning, you see something, but the next moment all is darkness.
What you have seen seems to be just like a dream. Perhaps it is right, perhaps it is not. In fact, if you are alert enough, you will start using the word perhaps more. If you are asked about anything, you will not be so deterministic, you will not be so definitive, you will not be so arrogantly certain. You will not talk in terms of absolutes, you will become more relative, you will say perhaps. “Perhaps it is so. It is very difficult…”
For example, you feel you are in love with someone. It is very difficult to say “Perhaps I love you.” But it is true. In the state man is in, more than that is not possible. Your love is only a perhaps, because what is love today can turn into hate tomorrow. Or maybe tomorrow is too far away. What is love this moment may disappear the next moment. Just a moment before you were so absolutely certain, but a moment afterward you yourself cannot believe what has happened to you. Have you gone mad? What made you so certain?
You trusted too much in the one-tenth part of your mind. You completely forgot about the unconscious mind, which is so vast, so dark, that you don’t know what is going on there, what is cooking there. Just on the surface you are thinking of love and deep down there is hate, anger, jealousy, and all kinds of wild sentiments, emotions, prejudices. And you are sitting on the volcano. If you are alert…
One great enlightened man, Mahavira, even after his enlightenment – when he could be absolute in his statements without any conditions – continued to use the word perhaps about every question that he answered. He was the first man in the whole history of mankind to bring in the concept of relativity. All that we can say is only relatively true – perhaps for the moment, but we cannot say it’s forever. We cannot make any unconditional statements.
His perhaps is one of the reasons why he could not gather a very big gathering of disciples – one of the greatest enlightened persons. But people want certainty; they are living in uncertain lives. People want beliefs; they are drowning.
Their situation is like that of the old Jew who had fallen on the street with sunstroke and was almost dying. A Christian priest saw the crowd. He entered the crowd and he said, “The old man needs me. Just let me come through. He is dying!”
He went by the side of the Jew, not knowing that he was a Jew, and whispered in his ear, “This is the moment! Remember God, God the Father, the Holy Ghost, Jesus Christ the Son, the only begotten Son of God. Remember.”
The old Jew opened his eyes and he looked at the crowd and said, “Who is this crazy man? I am dying and he is talking in puzzles. What God? What Holy Ghost? Who is the only begotten son? I am dying here and this idiot…”
People do not want puzzles. People want clear-cut belief systems. But Mahavira never gave a single belief system to anyone. If you ask him if God is, he will say “Perhaps.” But a God who is a perhaps is not much of a God. You cannot worship a God who is a perhaps. Then your prayer will be perhaps. You cannot create a religion out of the idea of relativity. Ifs and buts are prohibited from religious systems. People don’t want anything that will create more confusion in their minds, however great the source from which it may be coming. They are searching for some small belief that can give them a kind of security, safety, a God who will be their protector, to whom they can pray in difficult times – and almost all the time is a difficult time!
If you don’t even have a God to pray to, you are left in deep aloneness. And a man like Mahavira, rather than giving you some comfort, some consolation, tells you perhaps about everything. No consolation. But he has a great insight about you. He knows even if you believe in God, your belief is only an if. It cannot be more than that, because your unconscious knows nothing about God. Have you ever dreamed about God?
I have asked many, many people, “Have you ever dreamed about God?” They say “No.” The unconscious has not even heard the word God. Nobody has repressed God so deeply in himself that he becomes part of the unconscious and uncoils in his dream, like a genie coming out of a bottle. And you will meet neither Jesus Christ nor Buddha there. It is very strange.
Your unconscious is your greater reality, and Mahavira is correct when he says perhaps about everything. He is making you aware that in your situation nothing can be more certain than that. Change the situation, make your whole being full of light. It does not mean that you will become absolutely certain. It simply means all questions will disappear; there will be no answer. In authentic totality of consciousness, there is no question. You don’t ask about God or hell or heaven. You simply don’t ask about anything. You are so silent. Out of your silence, questions cannot come. Questions grow in the mind, and you are so far away and beyond the mind – in your innermost center – where there is no question and there is no answer. You are tremendously fulfilled, contented, at ease: with existence, with yourself, with everything.
Questions mean that you have some kind of tension, some kind of not-at-easeness; some trouble is there that brings the question. Something is haunting you and you are incapable of figuring it out. But when your whole being is full of light, when all darkness has disappeared, you are so in tune with existence that even to say you are in tune with existence is not right. It will be right to say that you are one with existence. Or it will be even better to say: you are existence. All separation has disappeared.
There is no questioner. There is no quest. You have arrived home.
In that state there is understanding but there is nothing to understand. This is the strange situation of man. When he wants to understand, he cannot. When he is capable of understanding, there is nothing to understand.

The newlyweds walk up to the hotel desk and ask for a suite.
“Bridal?” asks the clerk, noticing the “Just Married” signs on their luggage.
The young bride blushes and says, “No thanks. I will hold his shoulders until I get used to it.”

This is misunderstanding.

Old man Finkelstein was brought to court on charges of sexually molesting a teenage girl.
The judge dismissed the case because the evidence would not stand up in court.

Mendel Kravitz returns home one day to find a stranger on top of his naked wife, his head resting between her ample breasts.
“Hey!” yells Mendel. “Just what are you doing?”
“Why, er, I’m listening to music,” replies the stranger.
Mendel puts his head beside the stranger’s head and declares, “I don’t hear any music.”
“Of course you don’t,” replies the stranger. “You’re not plugged in!”

Osho,
Finally it has hit me too!
Sex and relationship have dropped me. Just when I felt that I was in the juiciest relationship, enjoying sex like never before, suddenly I couldn't stand it anymore. All the longing for the other, for sex and intimacy, has gone. I am feeling so good and relaxed by myself, with a lot of love in my heart, but without any direction.
Osho, can you explain what is happening? How come it is hitting so many of us all at once? Is it contagious? Has it to do with the star constellation? Or are you cooking something?
Nandan, you are here not as a separate ego, but as part of one phenomenon. So when anything starts happening, it is bound to happen to many others simultaneously. It will have a chain effect. It does not happen in the world because people are not in any way deeply connected with each other. There is no communion. There are communities, but there is no communion. This is a commune. The whole purpose of your being here is to melt and merge with all who are present here. There is no friend, no enemy. All are in love with me. Their sole purpose is exactly what somebody said the other day, “Our whole purpose here is one, we all love you.”
It is a loving commune where you are all equal, where you are no longer competitive, where there is no struggle of any kind going on, just a tremendous music and a silence drowning you all into oneness, without your even knowing it. You are slipping deeper into a whole.
This wholeness brings a new health and a new joy and a new kind of love. Sex is a very primitive thing. It is an animal heritage. Nothing is wrong in it, it is just very old. As you grow more and more mature, you start searching for something new and greater, something better and higher, something superior. Sex seems to be something below you – a little childish, a little immature.
It is good. There is a time when you can fool around. While you are meditating, your maturity comes sooner, your centering comes sooner, your awareness about things becomes clearer every day. Sex is going to be the first victim of your awareness – other things will follow – because sex is the very root of your animality.
Once sex drops, it’s as if a tree has lost its roots. Then the branches cannot remain green any longer; the flowers cannot remain alive any longer. In fact, the tree has died with the roots. For a few days, perhaps, it may manage to remain standing; for a few days the leaves will remain green, and perhaps for a few days the flowers will remain apparently alive. But basically the tree is dead the moment the roots are cut.
Your anger, your jealousy, your violence, your inferiority complex, your superiority complex – all kinds of neuroses, psychoses – are just branches. They will start dying by themselves. Once you have gone beyond sex without fighting with it…
That’s my basic difference to all religions. They have been trying to drop sex. I am not telling you to drop it. I am telling you to be more mature, to be more meditative. While you are not mature, sex is perfectly right. Nothing is wrong in it, there is no condemnation. Be playful and rejoice in it. Here, for the first time, a totally original experiment is going on: sex is accepted with deep respect. It is our heritage; we are born out of it. It is in our every fiber and every cell. To condemn it is to condemn oneself.
Trying to drop it means only repressing it into the unconscious. Then things become more and more complex and perverted. Once you start repressing sex into your unconscious… There is no other place in you – whatever you repress goes into the unconscious. The unconscious is your basement where you go on throwing all that you don’t want, that you don’t want to show to the world. But whatever you throw into the unconscious creates a very strange problem: you start becoming afraid of your own unconscious. You cannot go there, even with a lamp in your hand, because you know what you are going to encounter.

I was staying in a friend’s home. They were a little old-fashioned, so their bathroom and their toilets were not attached to the house but at a little distance behind the house. There was a small lawn, and beyond the lawn were their toilets and bathroom.
They had one small boy, just one child. His mother said to me, “While you are here, somehow help us to teach this boy that there is nothing to fear. Each time he has to go to the bathroom or to the toilet, somebody has to follow him. While he is inside, the doors have to be kept open and the person has to stand there – if it is night, with a lamp. And the doors have to be kept open so that the person who is standing outside does not disappear.”
I talked to the boy. I asked, “What is the problem?”
He said, “I am very much afraid of ghosts.”
I said, “How did you become afraid of ghosts?”
It was the parents themselves who had made him afraid of ghosts.
He said, “When I don’t want to go to sleep, they force me to go to sleep. When I don’t want to get up early in the morning, they force me to get up early. And to make this happen, they frighten me with ghosts saying, ‘If you don’t go to bed early, ghosts may trouble you in the night. And if you don’t get up early in the morning… Remember – we are warning you – there are ghosts all around sitting in the trees, invisible people.’
“They have convinced me, so I am afraid of going to the bathroom or the toilet, particularly in the night. Now they want me to go alone, and nobody is interested in standing outside while I am inside. Because of this I have to keep the doors open.”
I said, “Why don’t you do one thing: take the lamp yourself. And when there is light, you can see if a ghost is anywhere.”
He said, “Please don’t tell me such a thing. I can go in darkness but I can never go with a lamp.”
I asked, “What is the reason?”
He said, “The reason is clear. In darkness somehow I can dodge the ghosts. But when I carry a lamp, they all see me. Don’t suggest that idea. If I have to go, I will go in darkness. At least then they can’t see me. And if I feel that something is there, I can run, I can dodge, I can shout, I can do something. But with a lamp, all the ghosts in all the trees will see me and say ‘He is going now. This is a good time.’”
I said, “This is right. Your logic is perfect.”

I have always remembered this whenever I have talked about your unconscious and your repressions. If you repress all that you have been told is ugly, then there is no possibility of your ever becoming a meditator, no possibility of your ever becoming enlightened. That is the reason why in the West enlightenment has not happened. Half the world has remained absolutely unaware of the greatest experience in life, for the simple reason that Christianity is the most repressive religion in the world. It goes on forcing… And other religions are not much different, just a little more lenient.
It is not surprising that all the psychologists, psychoanalysts, psychiatrists are born in the West, not in the East. It was a necessity in the West. Christianity has created the necessity because it has created the disease. It has created the repressive mind. It was absolutely necessary for Sigmund Freud, Carl Gustav Jung and Alfred Adler to somehow help the Western part of humanity become acquainted with the unconscious. Christianity has completely cut off humanity from the unconscious. Unless the unconscious becomes part of the conscious, becomes conscious itself, there is no way of your ever being beyond the animal you are repressing within yourself.
Sex should never be repressed. Sex should be lived in its totality, with joy, without any guilt. Then what you are saying – and what so many sannyasins have been feeling – comes one day. You were rejoicing in it so much, and suddenly it drops away.
Now all the religions have been against me, are still against me, and they will remain against me for at least five centuries. Such is the stupidity of humanity. They cannot see that this simple experiment is so successful. Nandan, who is saying that she is having the juiciest affair of her life, enjoying sex like never before, is not aware that this is how sex drops.
I don’t tell you the real secrets because then you may become afraid and you may not enjoy. You will remain a little less juicy, just to prolong the journey a little longer. But when you are enjoying sex at the highest peak, that’s when it suddenly slips out of your hands. It is a beautiful experience, one of the most beautiful experiences: the moment sex drops on its own accord.
It happens only to those few people who have lived with intensity, have loved with intensity, have not felt guilty at all, have not listened to any religion or any tradition or any past, who have lived almost like Adam and Eve – as if they are the first people on the earth and they don’t know anything of repression. No priest has been able to pollute them; no religions have poisoned their minds. If you can be… And that’s my whole effort here: to make you into Adam and Eve, as if you are the first people on the earth, fresh, just driven out of the Garden of Eden.
What Nandan is saying is tremendously important. I will read it to you. “Just when I felt that I was in the juiciest relationship, enjoying sex like never before, suddenly I could not stand it anymore.” One can get free from sex only when one has seen the whole scene in its totality and there is nothing more to be discovered, when one has inquired, lived all the possibilities of sexual relationships. Then what can you do except let it go? You are finished with it. You have come to the end of the book.
You are saying, “Suddenly, I could not stand it anymore. All the longing for the other, for sex and intimacy, has gone. I am feeling so good and relaxed by myself, with a lot of love in my heart, but without any direction.” The disappearance of sex does not mean disappearance of love. It really means appearance of love. Sex was a very primitive phenomenon. There was not much love in it, only biological infatuation. If you have observed animals making love, you may have noticed one thing: they don’t look happy. They look almost as if they are in torture. In fact, that is the reality: it is a biological slavery, just a biological, hormonal, chemical slavery. It hurts those who have a little more consciousness.
As your meditation grows, you will see more and more that it is not a sin; it is simply stupidity. There is no need to be forgiven for it because it is not a crime and there is nobody to forgive you. And you have not committed anything for which you should feel guilty and ashamed.
But the moment you are free of it, suddenly you will feel a tremendous relaxation, because sex is a tension. You may not have felt it before. It was constantly there, so one becomes accustomed and immune to it. The moment it disappears, suddenly a great relaxation. Sex is the need of the other. In the very need of the other, there is dependence.
That’s why no wife can really respect the husband nor can the husband respect the wife. They hate each other. Psychologists are perfectly right when they say that husbands and wives are intimate enemies. And the reason? The reason is: you cannot love someone on whom you have to depend. The man has to depend on the wife; he has a sexual need and the wife takes every opportunity to torture him. That is her only opportunity to torture him. The man tortures her in many other ways. She is dependent financially. She doesn’t have the freedom to move in society; she doesn’t have the freedom to feel independent, liberated. Even the women who think they are liberated are not liberated. They are only reacting. They are still in the same old grip, only they have gone to the other extreme.
The moment you feel you are no longer dependent on anyone, a deep coolness and a deep silence settles inside, a relaxed let-go. It does not mean you stop loving. On the contrary, for the first time you know a new quality, a new dimension of love: a love which is no longer biological, a love which is closer to friendliness than any relationship. That’s why I am not even using the word friendship, because that ship has drowned so many people.
Your love becomes more like an aura around you which can be shared with anyone, even with a stranger. In fact, it is not a question of doing anything when you are sharing; it simply becomes your nature. You are just loving. In the past you used to fall in love with some individual. Now you don’t fall in love with anyone – you are love. Wherever you are, you carry your fragrance. Wherever you are, you carry your fresh breeze, your relaxed coolness. You will feel tremendous freedom.
This is true liberation of women, of men, because both are slaves of each other. The women’s liberation movement does not take account of the fact that she is not alone in bondage. Man is also in bondage because both are dependent on each other. After the whole day at work, the man comes home, and the woman immediately lies down and has a headache. The whole day there was no head, no headache, nothing. The moment she hears her husband’s car driving into the car porch, immediately, strangely, the headache comes with the husband; they both come simultaneously.
Just a few days ago I was telling you…

One day Hymie Goldberg came home and just shook his wife awake and gave her two aspirins.
She said, “What for?”
He said, “Take them!”
She said, “But I don’t have a headache!”
He said, “That’s great. So let’s go!”

Now he has tricked the woman. Now she cannot say she has a headache. She has refused the aspirin, not knowing Hymie Goldberg’s subtle logical strategy.
Once this longing for the other – the dependence on the other – disappears, your life takes off onto a new plane of existence. It is beautiful when you are in a commune like this, where life is accepted in its totality without any condemnation, where there is no god except life. Naturally this experience will go on spreading because you are so close to each other. Not that somebody is your husband, somebody is your son, somebody is your mother and somebody is your father – no, but for the simple reason that in the center you have someone who disappeared a long time ago.
But your love is still directed toward that same entity which has become only a presence, is no longer a person. The closer you come to me, the closer you will be coming to each other, but it will not create any relationship. It will be simply freedom: freedom to love, freedom to be friendly, freedom to rejoice in each other’s happiness, freedom to dance, not even knowing with whom you are dancing. There is no need. It is perfectly beautiful to dance with a stranger.
Here, nobody knows from what country you come, nobody knows with what religion you have been conditioned, nobody knows to what caste you belong. Nobody bothers about all these stupidities humanity has been burdened with for centuries. Suddenly just a pure humanness, a pure consciousness, a song that goes from heart to heart, a rhythm that spreads like ripples in a lake. So if something happens to one of you, it is going to happen to many.
Certainly I have been cooking it for many years. I am waiting for that day when you are free of all kinds of slaveries – and sex is the greatest slavery. Your greatest anxiety, your greatest jealousy, your greatest violence – all are rooted in sex. But still I want you to live it, not repress it. One day it will disappear.
It is joyful, Nandan, that you have not become afraid or worried, because people who are coming from the West are in a difficulty. They have become accustomed to think of life and sex as synonymous. They are not. Life is vast; sex is a small thing. In the West when sex drops, the person may think of committing suicide. Now, what is the point anymore?
Just the other day I heard you all had an evening with my therapist, Veeresh. Neelam may have suggested to him… Being my secretary, it was her duty to suggest that Veeresh not talk about sex and drugs. Veeresh said, “My god, then what is there to talk about? These are the only two things, that’s all, the whole of life!”
In the West, the idea has become very settled – in a subtle way, deep down in every being – that the moment your sex is gone… Now, what are you doing? Just take your gun and shoot yourself. I have heard a statement: “You know you are getting old when you have been with a boy all night and all that comes is the morning.” It seems to be almost a tragedy in the West. In fact, there should be rejoicing that all that comes is the morning. Now Nandan, all that will come will be the morning! Start enjoying the morning.
A tremendous harm has been done to humanity by the people –whether in the West or in the East – who have been against life, against sex, because they are the ones who keep people filled with sexuality for their whole lives. They are the ones who are responsible for so much sexuality, so much pornography, so much obscenity in the whole world. But nobody blames them, nobody even thinks there is a relation, or thinks about who has made humanity so stupid that even an eighty-year-old man thinks only of sex. A tremendous misunderstanding…
Sex certainly has to disappear, not by force but by a deep understanding that only comes through experience. Then a celibacy which has a beauty of its own arises. The Hindu celibate monks, the Jaina celibate monks, the Catholic celibate monks cannot understand the beauty of the celibacy that will happen to my sannyasins. Just the word will be the same, but the levels will be so far away from each other. The celibacy of a Catholic monk is nothing but perverted sex. It will create all kinds of complexities in his being.
The celibacy that is happening to you and to all my people is a freedom, freedom from all complexities. It is a growth beyond biology. Because the enlightened people and the sages of the past went beyond sex, the ordinary man misunderstood the whole thing. He thought perhaps they have attained that great wisdom because they have left sex behind, so if we leave sex, we will also attain wisdom. It looks logical, but it is fallacious.
People like Gautam Buddha have not repressed sex. They have lived it in its totality. I don’t think anybody in the whole world has lived a life of sex so totally, so intensely, as Gautam Buddha. By his twenty-ninth year he had come to the situation you are in: sex simply became meaningless, just an old game. How long can you go on playing it? And it’s not a very clean game either.
The misunderstanding has continued for twenty-five centuries in the East, even with his own monks. They thought that because he had left sex… They could not see the difference between leaving sex and sex leaving you – from the outside it appears the same. One thing was certain: sex was no longer part of his interest, his longings, his desires, but sex was not repressed by him.
But those who were seeing from the outside the great wisdom that arose, the great radiance, the great beauty, the explosion of sat-chit-anand, their simplistic logic was, “This man has left sex. That’s why he has attained truth, consciousness, bliss. So if we also leave sex, we too will attain the same state of being.” For twenty-five centuries the monks have been doing that, but not a single Gautam Buddha has been produced.
I have been condemned my whole life, so much so that I have started enjoying it. When for a few days nobody condemns me for something, I start thinking “What has happened to the world?” And the condemnation has been basically on a single point. I was telling people, “Live sex joyously and it will leave you one day, so silently that you will not even hear the footsteps when it is going away. You will suddenly see yourself on a totally different plane of existence.” But that old fallacy persists; not only persists, all the vested interests of all the religions of the world want it to continue.

A big, tall Cherokee Indian named Brown Bear comes into the bar with a six-shooter tucked in his belt. He is a giant of a man, so no one asks him why he is carrying a bucket full of horse manure in one hand and a black cat in the other. He puts down the bucket.
“I will have a whiskey!” he roars at the bartender.
After drinking it, in one gulp, he orders another and then another.
All of a sudden, Brown Bear pulls out his gun and starts shooting the bucket, drops the cat and chases it around the bar on his hands and knees. When Brown Bear finally catches it, the trembling bartender raises his head above the bar and asks, “What the hell was that all about?”
Brown Bear replies, “My father told me to be more like a white man, so I came here to have a few drinks, shoot the shit and chase a little pussy.”

A little French boy comes to England in order to learn English. As his plane leaves Paris he learns the word take-off. During the flight he is looking through a magazine about Africa and learns the word zebra. When he arrives in England, the family he is staying with have a new baby and he learns the word baby.
The next day he comes to the school and the pretty young teacher asks him if he has learnt any English words yet, and the little boy replies, “Take-off ze bra, baby.”

Little Ernie took his paper up to the teacher for marking and as she bent over the desk, he looked down the front of her blouse and said, “Teacher, I see something.”
The teacher was extremely embarrassed and said, “Ernie, that is very rude. Tomorrow, don’t come to school.”
The next week Ernie was sitting in the front row when the teacher was writing on the blackboard. She dropped her chalk and, with her back to Ernie, bent down to pick it up.
Ernie got up and without a word headed for the door.
“Where are you going?” asked the teacher sternly.
“Teacher,” said Ernie, “my schooldays are over.”

============================================================

Osho,
The beautiful statement sat-chit-anand has truth first, consciousness second and bliss third. Is there some inevitable sequence among them?
There is no sequence among truth, consciousness, and bliss. They are not steps of a hierarchy, but they come one after another. Neither of them is higher than the other two, so – in the way we understand it – there is no sequence. The actual experience of sat-chit-anand happens simultaneously. In fact, these three words, sat-chit-anand – truth, consciousness, bliss – do not indicate three experiences. It is just the poverty of language that we cannot contain the whole experience in one word. Our words are so poor. The experience is absolutely an organic whole: whatever happens, happens simultaneously.
But perhaps as far as the human mind is concerned, a very different kind of sequence may be needed to comprehend what happens. In the statement sat-chit-anand, truth comes first. The natural tendency of the logical, rational mind is that truth must come first in experience and then consciousness and then bliss. In actual experience you start with meditation, which brings you wider and wider consciousness. At the ultimate peak, when the explosion happens, suddenly you find yourself fully conscious. Then on the one hand you find truth and on the other hand you find bliss. This all happens in a split second. Perhaps it is better to say it happens in no time. Even a split second takes some time. It happens in timelessness.
But for the mind’s understanding – which is not the ultimate understanding but only a relative understanding – you can say the enlightened person experiences consciousness. As the consciousness comes into existence, suddenly he becomes aware of the truth that was hidden in the unconscious – because now there is no unconscious – and the bliss that was also hidden in the unconscious. I have told you it is almost like a bird, a single unity. The bird has two wings: truth, bliss, and the bird’s own body can be called consciousness. But you cannot divide them: you cannot say what comes first and what comes second; the whole bird comes. Without the wings, the bird cannot come and without the bird, the wings cannot come.
Or take another example: you suddenly switch on the light in a dark room. Do you think that first you see the table, then you see the chairs, then you see the wall and then you see this and that? – so many things are in the room. But when the light comes on, they all suddenly become clear to you without any sequence – nothing is first, nothing is second. They were all hidden in darkness. Once light is there, darkness is no more. You immediately become aware of the existence of everything that is there.
Your being is certainly a bird. The ancient seers have called it “the golden bird” – consciousness as the body, truth and bliss as the wings, and the whole sky full of stars is yours. Not only this sky; the mystics have been aware of skies beyond skies. Now even the scientist agrees that this sky cannot be the only sky.
The expansion of scientific consciousness has also brought a vast universe. There was a time in the Middle Ages when it was thought the earth is the center and the sun and all the stars are moving around it. It was a very small, cozy world, and nobody bothered about what was beyond it. As scientific exploration goes deeper and deeper, they become more and more mystical in their statements. Now they know existence has no limits.
And what we think of as stars are not stars. Each star is a bigger sun than our sun. Our sun is a very mediocre sun, although it is very big in comparison to the earth. It is over one hundred times bigger than the earth. It looks vast next to the earth, but only in comparison to the faraway stars, which look so small that we call them “twinkle twinkle little stars.” They are not “twinkle twinkle little stars”; they are far greater suns than our sun.
Our sun has its own solar system, made up of Earth, the moon and all the other planets. Each sun has its own solar system, and up to now they have counted at least three million suns. Among these millions of stars, the most mystical experience that has been encountered by the scientists is that they all are moving away from the center – as far as possible, at tremendous speed. It means the sky is available for them, they can go on… They have been going on for billions of years and their speed is the same as the speed of light.
The speed of light is the ultimate speed, physicists have concluded. There is no higher speed according to them. It is tremendous. You will have to work it out. In one second, light travels 186,000 miles. You have to multiply it by 60 – that will be the distance light travels in one minute. Then you have to multiply it by 60 again – so you will have one hour of the light’s travel. Then 24 – that is one day’s travel of light. Then 365 – that is one light year. And that is the lowest unit of measurement as far as light and its speed is concerned.
One light year is just like one meter, one yard, one foot. There are stars thousands of light years away. The nearest star is four light years away. Even to reach this star seems to be impossible. Four light years – we don’t have any vehicle, any rocket, that can go at the speed of light. And the trouble is intrinsic. The trouble is that at the speed of light, everything melts. Because it is so fast and the friction is so great, everything burns out and melts into light. We don’t have any metal, artificial or natural, that can remain intact at the speed of light. And without the speed of light, there is no possibility of reaching to those stars which are millions of light years away.
Scientists say that this earth was separated from the sun about four million years ago. There are stars which will never know that this earth ever existed because the day this earth was born, their light started coming toward it, but has not yet arrived – even at that tremendous speed – and scientists reckon the earth may go out of existence before those light rays reach here. Just in-between two light rays the whole of the earth’s life begins, comes to a peak and ends. Those stars have infinite space available – that is the sky. And now it is absolutely certain that there is no limit. Those stars can go on forever, as far as they want. We are citizens of an unlimited universe.
Existence is always in balance. Just as there is this vastness outside, the same tremendous expanse is within you. The within will be exactly as vast – as infinite – as the without, because the within and without should be in balance.
Physicists are the mystics of matter and the mystics are the physicists of consciousness. In this small statement of sat-chit-anand, the mystics are saying that a whole infinite universe within you becomes available simultaneously in an explosion of consciousness. The explosion of consciousness only brings light. Everything is there already – has been there forever – waiting for you to be awake.
There is no sequence the way we understand sequence, but there is a certain secret to be understood: without consciousness coming to its peak, you will not become aware of either truth or bliss. But once you have become aware, you know they are all one. This is a far more meaningful, significant, trinity than the Christian one. Their trinity seems to be fictitious: God, the Son, the Holy Ghost – it is good for children’s books because they cannot understand sat-chit-anand. They say they can understand the Holy Ghost, they can understand the father, they can understand the son. But that is a very stupid fiction. With no rationale, with no evidence, Christianity goes on claiming it. Its whole structure depends on it.
The mystics’ trinity seems to be based far more on experience, on truth. It is not a fiction – and it is available to you without any prayer, without any holy scripture. Just you are enough because you contain that infinity. All that is needed is to look inward. Allow your consciousness to grow so that it fills you with light and dispels all darkness, and you will find the most precious treasure within yourself. In that experience, there will not be any division between truth, consciousness, and bliss. It will come all at once, showering on you.
But the moment you bring that experience into language, you have to make one into three – so as not to be unfair to the tremendous experience that has happened. No single word can say anything about it. It will be a very partial statement, and any partial truth is more dangerous than a lie. At least the lie can be detected. The partial truth is very dangerous because it may not be detected; it gives you the feeling that it is true.
These three words contain almost three universes. Each is a sky unto itself. There is no limit to your consciousness. You can go in the inner world just as far away as stars are going in the outer world. Neither does bliss have any limits, nor does truth have any limits – and when three things don’t have any limits, they cannot be three. Three unlimited things are bound to become one. So the experience is of one organic whole, not in sequence. But in language the difficulty is that we have to write words in sequence.
Languages like Chinese, Japanese, Korean – Far Eastern languages – are far better than alphabetical languages because alphabetical languages have to put everything in a sequence, in a sentence. One thing will be followed by another and then by another, one word by another word, one line by another line, one paragraph by another paragraph, everything in sequence. The nonalphabetical languages have disappeared from the world, except in the Far East.
In the beginning, all languages in the world were nonalphabetical, they were pictorial. For example, if you see an elephant, you see the whole elephant as one unity. But if you have to describe the elephant, you cannot describe it as one unit. You will have to tell about its legs like pillars, you will have to tell about its ears like big fans and so on and so forth. It is a big animal. And in reading your sentence about the elephant, one who has never seen an elephant is bound to think that there is a sequence. In Chinese, the situation is different. The elephant is not described the way we write about it. There is only a symbol of the elephant.
I remember one symbol I cannot forget: a symbol of a roof of a house, just a plain roof – anybody can understand the roof – and two women sitting under the roof. One of my friends was learning Chinese. I asked him, “What is it?” He said, “This symbol means fight, war.” Two women under one roof? There is going to be a Third World War without any doubt. Whoever made the symbol must have been a great psychologist. Knowingly or unknowingly, he has expressed so much in such a small symbol. If you have to write about it in an alphabetical language, you will have to use a few sentences to say the whole thing.
The mystic has always been in tremendous difficulty: how to say the unsayable? But he has tried, and he has tried his best in the East, because the East has known the mystic for almost ten thousand years. Ten thousand years is the minimum time that I am talking about.
The whole genius of the East has been concentrated on only one point: the discovery of oneself. That discovery – whether the mystic was in China, or in India, or in Arabia, or in Japan, makes no difference – the mystery has brought them to the same point, has always culminated in sat-chit-anand. They have all found tremendous bliss. Their lives have become absolutely authentic and truthful, and their beings have become absolutely conscious. There are no longer any unconscious parts lingering in them.
This can be seen by people who have receptivity, sensitivity and intelligence – who have eyes to see it, who are not standing with closed eyes saying “There is no light.” You will have to open your eyes. Any mystic belonging to any age, to any country, to any part of the globe, reveals the same truth because truth is the unchanging, unmovable center of the whole of existence.
If you can find yourself in company with a mystic, and you can be unafraid, and open your heart so that he can pour his experience into you, he can only give to you. You need not be worried. He is not going to take anything from you. You don’t have anything in the first place – and what you have, you are unaware of. The mystic can pour his light into you and can make you aware of all that is hidden in you – your hidden splendor. This is the authentic relationship between the master and the disciple. The master does not teach anything. He simply pours his light into the heart of the disciple. There is no philosophy to be taught, there is no teaching that the student has to be converted to – there is only an experience that has to be transferred.
For centuries it has been known as the transmission of the lamp. It is a beautiful expression: transmission of the lamp. The master simply allows you to have his fire, to make your dark house also light. He loses nothing, but you gain tremendously. Hence the great gratitude that has been felt by the disciples for the master, because you cannot repay him – there is no way. What he has given to you is invaluable. All that you can do is feel a heartfelt gratitude. This gratitude is the only authentic connection between the disciple and the master. And as the disciple also becomes aware, he rises to the same status as the master.
A beautiful story…

When the master of a great seeker, Rinzai, saw that the moment had come when Rinzai was going to be of the same status as the master himself, he called Rinzai and slapped him hard. Rinzai said, “But I have not done anything, I have not even said anything. You have been beating me for years.”
It is a very loving gesture, this beating. Only Zen has come to understand that it is out of sheer love that the master slaps the disciple.
The master said to Rinzai, “This is my last slap to you. I could not resist the temptation of enjoying it once more, because from tomorrow you will be a master yourself.”
So playful. Both laughed, both enjoyed it. Rinzai remembered it his whole life. He became a much better-known master than his own master, but he never forgot the last slap that the master had given him. He continuously remembered, “My master loved me so much that there was not a single day that he would not beat me – on any excuse.”
It looks very strange to the logical mind, but logic has nothing to do with the inner world. Rinzai said, “Now I understand how much effort that old man was making in slapping me. In fact, his hands were hurting more than I was hurting because I was young, healthy. He was very old, but he did not miss. As I was reaching close to my enlightenment, he knew it before I knew it.”
Naturally, the master knows before the disciple that you are just on the brink. And that slap was not just a slap. To the outsiders it was a slap, but to both the master and the disciple that slap was a push beyond the boundary that was making him still think of himself as a disciple. With the last slap, he was recognized as a master, not with certificates – they are so inhuman, so dead – but with a living contact.
Then both the men, the old man and the young, laughed late into the night, and the whole monastery thought, “What is happening?” People were looking from every window and door – “What is happening?” And both were laughing tears of joy.
The next day, the master did not appear for his morning sermon. He sent word to Rinzai, “Now you can go. Now, you can do what I have done to you. You can transmit the lamp to others. I am too old – just take the whole responsibility of the monastery.”
Rinzai said, “When you said you were hitting me for the last time, I immediately understood that now I have to be responsible for this whole monastery. With your last slap, you have retired. That’s why I was crying, because you are retiring. Without you, I do not want to be enlightened. Let me remain a disciple. Don’t retire. But you have done it already. I was perfectly happy and I was not thinking that it was going to happen so soon.”

What had he experienced, when the master slapped him the last time? Just a sudden explosion: sat-chit-anand.
There is no sequence. It is all simultaneous. It is all together. It is one without any order.

Osho,
Last night, I noticed your beard. It is really a magnificent thing; it reminds me of a lion's mane. Does a beard like yours come with enlightenment? Or do you have to be born with it?
Such a beard comes with your birth. Enlightenment cannot give you such a beard – don’t be fooled!
You can see it: Gautam Buddha has no beard, not only no beard, no mustache either. Great masters of the Jainas, called tirthankaras, are without any beard, without any mustache. In fact, both traditions – the Jaina and the Buddha tradition – have a strange idea which their scholars have not been able to explain, which has been questioned for twenty-five centuries at least. But I don’t belong to any tradition. That’s why I have a certain objective insight into things. I can give the reason.
It was not that they were shaving themselves twice a day – just that they had no beards and no mustaches from their very birth. They never grew them. In fact, in Jainism, it has become a part of the definition: unless a master is without a mustache and beard, he is not a master, because their twenty-four great masters are all without beards, without mustaches. I cannot believe that all these people were missing some hormones which create the beard, which create the mustache in man and not in women. Once in a while some women may have – particularly in old age – a little mustache, a little beard. Sometimes it happens in young age also.

I knew a very beautiful young girl. She was the daughter of the principal of one of the Leonard Theosophical Colleges of the Christians. The principal was very much interested in me – that’s how I came to know the girl. She was very intelligent, very beautiful. She got married in America, got a DLitt from America and now teaches in America – but all her beauty was in trouble because of a beard. She had to shave it twice a day, but still there was a black spot. If you came close to her, and she was so beautiful… That black spot was making her feel very inferior.
When I saw her last with her husband, they had both come for six months to teach in the Leonard Theosophical College in Jabalpur, and then six months in some other theosophical college in America. The last time I saw them must have been thirty years ago.
I told her, “You will suffer unnecessarily your whole life from inferiority because of this beard. The more you shave it, the bigger it becomes and you are in America. It is a simple thing – just a little change in your hormones and it will disappear. You need some more female hormones. You have too many male hormones. The balance is not right.”
She said, “I never thought about it and nobody ever told me.”
Then I received her letter a few months after she had gone to America saying, “I am very grateful that my beard has disappeared.”

It is a question of hormones. In old age, women start growing beards because their female hormones are finished, but their male hormones are still there, active. They have lived the life of a woman, but they have not used their male part, so the balance has changed. In old age, many women start growing a beard. But in old age, nobody takes much notice.
I cannot believe that all these twenty-four tirthankaras, spread over five thousand years, all had unbalanced hormones. What could be the reason? And the same was the question about Buddha. I don’t believe that they did not have mustaches or beards. My own understanding is that it is only a symbolic expression, that as you become more and more aware, you become more and more delicate – as graceful as a woman. Instead of having male qualities, which are the qualities of a warrior or a soldier, you start having the qualities of compassion and love and grace and beauty of a woman.
Those statues, the twenty-four tirthankaras of the Jainas, don’t represent the people exactly; they represent only a metaphor. They are not photographs. They are very objective pieces of art. You can go into any Jaina temple. If it is big enough, it will have twenty-four tirthankaras. If it is not big enough, then they place three statues and mirrors on both the sides and small windows for you to look through.
When you look into those mirrors, they go on reflecting each other. So instead of three, you see a line of hundreds, as far as you can see. The first mirror reflects the second mirror, then that mirror reflects the other mirror, and this goes on and on. So as far as you can see and strangely, you can see exactly twenty-four tirthankaras – a great artistic device. But if the temple is very poor, then you will find only one statue of Mahavira.
But one thing is – it is striking that Jainas have also not been able to explain this – all the statues look similar, exactly similar. The only difference is a small symbol underneath their legs – a line represents Mahavira. Even the priest cannot say which is Mahavira. First he has to look. You may not understand how he manages to tell that this is Mahavira, this is Abhinava and this is Meminaka. There are different symbols for each master, but their statues are exactly the same.
That too is impossible. Twenty-four people exactly the same? The same height, the same nose, the same eyes, the same face, the same body – it is not possible. For centuries they have been at a loss to answer because they have been looking at those statues as factual. I look at those statues as symbols. Those statues say nothing about the bodies of those twenty-four masters. They say something about their having exactly the same experience. Their same faces, their same eyes, their same heights indicate only one thing: what has happened within them is the same.
Now, how to say it in a sculpture? The great artist must have found a tremendously beautiful way to say through their statues, “We are not making their portraits; we are not photographers. Through the statue we are trying to represent their inner experience.” And because the inner experience was the same – sat-chit-anand – there was no need to make any differences in the bodies.
You are a little bit crazy, but not more than me. I insist: if you want this kind of beard, you will have to be born with it. It does not come with enlightenment. Enlightenment has no concern with your beard. Even a woman can become enlightened but that does not mean she will have a beard. This kind of beautiful beard comes only with your birth.
I was very reluctant to listen to my parents. They were all insisting that this does not look right, “You should cut off your beard.”
I said, “I want to keep the original hairs just as existence has given them to me. I am going to return them to existence in exactly the same way. I am not going into this stupid business of shaving every day. Moreover, I am so lazy – someday I may shave off half, and the other half…”

The priest had been invited to preach at a mental hospital. During the sermon he noticed that one of the patients was paying very close attention, his eyes fixed on the priest’s face, his body bent eagerly forward. Such interest was most flattering. After the service the priest noticed that the man was speaking to one of the attendants. So, as soon as possible, the priest asked him, “Did that man speak to you about my sermon?”
“Yes,” said the attendant.
“Would you mind telling me what he said?” asked the priest.
“Well,” said the man reluctantly, “what the man said was, ‘Just think, he is out, and I am in.’”

We are all in. There is no out. We have dropped out. You are my people – insiders.

Osho,
Standing in the queue for breakfast this morning I overheard two German girls talking, “Who the hell is this guy Milarepa anyway? Osho gives him so much juice!” The other replied, “Oh, he's no one really! Don't you know? Osho just invented him as a joke!”
Just then, Lolita walked up, put her arms around me, looked deep into my eyes and said in a sexy voice, “Hi, schnooksy, did you hear the discourse this morning?” One look in her eyes and I knew I was in trouble again. I forgot all about my breakfast, excused myself, and ran back to my room. I closed my eyes and began repeating, “Vimal, Vimal, Vimal.”
Osho, am I having what psychologists call an “identity crisis?” I am also wondering, who the hell is this guy Milarepa?
Milarepa, you have created more trouble than you are aware of, because Jivan Mary committed a mistake in typing the name of Lokita. She typed the name Lolita. And then such a chaos began; the boyfriend of Lolita was immensely freaked out. He suspected that this Lolita was having a love affair with Milarepa. And Lolita was crying and weeping and trying to convince him.
Hearing about Lolita’s beauty, many new lovers started knocking on her door, saying “Don’t be worried. If Milarepa has left you after ten minutes, we are here. For what are we here?” And the boyfriend freaked out even more. Lokita was enjoying immensely. She changed her name to Lolita. She dropped her own name, Lokita. So many were following her.
Milarepa, the girl who hugged you was not Lolita; it was Lokita who has changed herself into Lolita. But you are such a fool that you have forgotten completely who this woman is. And naturally, just a ten-minute love affair – who remembers the name or the face?
I have heard about a man who married ten times. And when he married the tenth time, after three months he discovered that he had married this woman once before. When you marry ten times, memory has its limitations. You are not a computer.
Milarepa changes girlfriends ten times every day. So naturally, when Lokita hugged him again, telling him that she was Lolita, he thought, “My God. I am again in trouble.” You will remain in trouble always, Milarepa.
Now these two girls were asking “Who the hell is this guy Milarepa anyway?” and “Osho gives him so much juice.” I have to give it to him because the poor fellow has to distribute his juice all around. If I don’t give him juice, you will find him lying flat on the bed, finished. I have to keep him alive. Do you have any objections?
It is too much that the other replied, “Oh, he’s no one really.” He is one of my craziest disciples and I will not tolerate such insulting remarks. And she said, “Don’t you know? Osho just invented him as a joke.” He is not a joke, although his whole life is full of jokes. But he is a real person, just sitting here, keeping his head down, avoiding the girls.
He is becoming a little old – I may take him out of the circus. But I never take anybody out of the circus unless he requests it, and Milarepa has not requested it yet. So I feel he needs a little more experience, a little more anxiety, a little more tension, a little more trouble. Let him have it to his heart’s content.

The old bull’s active days are over – soon Milarepa’s days will also be over – but the farmer permits him to stay in the pasture with the cows. Of course, the farmer lets a young bull loose in the field as well, and he goes to work immediately.
Watching this, the old bull starts snorting and pawing the ground with his hooves. “You are wasting your time,” says the farmer. “You are too old for that sort of thing now.”
“I know,” says the old bull, “but I can show him I am not a cow, can’t I?”

Poor Milarepa is not a joke, just an old bull that I am keeping in the pasture with the cows. Not to be caught, he finishes his love affairs quickly – ten minutes. That must be the minimum time in the whole world. A love affair finished in ten minutes! Perhaps three minutes honeymoon, two minutes married life, five minutes trouble, and it is finished. The fact is: now he is getting old. Everybody is getting old. But he has to go on proving that at least everybody should know he is not a cow.
And as for you, Milarepa – you need not be afraid of the cows. You need not go to your room and lock it and feel that again another crisis has arisen and start repeating “Vimal, Vimal, Vimal.” Vimal is not a transcendental meditation; it is not going to help. And don’t be so afraid of women – just a little longer.
I came across a statement just the other day: “There is nothing in the world better than the love of a good woman unless, of course, it is the love of a bad woman.” Here you will find the greatest women in the world – fed up with the world. They have come here to meditate. But a woman is fundamentally love. Her meditation cannot be without love. A woman is not much interested in sex. She is much more interested in warmth, in cuddling, in friendliness, in love. Man is much more interested in sex.
These are the fallacies which show that God never created the world, because nothing fits together. He does not seem to understand that man and woman have to live together. They should be made in such a way that they fit with each other, but they are absolutely misfitting. Man’s sexuality is genital and local. It’s like local anesthesia.
When my personal physician took my blood, in the beginning he used to tell me, “Now, the prick.” Finally he understood that what he is doing is nonsense. It is not the prick. Now he does not say that. I have been watching while he changed his idea. Now he does it silently without saying anything.
But man is nothing but the prick. Women have a totally different kind of being. Her whole body needs love. It is not sexuality. Her whole body is orgasmic. That’s why there is tremendous trouble. Man comes to orgasm quickly – within two minutes – and the woman has not even started. The woman takes a little time. Her whole body has to become ready, ecstatic. Her whole body has to join the dance. Only then can she feel orgasmic joy. So she is not actually interested in the prick. She is more interested in hugging, in being close to you, in the warmth of your body. She wants to be surrounded by your love, she wants to surround you with her love.
More and more people will be feeling that sex is dropping away, but that does not mean that you have to escape when you see a woman approaching you, shut yourself in your room and repeat the transcendental mantra: Vimal, Vimal, Vimal. You have to change your old idea of love. It was not love, it was pure sex. When sex drops, you can meet the woman on a higher level for which she has always been longing and suffering.
For millions of years women have suffered because man has not been able to give them what they need. Man has simply used them for his sexuality. They feel almost like a commodity to be used, and then the man turns over and goes to sleep and starts snoring. This is so ugly and the woman has tears in her eyes, is crying. After each lovemaking the woman cries because she has not got anything. Her standard of love is higher than the standard of man.
As more and more sannyasins will be dropping out of sex, they should start learning the language of love, of warmth, of friendliness. No woman is going to feel offended that you have dropped sex. In fact, she is going to be immensely happy that now love can move to a higher level, which was always her deepest longing.
This difference between women’s and men’s orgasmic capacities has been one of the causes of the greatest misery of humanity, and nobody has ever tried to bridge it. Either the woman has to be brought lower – which is impossible, because her whole body is orgasmic; she cannot become locally orgasmic. Or – the only way possible – the man learns the language of love and becomes the same as the woman, his whole body needing a shower of love. That will take almost ninety percent of the misery from the world.
But it can happen only if the man comes to a point where sex drops by itself, because this is the deepest reason for man’s and woman’s conflict. But they are not aware of it, so they fight on any other excuse – continuously misunderstanding. Man says something, the woman understands something else. The woman says something, the man understands something else. It is almost impossible to have an intelligent conversation between two lovers. I have never heard of anything like that. You can have an intelligent conversation with somebody else’s woman, but not with your own woman. With your own woman you can only fight – or you can read your newspaper.

Two Italians meet each other in the pizzeria.
“Are you going to Goa?” asks the first.
“No, I’m-a going to stay-a,” replies the friend.

The pope was giving another of his speeches to a lively crowd of Italian youngsters. He was trying hard to make his point. “You must not use-a the pill!”
A young, pretty signorina stepped forward and said, “Look, Polack! You no play-a da game, you no make-a da rules.”

This goes on, this misunderstanding. But with my people I hope to create a very deep understanding of all that is hidden in the darkness inside. I am trying to bring it out in every possible way, so that you can become aware of your whole being and what the real authentic cause of your misery is. And if you are thinking of some false causes for your misery, you are not going to get out of misery.

Nancy Reagan comes back from her medical examination with a smile on her face.
“Why the grin?” asks Ronald Reagan with a sour face.
“Because,” she boasts, “Dr. White told me I have the figure of a woman half my age.”
“Oh, yeah? And what about your seventy-year-old ass?”
“Come to think of it,” replies Nancy, “he didn’t say a thing about you.”

============================================================

Osho,
Is not the inquiry into sat-chit-anand the same as Badarayana's “Athato brahman jigyasa”?
Badarayana’s statement, “Athato brahman jigyasa” is one of the most potential statements ever made. It means, “Now begins the inquiry into the ultimate.” It is the first statement in his Brahma Sutra – Maxims about the Ultimate – one of the greatest mystic books in the world. This is the first sentence of that strange book, but one of the most significant books that has ever been written.
I call it strange because Badarayana is not well-known around the world, although in India he is the only mystic on whose maxims thousands of commentaries have been written. Each of his statements is so pregnant with meaning that you can go on commenting on it in a thousand-and-one ways. Still it seems something inexhaustible has remained. This is the only book which has commentaries, then commentaries on commentaries, then again commentaries on those commentaries.
For almost two thousand years, all the great geniuses of this great country have been in some way or other connected with Badarayana. And still his name is not known in the world. Perhaps the reason is that nothing is known about him except the book. About his personal life absolutely nothing is known. Whether he was a historical person or not is very difficult to say. But one thing is certain: whoever wrote the book – whatever his name was – was certainly one of the greatest mystics of the world. So what is the problem in calling him Badarayana?
Whoever wrote the book, one more thing is certain: the book is historical. It has existed for two thousand years and is one of the books – the only one – which has spread due to so many commentaries. It has so many complexities that almost every philosopher in India became involved in some way or other. There is no other book in the world which has been commented upon so much. It can mean only one thing: his statements are almost mines of meaning. You can go on digging and you will go on finding more and more – fresher sources of water, fresher sources of meaning and significance.
Sat-chit-anand is not equivalent to athato brahma jigyasa. Athato brahma jigyasa – now begins the inquiry into the ultimate – is the first step and sat-chit-anand is the last step. What begins as an inquiry… Sat-chit-anand is not an inquiry, it is the ultimate result of the inquiry: you have come to the conclusion. The statement of Badarayana is the beginning and sat-chit-anand is the end. They are not synonymous, although they are deeply connected with each other. Without the inquiry, there is no possibility of realizing the conclusion. Hence Badarayana comes first. This small statement has to be understood because it is for every beginner.
As far as the ultimate is concerned, one is always a beginner. One is always coming close to it, closer and closer and closer, but something always remains inviting you, calling you forth, challenging you, a higher peak. You were thinking you have arrived but still there is something left. And this pilgrimage continues. I have started saying that there is no goal, only the pilgrimage. In other words, the pilgrimage in itself is so divine, so holy, that to be bothered and to be anxious about the end of it can only mean one thing: you are not interested in the journey, you are interested in the end of the journey. You are not enjoying each moment of your pilgrimage. You are looking forward, ahead, for the time when you will have reached and then you will celebrate – and that is a wrong approach from the very beginning.
Each moment is the journey and each moment is the goal. You have to live as if you have already arrived, although there will never be a moment when you can say “I have arrived.” You can only say “I am coming home. I can see the home coming closer and closer.” But it is good that you never come. Once you have come, you come to a full stop, and life knows no full stops. Yes, colons, semicolons, commas, everything is allowed – but a full stop? – absolutely no, a hundred times no, because a full stop will mean that life has come to an end, life has come to the grave. Life never comes to an end. It never terminates in death. It is an ongoing process.
Hence, Badarayana’s statement has to be understood very lovingly and very deeply. Each word of it is pure gold.
First, it has been commented on by different commentators, giving different colors to it. You are not accustomed to this because in the West the very phenomenon of commentaries has not happened. Nobody comments on Kant, nobody comments on Hegel, even on Socrates nobody comments, nobody comments on the Bible. The very phenomenon of commentaries is absolutely Eastern. The reason is that the great philosophers of the West came into existence after writing had arrived, when it was no longer a question of memorizing – you could write a treatise.
When philosophers like Kant or Hegel or Feuerbach write, they write with all the possible implications, complexities, meanings. They keep in mind what the points are if somebody is going to contradict them. They also keep in mind what the arguments of the opposite philosophy can be, and they are already replying to them – although nobody has opposed them, nobody has even understood what they are writing about. So their writings are very complete in a way, full and entire. They have not left anything for anybody else to add.
In the East, commentaries started for a certain historical reason. It is at least ten thousand years old – that is the very orthodox view about the history of philosophical development in the East. There are people who think it is far more ancient than ten thousand years. Because there was no writing – writing had not yet been invented – every master had to speak in small maxims, not elaborate treatises but in small sutras. The word sutra means the thread.
They are giving you the very minimum to remember, because to remember a vast amount of a great philosophical treatise will not be possible. And there is a danger of forgetting something, there is a danger of adding something of your own. So the way of the sutras was the only possibility – to write in such a condensed way that every disciple of any master can remember the small, seed-like maxims.
But they are only seeds. They indicate the way, they indicate a certain direction. Unless your heart becomes a soil for those seeds, they will not sprout into leaves, into branches, into flowers, into fruit. Those seeds contain everything that is going to happen, they have the whole inbuilt program. If you allow that seed to enter your being, as it sinks deeper and deeper, you will realize all that is contained in it. It will become a reality in you. But because individuals are different, because individuals are unique, each individual heart is not the same soil, not the same territory, not the same land. The seed will have to grow according to the soil.
Somebody’s heart may be very fertile, creative. The tree may become very huge, the foliage may be very green, and when the spring comes there will be thousands of flowers and fruit. But somebody else’s heart may be very hard. The seed is the same, but the soil is not going to help the seed much. The seed has to grow against all odds, against all hindrances. The heart is not going to help, on the contrary it will hinder. It is just a seed which has fallen onto ground full of stones. It may grow, but it won’t be the same as in a fertile creative heart. It may not attain the same height; it may even be a bit crippled; it may not have much foliage; only a few flowers may come. But the uniquenesses are such…
Somebody is a poet and the seed may become poetry, somebody is a musician and the seed may become music, and somebody is a sculptor and the seed may become a beauty in stone. It will all depend in which kind of heart the seed falls. There are many more implications.
It is possible that one heart may be very fertile and it may bring forth thousands of flowers and one heart may not be so fertile and it may not bring forth thousands of flowers but just one flower – very huge, very big. Those thousand flowers will not be in any way competitive to this one flower. In number they may be many, but the beauty of this one flower has almost accumulated the whole beauty of thousands of flowers.

For many years, while I was teaching in the university, I had one gardener. I had a beautiful garden. And this old man I had chosen for a certain reason – he was somebody else’s gardener, some army officer’s gardener. Every year, he had won the competition for growing the biggest roses. I used to go to see it because the whole city was involved in the competition. All the rich people – officers, bureaucrats, professors, doctors, those who could afford a garden – were participants.
But I was not interested in the people who were participating. I was interested in finding out who the gardener was. The poor gardener was not even mentioned when the trophy was given to the winner; it was given to the owner of the garden. I was looking out for the gardener – this army officer could not be a gardener himself – but the poor gardener was not even there.
I followed the army officer’s car. I looked around his house, I watched, and I found the gardener working. When the officer went in, he did not even tell the gardener, “I have won the trophy because of you. In fact, it belongs to you.” He simply went into his garage and then into his house.
I went into his garden. The old man, a poor man, was working. I asked him, “Have you heard that your roses have been chosen as the best for this year?”
He said, “Nobody has told me yet.”
I asked, “How much is this army officer giving you as salary?”
He said, “Not very much.”
I said, “Whatever he is giving, I will give you double. You can tell me later how much he is giving you. Just bring whatever you have into my car and come with me.”
He said, “But he is a dangerous man. He will search for me with his gun.”
I said, “Don’t be worried, I am no less dangerous. Don’t you worry.”
So I brought him into my own house and I told him, “You start working, and every year I will not be going to the competition, you will be going. And all the trophies that you win will be in the house that I have given to you.”
He could not believe it. He asked, “But what about the army officer?”
I said, “I will take care of him. You need not be worried about it.”
Then I saw how he was winning. His whole art was never to allow any rosebush more than one flower. He would cut off all the buds and leave only the biggest bud.
I asked him, “What is the secret of it?”
He said, “The secret is simple. The rosebush has a certain amount of juice. It can be distributed to one hundred flowers, but if you don’t allow it to be distributed, it is bound to assert itself into one flower.”
I remained nine years in that university. For nine years continuously he was the winner. And his secret was just to allow one flower to grow.

So it is possible. These are the uniquenesses I am talking about – that the same seeds in different hearts will bring different manifestations.
That is how commentaries begin. The master dies. He had thousands of disciples who have listened to him. Now they start thinking – what is the significance of a certain statement or of a certain word? In the East, it has been a very delicate affair – not brutal logic, but a very subtle, very feminine art.
The word athato can mean now, it can mean here now, it can mean from now, it can mean from this point onward. Because of these different meanings growing in different hearts, the whole meaning of the sentence will change. Just the first word will change the whole meaning. For example, to a man or a woman whose heart is the heart of a devotee, the heart of a lover, athato will mean “Enough of love; now begins the inquiry into the ultimate. Enough of this world and its pleasures, now begins the inquiry into the ultimate.”
To the logician, the same word will mean “Enough of logic, enough of rationality, enough of philosophy; now begins the real inquiry into the existential” – not into words, not into philosophical investigations, but into an existential experience. To a poet it may mean “Enough of poetry, enough of all that life I have lived up to now; the time has come to enter the path in search of light, in search of the truth. I have sung songs of joy, I have sung songs of beauty.”
But a time comes when you are tired even of your own creativity. How long…? Just as you become tired of the woman you loved so much, of the man you loved so much, you become tired of your creative dimension for which you would have sacrificed your life. A moment comes when it seems that you have been playing like a child, collecting seashells on the sea beach, or making castles of sand. Beautiful utopias – but it is enough.
You have not gained anything of the eternal, of the timeless, of the immortal. How long are you going to wait? Now is the moment to change the direction of all your genius and intelligence. Then athato will mean something different, different from what it can mean to a businessman, to what it can mean to a king. He has been on a power trip, he has conquered as much as he wanted, he is tired.
I am reminded of one of the greatest emperors, perhaps in the whole of world history.

His name was Ashoka. He could have become a world conqueror far more easily than Alexander the Great. He had far bigger armies, far more developed technology, far more riches. He was on the way to becoming a world conqueror, but the first victory was enough. He conquered what is now the state of Orissa. In his days it was called the land of Kalinga. He conquered the country of Kalinga.
Millions of people had to be killed, massacred, because the people of that place were ready to die but not to be conquered. The situation was such that the fight would have continued until not a single man remained and Ashoka would have been victorious only over millions of corpses. Halfway, Ashoka trembled, seeing millions of people massacred, and seeing the point that these were not the people who were going to give way. Either life in freedom or death – there was no other alternative for them. They would not accept any kind of slavery.
When he became absolutely certain of it, he thought for a moment – just in the middle of millions of corpses – “Is it worthwhile? What is the point? Killing these brave people and just becoming victorious over a country of the dead. You will feel repentant your whole life because you have destroyed so much life. And not the life of ordinary people, but people of tremendous courage, who have given you absolute alternatives: ‘Either we will live in freedom or we will die in freedom. Slavery is not acceptable. You may be a great king, you may have great power, but at least we have the power to die – you cannot take it away from us.’”
The country was poor. It was not in any way comparable to the vast empire of Ashoka. Ashoka’s empire was the biggest India has ever seen – from Afghanistan, which is now a separate country, Pakistan, which is now a separate country, Sri Lanka, which is now a separate country, Burma, which is now a separate country, to Nepal, Bhutan, Sikkim, Ladakh… India has never had so large a map as it had at the time of Ashoka.
Just this small country of Kalinga was independent, and they were poor. They did not have an army or the technology, just courage – such a courage that they had only two simple alternatives: “We will live in freedom or we will die in freedom; we don’t know any other alternative.” In fact, Ashoka had become challenged in a way – he had to see how, for centuries, these people had been free without an army, with just human courage and dignity and pride. It was a great challenge to the great emperor, who could have crushed them without any effort. He had already killed half of the country.
But then suddenly a turn came to his consciousness, and he saw that this was simply being stupid, “You are destroying a beautiful, proud people and you are able to destroy them because you have bigger armies, you have more weapons, better weapons, you have better horses, but you don’t have better human beings than those you are destroying. Your people are simply servants who are fighting because they are being paid. These people are fighting without arms, without horses, just because they love freedom. It is ugly to destroy these people – this will be destroying a beautiful variety.”
He returned home. His generals asked, “What is the matter? We are winning.”
Ashoka said, “This is not victory, this is simply murder. And I am not a murderer. If I cannot conquer them alive, I don’t want to conquer them. I don’t want to be called in history a conqueror of corpses. Forget about it.”
The whole thing became such a nightmare in Ashoka’s mind that the moment he reached his palace he came to a transformation point: he renounced the empire. He said, “Of what use is this whole empire? Enough of it! I don’t want any conquering or anybody to conquer, anybody to invade, and I don’t want any empire.”

Ashoka became a disciple of Gautam Buddha. Gautam Buddha had died two hundred years earlier, but his disciples were alive, his enlightened disciples were still there. It may have been the third or fourth generation, but there were people who had the same flavor and the same charisma, the same magic.
Ashoka became a disciple, renounced the world, started living like a beggar in his own capital, begging for his food every day in his own capital. And because he became a sannyasin, this word athato would bring to his mind a totally different meaning than it could bring to the mind of a poet, or to the mind of a creative artist, or to a painter.
And the meaning of brahma jigyasa will be like the meaning of athato. To the theist, brahma will mean God; to the atheist, brahma will mean the ultimate reality – not a personal God, but an impersonal reality. Jigyasa, inquiry, will also take different forms. To somebody it may become meditation, to somebody else it may become yoga, to somebody else it may become prayer. It will depend on your potentiality – and according to your potential the seed will take form.
This simple sentence has been commented upon by almost one thousand commentators. I have gone through so many commentaries and it has been such a joy to see the same small sentence – just three words – take such different meanings. And the whole commentary on all other sutras, all other maxims, will depend on the different meanings of this first sentence.
It is not equivalent to sat-chit-anand, but it is the beginning. And sat-chit-anand – truth, consciousness, bliss – is the ultimate realization of this small beginning that becomes deeper and deeper and bigger and bigger, and sooner or later becomes your whole life. Badarayana’s sutra is only a hint that it is time to change. It is time to become a seeker; it is time to behave like a mature person; it is time not to waste your life anymore on mundane activities. It is time for the pilgrimage. Your boat has arrived. It is time to go into the unexplored seas, to the untraveled path; to be alone and to go within; to be alone and to be absolutely free and independent; to find your roots in existence.
The day you start finding your roots in existence will be the moment when you have touched the edge of your very life spring. That will be the time of a certain conclusion. Your life is no longer a question, but becomes an answer. And that answer is sat-chit-anand. Those three words are irrefutable.
God can be argued against. In fact, half of the world is now communist and does not believe in God. Buddhism, which is the third-greatest religion after Christianity and Mohammedanism, doesn’t believe in God; Jainism, which is a minority religion, doesn’t believe in God either. In fact, if you accumulate all the numbers, there are more atheists in the world than theists. It has never been so before. The world was always a theist majority and an atheist minority. The balance has reversed. Today there are more atheists in the world than theists.
And the theist is not much of a theist either. He is theist just by name; scratch his skin a little and you will find a doubt inside. He believes in God, he goes to church, he goes to the temple, but his is not a faith which has no doubt within it. It is a faith which has been sitting on repressed doubt. It is a belief – just underneath is doubt. I have never come across a single theist who really believes. He may say “I really believe,” but the more he says “I really believe,” the more he exposes himself. When you say to someone “I really love you,” what do you mean? Is not love enough? This emphasis of “really” makes the whole thing bogus. It is like in a movie – it is not true, it is a Hollywood love affair.
Truth cannot be denied either by theists or by atheists or by agnostics. These are the only three possibilities, the only three alternatives. The agnostic is the most intelligent of all three. The agnostic says, “I don’t know, I am still trying to know. I am on the path, but I have not come to any conclusion yet.” He is the most honest of the three – not really getting into either belief or unbelief. Keeping himself neutral so that he is not prejudiced, so that he is not carrying a certain opinion already. Just keeping himself without any prejudice, without any opinion, so that when he comes across the truth, he can realize it as it is, not as he wants it to be. An opinion will give color, distortion; an opinion will create its own illusions, hallucinations.
The agnostic is the most significant seeker of truth. But there are very few agnostics in the world. Perhaps most of them are here, going onto the path with open eyes and with a clean heart, ready to accept truth as it is, with no desire to project anything onto the truth. The agnostic cannot deny the beauty of sat-chit-anand. He can say “I am searching,” but he cannot say anything against it.
Neither can the theist deny it. He may say “This is what I mean by God: my God is truth, my God is consciousness, my God is bliss.” There is no problem – it is just a question of words that only idiots fight about. If this is what you mean by God, then it is perfectly okay. But then don’t pray, because there is no person who is going to listen and say hello to you.
Sat-chit-anand is just an experience. If you want it to be synonymous with your idea of God, there is no harm, but remember, there is no need to create temples and mosques and synagogues and churches for it. It is an experience that is going to happen within you, not without.
Nor can the atheist deny it. He can deny God as a creator. He can laugh at the very idea of a personal God because there is no evidence and no proof for it. It is simply pure fiction invented by cunning priests for the gullible, for those who are still childish and have some father fixation – they need somebody to protect them, a great father.
Not even the atheist can deny the reality of truth, nor can he deny the reality of consciousness because he is already a little bit conscious. If this much consciousness is possible, what is the problem? Why can’t more grow? This small consciousness that we have is enough proof that there is a possibility of growth, of expansion.
We may not know bliss, but we have known moments of peace, we have known moments of silence, we have known moments of joy. Bliss is altogether something tremendously vast. But if you have seen a dewdrop, you have seen all the oceans: a small dewdrop is enough proof that water exists. And if there is a dewdrop, what is the problem? There may be oceans. The formula that makes the dewdrop, H2O, makes all the oceans. It is the same formula, the same foundation.
These are the three kinds of people in the world. None of them can deny sat-chit-anand. That’s the beauty of mystical experiences. Theological belief systems don’t have this greatness. They can be denied, refuted, laughed at. There is no way to defend them. There is no way to prove them. But the mystical experiences belong to a totally different category.
It is something that would be absolutely inhuman for anybody to question, because to question it is to question the very meaning of life. To question it is to question your very existence, your very consciousness, your very experience of pleasure, peace, silence, joy. It is not possible.
Just a few days ago the records of the Nobel Prize committee were made available; the public is allowed to see them every fifty years. Fifty years of records: how many people were considered for the Nobel Prize; why certain people were rejected for the Nobel Prize; why it was given to certain people. All those records were opened just a few days ago. And I came across the strangest thing. I could not believe that they could have done such an ugly and nasty thing: Leo Tolstoy was denied the Nobel Prize on the grounds that he was a kind of mystic.
I have never thought that it can be a crime that one of the greatest creative artists… His novels are incomparable – perhaps no one will ever be able to write such a great novel as War and Peace. The man was not only a novelist, but a man who lived whatever he was preaching. His preaching may be under dispute, you may not agree with him – that’s another thing. I myself don’t agree with him because he was preaching poverty.
He was a very rich man, he was a faraway cousin of the Czar. He belonged to the royal family of Russia and he had immense land, thousands of slaves. Everything that was possible in those days was available to him, but he did not use anything, he lived like a poor man. His whole family lived like a royal family, but he used to live in the servants’ quarters, not in the palace. At least he was a sincere man: whatever he thought was right, he did.
The Nobel Prize committee mentions it – he was a Christian. He has written the most beautiful books on Christianity. I don’t think there has ever been any theologian who has written so beautifully about Christianity. But the Nobel Prize committee declared that the Nobel Prize was not to be given to him because his ideas about Christianity were not orthodox, they were very much his own.
Tolstoy believed in a mystical Christianity. He did not believe in the orthodox, traditional Christianity. He had his own ideas about Christianity – as if to have one’s own ideas about religion is a crime. He was not accepted because his Christianity was a kind of mystic Christianity. This mysticism became the barrier. His name was proposed and rejected. There have been many other names which have been rejected on strange grounds – and even politicians have been given the Nobel Prize.
It is very strange. Leo Tolstoy is as important a person as Jesus Christ himself, but I think Jesus Christ would also have been denied the Nobel Prize because he was not an orthodox Jew. He was proposing his own ideas about religion – mystical Judaism. Naturally, you cannot give a Nobel Prize to a man who was finally crucified. He cannot be accepted as a respectable, prestigious person. He was hanged on the cross just like any other criminal. On each side of him there was a criminal. He was treated exactly like any other criminal, or even worse. No other criminal was forced to carry his own cross.
It was certainly difficult. I know this from my own experience. When I was in America, against their own constitution and all their own laws, they handcuffed me, they chained my legs. Not only that – they were not satisfied – they put another chain around my waist. Even that was not enough: they put both my hands in handcuffs and chained them to the chain on my waist so I could not even move my hands. I could not wave to the crowds who were greeting me. That was their strategy – that I could not even wave my hands to the crowds who had come to greet me. And they chained my feet so close together that walking was impossible.
So I know how difficult it must have been for Jesus to carry a cross in such a situation, a heavy cross. Perhaps because he was only thirty-three, young, healthy, and a son of a carpenter, accustomed to carrying big logs from the forest to his father’s workshop, continuously working with wood, he was able to somehow carry the cross. But three times on the way, he fell, and whenever he fell with the cross, they hit him hard with their sticks, lashed him, and forced him to get up and take the cross on his back. Certainly a Nobel Prize cannot be given to such a man! It will be very insulting to the Nobel Prize committee.
We are living in an insane asylum. Mysticism is the highest flowering of human consciousness. To deny Leo Tolstoy the Nobel Prize on the grounds that he is a mystical person is so absurd but so indicative of the insanity of humanity and of the people who are powerful because they are members of the Nobel Prize committee. The King of Sweden is the chairman and all the others are highly respectable, prestigious people. I don’t think any one of them is even worth the dust under the feet of Leo Tolstoy. But they are denying that man who has created novels which are sheer poetry. The beauty of his novels is so alive that if you want to choose just ten great novels of all the languages of the world, you will have to include at least two novels by Leo Tolstoy in those ten.
It is a strange phenomenon that Leo Tolstoy, Anton Chekhov, Fyodor Dostoevsky, Maxim Gorky, Turgenev – five great novelists – were contemporaries. If you are going to choose ten novels, five will be from these five people. Perhaps all ten will be from these five people, because they have all written such great novels: The Mother by Maxim Gorky has no comparison in the whole world; or Fathers and Sons by Turgenev; or The Brothers Karamazov by Dostoevsky; or Anna Karenina by Leo Tolstoy. Perhaps these five people will cover almost all ten places – they will not leave room for anybody else. But none of them received the Nobel Prize – not only Leo Tolstoy, none of them, and each was better than the winner. It is very difficult out of these five to vote who is the best.
They were all friends. They lived in the same city – Moscow. It was a strange combination, it had never happened before: five such unique geniuses in the same city, creating novels such that you cannot choose which is better. And defeating the whole world – past, present, and perhaps future – because there seems to be no possibility to improve on The Brothers Karamazov or Maxim Gorky’s The Mother. But none of them got the Nobel Prize.
I have come to know only about Leo Tolstoy. I don’t know why the others were refused. Perhaps Maxim Gorky was refused because he was pro-Communist; Turgenev may have been refused because he was an atheist. These are just my assumptions. I don’t know their records. But these names must have come before the committee. It is impossible that they were not proposed and rejected.
But the same grounds will do for all. They were all mystics in their own ways. They were all seekers of the ultimate in different directions, but they were all moving toward sat-chit-anand. They had all come to the point of athato brahma jigyasa – now is the time to begin the inquiry. And their novels reflect their inquiry.
They are not ordinary novels, the way that novels are written today. Today novels are written to be read just once and thrown away. You cannot read a modern novel twice unless you are utterly stupid. I have not come across a single modern novel that can be read twice by any intelligent man. But these five people – their novels you will have to read many times to grasp the meaning. The first time you will be simply acquainted with the superficial story, but you will become aware that there is much more that you are missing. You will have to read them twice, and suddenly you will become aware how much you had missed the first time. Perhaps the third time you may be able to touch their depth.
It is a constant joy, once in a while – after two, three, four years – to read them again. In these three or four years your consciousness has developed, your experience has developed. You are no longer the same. The novel is the same, but you are no longer the same. Now you can see better, now you can understand more, now you can dig deeper. These are novels which have to be read all your life, again and again. Every time you will find something new that you had missed, something great – and you will be shocked that you missed it.
That is the beauty of all the ancient sutras. They are so condensed in meaning that you can go on reading again and again and you will find new meanings. And as your consciousness grows, those meanings will become deeper and deeper. As your experience on the path becomes richer, those sutras will have a new music, a new dance for you.
I have been thinking of speaking on Badarayana’s Brahma Sutras, but I am keeping that for the last. Once I speak on Badarayana’s Brahma Sutras, then I will not speak again because there is nothing that can be better than Badarayana’s Brahma Sutras – that is the end. So I am keeping it aside. If you want me to continue to speak, don’t let me speak on Badarayana! If you allow me to speak on Badarayana, then remember… Just once in a while, here and there, you can ask questions, but the whole sutras I have kept for my last communion with you, my last transmission of the lamp.

Osho,
The musicians are playing. We are waiting for you to be with us. There is a moment when the auditorium is filled with silence. Then you come. Osho, what is this magic of waiting?
There is certainly a deep magic – almost a miracle – when you are in silence, in trust, in love, just waiting. The moments of waiting are moments of meditation. Because you are waiting, expectant, your mind stops functioning. You are so concentrated in your waiting that there is no energy left for the mind – that is the secret, the magic.
Waiting for me is just a taste of the ultimate waiting for truth. If just waiting for me you feel so much that it is inexpressible, so much that you can only call it magic, learn something from it. The same waiting is needed for the ultimate to happen to you. It also comes like a guest.
People have a wrong idea, and the wrong idea is created by people just like me, without any intention of creating it. In fact, nobody wants to create it, but somehow language interferes, distorts, and creates something which was never intended. The difficulty is: How to say the right thing? Language seems to be perfectly good for saying the wrong thing. The moment you start saying the right thing, it doesn’t fit with language, with grammar, with…
For example, everybody thinks he is going in search of truth. The reality is that you are not going anywhere, you are just going to remain here-and-now. Truth and consciousness and bliss are going to come to you. They are going to be your guests. You are the host. All that you need is an open door, waiting, just like one waits for one’s friend, or for one’s beloved, looking far away, as far as the eyes can see, looking toward the faraway horizon, waiting.
I am reminded of a Sufi story. It is not just a story, it is a historical fact.

Another great emperor of India was Akbar. Mohammedans pray five times a day and Akbar was very particular. One day he had gone hunting in the forest with all his friends, and they all got lost.
Evening was descending, the sun was setting, and it was time to pray. So Akbar stopped under a huge tree, tied his horse to the tree, and sat on the ground to do his last prayer of the day. As he was praying, a woman, a young woman, ran just by his side, giving him such a shock – it seemed as if she was mad or blind – that Akbar fell down. Still, she did not look back.
Naturally Akbar was very angry. Mohammedans in prayer are very particular; nobody should disturb them. It can become a very dangerous thing and for the emperor… An ordinary village girl, not caring at all, was running like mad and hitting the emperor. The emperor fell down. Mohammedans pray sitting on their knees, so it is very easy just to push them a little and they will fall down.
It is very difficult to push a Buddhist or a Hindu when he is praying because he is sitting in a lotus posture. It is a very locked posture – you cannot just push him. He is very strong in his posture. But to push the Mohammedan is very easy, however strong he may be – his posture is such, sitting on his knees.
Akbar finished his prayer quickly because he wanted to catch hold of the girl. She could not be allowed to do such things. If she could behave with the emperor in such a way, what to say about other people? But it was getting dark, so he could not figure out where she had gone. He waited, thinking she had to come back to the village. He was just outside the village. Finally she came.
Akbar stopped her and said, “Do you remember what you have done?”
She said, “I don’t remember anything. Do you?”
Akbar said, “You seem to be very strange. You don’t understand. You are talking with the emperor of the country.”
She said, “I understand, but I don’t remember anything of what you are talking about.”
He said, “What I am talking about? I was praying here and you ran in such a way that you pushed me, and I fell down. You disturbed my prayer.”
She said, “Perhaps if you say so, it must have been so, but you have to forgive me. I was going to wait for my lover just on the road which runs through the forest. I wanted to greet him – he is coming after many years – just outside the village. I could not remain sitting in the house and waiting. It is just one mile distant, but he will be waiting, thinking that I must be standing just by the side of a tree where we used to meet when we were young. That’s why I was concentrating so much that I did not know I had committed any mistake. Please forgive me, it must have been committed without my knowing at all.”
She was so innocent and tears came to her eyes because she had hurt her own emperor. “You can give me any punishment, otherwise it will remain heavy on my heart. But just one question before you punish me: you were in prayer – still you were not so much in concentration as I was, because I don’t remember it at all. It cannot be that I hit you; it cannot be one-sided. Your body must also have touched my body, but I don’t remember having seen anybody on the way – praying or falling or anything. I don’t remember that anybody touched my body. So I am puzzled, and I would like to be clear about it. Is your prayer not as strong as my love?”

Akbar remembers it in his autobiography, Akbarnama. He says, “I had to ask forgiveness from that village girl. I have never forgotten her face, and I have never forgotten that my prayer is just formal. If I am lost in my prayer and my love, in my gratitude toward the ultimate, how can I be aware that somebody has touched me, pushed me, or that my body has fallen? I would not have been aware of anything. But I was aware and that makes it certain that my prayer is just superficial.
“That girl’s love was far deeper. She was closer to the ultimate than I was, although she was not concerned with the ultimate at all.” A tremendous statement of understanding…
You are saying, “The musicians are playing. We are waiting for you to be with us. There is a moment when the auditorium is filled with silence. Then you come… Osho, what is the magic of waiting?” It is prayer. It is love. It is trust. It is gratitude: it is the whole of religion.
If you can learn waiting, and if waiting can become your moment-to-moment experience, whenever you are not involved in ordinary things, and you can find time… Anytime, day or night, just in your bed, sit silently and wait. Wait for the guest. And I promise you: the guest has always come. The waiting has never failed. It has always been an absolute success, but not the success of your ego – it is the success of your humbleness.
It is the victory of your being, not the victory of your mind. It is the victory of your silence, of your love. Learn waiting and you have learned all about meditation.