---
title: Satyam Shivam Sundram 01
series: Satyam Shivam Sundram 01-30
talk_number: 1
url: https://oshoworld.com/satyam-shivam-sundram-01
language: English
duration: 01:25:43
author: THE MANTRA SERIES
scraped_at: 2026-01-03T09:20:14.297979+00:00
---
Osho,
What is the mystic conception of ultimate reality?
The mystic’s conception of the ultimate reality is the only authentic and real experience. It is not a thought or a concept, but an existential experience.
The mystic does not deal with the mind. His whole effort is to get rid of the prison of the mind. The mystic is not a philosopher; his world is beyond all philosophies. Philosophies are simply by-products of mental processes. They do not reflect the reality, they only reflect you. That’s why there are so many philosophies in the world contradicting each other.
The reality is one. How can there be so many philosophies? There are not so many mystical experiences. There is only one experience: neither time nor space changes it. For millennia, the mystic in every country, in every race, in every age has experienced the same reality. The philosopher thinks about reality, the mystic simply drops all thinking. In his silence – his utter silence and serenity – he becomes a mirror, and the reality reflects itself.
The mystic is the greatest flowering of human consciousness. His ultimate vision can be described in three beautiful words that have been used for thousands of years, and there has not been any improvement on them. They are three words from the ancient-most sources: satyam shivam sundaram.
Satyam means the truth – not what you think about it, but what it is; not your idea about it, but its reality. To know this truth you have to be utterly absent. Your very presence will distort the vision – because your presence means the presence of your mind, your prejudices, your conditionings. You are nothing else but a bundle of all that has been forced upon you by the religions, by the society, by the so-called leaders of humanity.
Your absence means the absence of all prejudices, of all borrowed knowledge: absence of the Christian, absence of the Hindu, absence of the Mohammedan; just a pure sky, a pure being. I am using the word absence to deny all that is not you.
But don’t misunderstand me: this absence of you is your real presence. Only the prejudices are absent. The ego is absent, your knowledgeability is absent but your being shows in its utter purity. You disappear as a personality and there remains only a pure presence. So on one side it is absence of all that is false in you, and on the other side it is presence of all that is real in you. In this state you don’t think, you simply see.
This seeing of existence is the first experience of the mystic contained in the word satyam. Satyam means the truth: not any conception about it, but truth itself.
The second word, shivam, means virtue: all that is good, all that is valuable, all that is the most precious in you; the ultimate good. The man who comes to experience the truth starts living the truth immediately. There is no other alternative. His living the truth is shivam. Shivam means truth in action, truth in your life, truth in your love, truth in your friendship, truth in your eyes and truth in your heart. Shivam is the action of truth. Truth itself is the center of the cyclone, but if you experience the truth, the cyclone around you becomes shivam. It becomes pure godliness.
A man of truth is the only proof that the world is divine. No argument can prove that the world is divine.

I am reminded of one of the greatest mystics, Ramakrishna. When asked by a logician, “What is truth? Do you have any argument, any evidence for it?” Ramakrishna laughed hilariously.
He said, “I am the argument, and if you cannot see in my eyes the proof and the evidence, you will not find it anywhere else. I am the only proof that existence is not dead, that existence is not only matter; that existence is not only available to science, that existence is much more than matter, that you are much more than the body, that you are much more than the mind.”

But this “much more” cannot be proved by any logician, any scientist. Only the mystic is the proof. He also cannot prove it by words, but only by his way of life. The way of life of the mystic is the only possibility of coming in contact with the divine, which is all around you. You are living in the very ocean of the divine, but the mystic becomes your first window through which you can see the non-material, the spiritual, the beyond.
Shivam is the mystic in action: his gestures, the music in his words, the poetry of his life, the light and the depths of his eyes. And whatever he does – whether he is chopping wood or carrying water from the well – you can see that there is a subtle difference. He is total in his every act, and that totality brings the third word, sundaram.
Sundaram means beauty. So this is the mystic trinity: satyam, the truth; shivam, the good, the divine; and sundaram, the beauty.
You have seen the beauty of the flowers, you have seen the beauty of the stars, you have seen the beauty of a bird on the wing, you have seen beauties upon beauties of sunsets and sunrises. But the greatest beauty is to see the totality, the intensity of the mystic. That is the greatest flowering in existence – of consciousness itself. It is available only to those who are humble enough to receive it, who are not living a closed life of fear, of paranoia, but who are living a life of love with all the windows open. And they are ready to go with life wherever it leads.
These receptive souls are the only real seekers in the world. These receptive souls are blessed with their experience of sundaram: the beautiful rose that is opening in the heart of the mystic. These three words are so unique, so incomparable, there is nothing parallel to them.
Truth is the experience, shivam is the action that comes out of the experience, and beauty is the flowering of consciousness of the man who has experienced truth. These three are the ultimate reality for those who are on the mystical path.
This is a mystery school. All my effort is not to give you knowledge, but to take all knowledge away from you; to make you so innocent, just like a newly born child who is fully conscious, sensitive, alert, but knows nothing. His not knowing makes every child’s experience something that is available only to the greatest sages of the world.
To understand the psychology and the development of religious consciousness, I would like you to start with the child. It is the child’s experience that haunts intelligent people their whole life. They want it again: the same innocence, the same wonder, the same beauty. Now it is a faraway echo; it seems as if you have seen it in a dream. But the whole of religion is born out of the haunting of the childhood experience of wonder, of truth, of beauty, of life in its beautiful dance all around. In the songs of the birds, in the colors of the rainbows, in the fragrance of the flowers the child goes on remembering deep in his being that he has lost a paradise.
It is not a coincidence that all the religions of the world have this idea in their parables: that man once lived in paradise and somehow, for some reason, he has been expelled from that paradise. There are different stories, different parables, but signifying one simple truth. These stories are just a poetic way of saying that every man is born in paradise and then loses it.
The retarded, the unintelligent completely forget about it but the intelligent, the sensitive, the creative go on being haunted by the paradise that they had once known. And now only a faint unbelievable memory has remained with them. They start searching for it again.
The search for paradise is the search for your childhood again. Of course your body will no longer be a child’s, but your consciousness can be as pure as the consciousness of the child. This is the whole secret of the mystical path: to make you a child again – innocent, unpolluted by any knowledge, not knowing anything, still aware of everything that surrounds you, and with a deep wonder and a sense of a mystery that cannot be demystified.
This is something of fundamental importance to understand. The scientist is trying to demystify existence. His whole effort is to make everything known. The very word science means knowledge. The work of the mystic is exactly the opposite of the work of a scientist. The mystic does not want to demystify existence; on the contrary he wants to become part of this enormous mystery itself. He does not want to become a knower; he wants to disappear in the mystery of existence.
I am reminded of a beautiful story. Of course it cannot be true, but it is so significant that I don’t care whether it is true or not.

A Chinese emperor called all the painters in his empire. It was one of the greatest empires in the world. He himself was in deep love with painting and he asked the painters, “I want to declare one of you the master painter of my empire. You are going to be my guests and you have to paint. I will come to see your paintings and whichever painting proves to be the best, that painter will become part of my royal court and the master painter of the whole empire – with many rewards.”
Thousands of painters participated in this competition. One old painter said to the king, “It will take at least three years for me to complete the painting, and I have a few conditions. While I am making the painting, nobody should enter into my house. I don’t want anybody to see the incomplete painting. When the painting is complete, I will invite you.”
The king said, “Three years? That is too much.”
The painter said, “Then I must get out of the competition. Three years is nothing because you don’t know what I am going to paint.”
Reluctantly the emperor agreed. All the other painters finished their work: somebody in one week, somebody in two weeks – at the most four weeks. But the king was not satisfied. He was waiting for the old man. Without seeing his painting he could not declare his judgment.
After three years the old man came and asked the emperor, “Now the painting is complete. You are welcome.” He was painting in the king’s palace itself. He had been given a beautiful place that was guarded twenty-four hours a day so that nobody should enter for three years. Let the painter do his work unhindered, not interfered with.
The emperor was waiting for three years. It is a long time and he was old and afraid that perhaps death may come before then. But fortunately he was still alive. With great wonder in his heart he entered the palace where the painter had done his work. He had painted on a whole wall of the palace, a beautiful forest with a small river flowing, and a small footpath going into the deep forest and disappearing into the mountains that he had painted.
The king could not believe his eyes. It was almost miraculous, magical. He was in awe. After a long silence he asked the painter only one question: “I am very much interested in this little footpath that goes around the forest, is sometimes seen around the mountains and then disappears. Where does it go?”
The painter said, “There is no other way to know unless you walk on it.” And the king completely forgot that it was only a painting. He was so overwhelmed by the beauty that he took the painter’s hand in his hand and they both walked on the path and disappeared into the mountains.
They have not yet returned.

This is the way of the mystic. He disappears into existence not to return.
The scientist always remains an outsider: speculating, dissecting, analyzing, but he is not part of what he is doing. He is just a neutral objective observer. The mystic is not an observer. The mystic joins the dance. He dances with the trees, he dances in the rain, he dances with the peacocks. He sings songs with the birds. He slowly, slowly merges and melts into existence. He does not demystify it; he makes it more mysterious. He glorifies it, he gives it its splendor, its majesty. He makes it the most profound orgasmic experience.
The mystic is a lover not a knower. His path is of love not of knowledge. Love is his God, not logic. Through his love he has come to realize three things: satyam shivam sundaram – the truth, the godliness of existence and the tremendous beauty, the unbelievable poetry, the song of the silence, the music without sounds. Only the mystic knows without any knowledge.
The scientist has knowledge but knows nothing. A man of the caliber of Albert Einstein said to his friends before dying, “If there is another life, I would not like to be a scientist or a physicist again. This has been a sheer wastage. I have known so much, but I know nothing about myself. What is the use of all this knowledge? My inner world remains dark and I have been watching faraway stars and the galaxies and the nebulas and I have not looked at myself.”
Only a man of tremendous intelligence can see the point: Albert Einstein was not dying with contentment, with joy, but with a deep frustration and disappointment. The world may think that he was one of the greatest, most successful men – perhaps the greatest scientist that has ever walked on the earth. But ask him, he has missed all that is beautiful, he has missed all that is divine, he has missed all that makes life a rejoicing.
The mystic’s concern is to create a song in your heart and a dance to your feet and a joy that never fades in your very being.
Remember these three words. They are the most beautiful words ever uttered by anyone, and they reveal the very essence of the ultimate reality: satyam shivam sundaram.

The second question:
Osho,
I was reading an article about women being fed up and the responsibility is from men. Is it true?
It is true, but only half true. Man is also fed up, and the responsibility is of the women. In fact we are all in the same boat. Man or woman, all are fed up because our way of life is utterly wrong. Neither are men responsible for women’s boredom nor are women responsible for men’s frustration.
You will have to go deep into the psychology of frustration. The first thing to remember is that you are frustrated, you are fed up, you are bored only if you were expecting otherwise. If you were not expecting anything…
I am not fed up, and I don’t see any possibility… To the very last breath I will remain with the same wondering eyes that I was born with. I am also living in the same world in which you are living. I am not bored because I never expected anything. Hence frustration is impossible.
Women are fed up because they have been expecting too much from man, and the poor man cannot fulfill all that. Women are more imaginative. They make a hero out of any Tom, Dick or Harry. With their romantic eyes, idiots appear to be Gautam the Buddhas. And slowly, slowly as they come closer to their great heroes, they don’t find the giants, they find ordinary, poor human beings. Then great frustration sets in. They magnify and exaggerate but you cannot live in exaggerations and you cannot go on living looking through a magnifying glass. Sooner or later you have to come to terms with reality, and the reality is just the henpecked husband, and utterly uninteresting.
And the man – he is not so imaginative but his biological instinct makes him almost intoxicated, and when he is intoxicated by his biological instinct then any ugly woman appears like a Cleopatra. His eyes are covered with biological madness. The people who called love blind were not wrong. He starts seeing with closed eyes. He is afraid to open his eyes because the reality may not be so great. But how long can you go on living with closed eyes? Sooner or later you have to see the woman you have been infatuated with.
The biological infatuation disappears very soon. It is chemical, hormonal. Once you are sexually satisfied with the woman, all blindness, all madness disappears. You are again rational, sane, and you see just an ordinary woman. Naturally, to avoid her you start reading the newspaper. Men are sitting before their TV’s. In America they have done a survey: the average American man looks at the TV seven and a half hours per day. And naturally the woman feels fed up.
I have come to know that people are even making love to each other and watching the television at the same time! Even the greatest sexologists – Vatsyayana, Pundit Koka, Sigmund Freud, Havelock Ellis – have not dreamed about a day when people will make love while they are watching the television. They are so bored with everything. Television is a refuge.
But the psychology is simple: you start expecting things from others and you start believing in your expectations. Soon your expectations are shattered against the reality. That is the reason why men are fed up, women are fed up – everybody is fed up. The world is full of bored people.
Boredom is perhaps the most significant phenomenon that has happened to the twentieth century. Man was never so bored before. In ancient days, when man was a hunter and there was no marriage and no possibility of monotony, he was not bored. There was no time to be bored. The woman was not bored: there were possibilities of choosing new men. Marriage settled everything in the name of safety and security, but it took away the joy of exploration.
One of the Urdu poets has a beautiful song in which he says, “If you…” he is addressing God, “…if you were in favor of marriage, then why did you give me eyes, then why did you give me intelligence?” Idiots are not bored! And you will be surprised: blind people are not bored.
The more intelligent you are the sooner you will be bored. That is the criterion. The most intelligent, sensitive, creative people are the most bored people because one experience is enough. To repeat it is only for the idiots.
As the world has become more and more settled financially and socially: marriage, children, education, retirement, pension, insurance – in advanced countries people are even paid for their unemployment – it has taken away all the joy of exploration. Everything has become so settled and controlled that in the West particularly, there seems to be only one possibility left to explore, and that is suicide. Only that has remained unknown.
They have experienced sex and found it is just foolishness. They have experienced drugs and found that it is just deceiving yourself. Now there seems to be no adventure, no challenge. More and more people are committing suicide. It is something to be noted that the suicide rate is not increasing in the poor countries. The poor people seem to be less bored, less fed up because they have to think about food and clothes and shelter. They don’t have time for boredom. They cannot afford it.
The richer the society, where everything is available… How long can you go on living in a settled, monotonous, secure, insured, guaranteed lifestyle? People of great intelligence start committing suicide.
The East has also known times of richness, but fortunately the East has found a better substitute for suicide, and that is sannyas. When people became fed up, like Gautam Buddha… Because he had all the luxuries possible, and how long can you go on repeating the same luxuries every day? By the age of twenty-nine he was finished with the world. He had experienced everything; there were no more possibilities in the world.
One dark night he escaped from his kingdom, his security, his safety. He dropped all of that and became a beggar in search of something which will be eternally fresh, which will never become old, which will never become boredom. The search for the eternally fresh is the search of sannyas.
There is a source within you that is eternally fresh. It never becomes old, you can never get fed up with it. And when I am saying this, I am saying it from the same source. My words are coming from the same source. If you can taste them, if you can feel them, you may have some glimpse of a faraway land where everything goes on becoming new every moment, where dust does not gather on any mirror.
And that world is within you – but you are interested in a woman, and the woman is interested in you. The woman cannot find your eternal source of joy, neither can you find your eternal source of joy because you are focused on the woman. We are all focused on others, and that which can give you a continuous joy is within you. But you never look within.
People are ready to go to Everest, people are ready to go to the moon, to Mars in search – but you don’t know that even if you reach Everest you will simply look stupid. What will you do there? How long did Edmund Hillary remain on the top of Everest? Not more than two minutes! And he risked his life. Hundreds of others had died before him, trying to reach the same peak. And as far as I can see, Edmund Hillary standing on the highest Himalayan peak in the world must have looked very embarrassed. It was good that there was no one to see him. After two minutes he was bored: Go back home!
What are you going to do on the moon? It is a strange situation with man.

When Yuri Gagarin, the first Russian astronaut in the history of man to reach close to the moon came back, he was asked by the journalists, “What was your first thought when you were close to the moon?”
He said, “The first thought: I looked at the earth. It was looking so beautiful from there. It is eight times bigger than the moon, and from space it shines exactly as the moon shines, but eight times more. And the moon becomes just as ordinary as the earth.”
It is only from far away that you catch the reflected rays of the sun. The moon has no light of its own: when you reach the moon, it is the most deserted, the ugliest spot possible because there is no water, no greenery, no roses. Nothing happens there at all. It is just a desert, utterly dead.
“But from space,” Yuri Gagarin said, “my first thought was, ‘My beautiful earth!’” Strange! When you live on the earth, you don’t bother about the earth. Yuri Gagarin had lived his whole life on the earth and he had never thought, “My beautiful earth!”
And the second thing he said was, “When I uttered to myself ‘My beautiful earth!’ I remembered that I am a communist and I belong to the Soviet Union, but from space the earth is no longer divided into the Soviet Union and Germany and Japan and America and India.” All these stupid lines that we have created on the map don’t exist on the earth. From close to the moon, for the first time he felt one humanity, one earth – and so beautiful.
Yuri Gagarin was in India. I met him in New Delhi and I asked him, “Since you have been back on the earth, have you ever thought ‘How beautiful is my earth’ again?”
He looked at me, shocked. He said, “Nobody has asked that question. And I have never thought that about the earth again.”

Man always looks to faraway things. He seems to be completely unaware of that which is obvious, that which is close. You are the closest to you, that’s why you go on missing it. And there is no way to take you away from yourself. Wherever we will take you, you will be – you cannot be separated from yourself. Hence you cannot say, “My beautiful being!” You will have to learn the art of entering into yourself. You will have to be more subjective than objective.
Subjectivity is the essence of mysticism. You will have to start looking inward: that’s what we call meditation. It is nothing but looking inward, reaching to the point of your very life source. And once you have touched your very life source, there is no boredom. Your life is a constant celebration. Otherwise, whether you are man or woman, to be bored is going to be your destiny.

Becky Goldberg was becoming extremely upset and lonely because all her husband, Hymie, did all day and all night was watch television. So she went to the pet shop to find a companion.
“If you are looking for an unusual pet,” said the shop owner, “this cage contains a giant goony bird, whose beak and claws are capable of destroying anything.”
“How horrible,” said Becky.
“Not at all,” the man replied. “The goony bird is remarkably well-behaved, completely obedient. He will only destroy something if he is given the command, such as ‘Goony bird, the chair,’ or ‘Goony bird, the table.’ Then he will fly into action.’”
“Could he destroy a TV set?” asked Becky.
“Of course,” said the man. “He will turn it into a pile of scrap in a matter of seconds.”
So Becky bought the goony bird and took him home. Sure enough, Hymie was in front of the TV, so she opened the bird’s cage.
Hymie looked up and said, “What sort of pet did you buy, dear?”
“I bought a goony bird,” said Becky, preparing to give the command.
Hymie went back to watching TV and said, “Goony bird, my ass!”

============================================================

Osho,
The other morning when I heard you talking about sexual energy, AIDS and birth control, I felt such a pure rightness about each thing that you said. You are the intellectual giant of the century: there is no competition. I also feel a sense of urgency. What can I do to spread your words, or is that something only you can do?
The question you have asked has raised many questions.
First, I am not an “intellectual giant of the century.” That kind of misunderstanding is very possible, particularly because whatever I have to say has to be said through the intellect. But intellect is only a means, a vehicle, a medium; it is not the source of what I am saying. It is not the meaning of my life and my being. I am not an intellectual. In fact, I am the most anti-intellectual person who has ever existed on this earth. I will have to explain to you.
Intellect is thinking about things you do not know. How can you think about things you do not know? It is simply groping in the dark. I am reminded of the old definition of a philosopher. A philosopher is purely intellectual. The old definition of a philosopher is of a man who is blind, and in the darkest night, in a house that has no light, he is searching for a black cat that does not exist.
The intellectuals go on doing great gymnastics of the mind. They go on thinking about things that they do not know. Naturally, they never come to any conclusions. And it is impossible to come to any conclusion, to any realization through intellectual processes; hence the whole philosophical effort of the world has been an exercise in utter futility.
All philosophy is bunk. No philosopher has contributed any new insight, any new consciousness, any new festivity to the world, any new celebration to man’s consciousness. No philosopher has contributed to the beauty of this planet and this humanity. But they have been doing tremendous work all their lives creating great systems of thought which are nothing but castles in the air, soap bubbles.
The greatest intellectuals and philosophers of the world are just children, playing on the sea beach, making castles out of sand. You cannot live in those castles; in fact, just a little breeze and your castle disappears.
Mind can be used in many ways. One is the way of the intellectual: he goes round and round and round, about and about and about. He moves in a circle, which is of course unending. Every circle is unending. He travels much but he never reaches anywhere. This is the most futile use of your mind.
The other way is to use the mind not in circles but as a straight, horizontal line – one-dimensional. That’s how the scientific, the mathematical, the logical genius uses the mind. He moves in a straight line, but horizontally. He comes to certain conclusions, he comes to certain discoveries, he comes to certain inventions. He enriches the world as far as matter is concerned, as far as technology, machines and knowledge about objects is concerned.
At least his effort is not absolutely useless. It may be harmful, but it is not useless. Because the one-dimensional man is blind, he goes on searching, seeking, but does not know what the ultimate purpose of all his seeking and searching is. Hence even a man like Albert Einstein ends up finding atomic energy.
He was not a man who was violent or destructive. He was a man of peace. But if you are blind and you go on searching in directions without knowing where you are going, you are bound to end up in areas which are not healthy, which are not life-affirmative, which may even be dangerous to human beings. And that’s what Albert Einstein’s whole life’s effort has proved: Hiroshima and Nagasaki are the ultimate conclusion of his discoveries.
Science is a blind search. It has no sense of direction; it does not know the meaning, the significance of human life. It does not understand that man is not only matter. The horizontal, straight, line of science can never discover anything more than matter; hence science has become confined to a materialist conception of the world.
It is one of the most dangerous conceptions because a man like Karl Marx – a great genius, a giant as far as intellectuality is concerned – ended up with materialism. He concluded that man is nothing more than a by-product of matter, an epiphenomenon. The moment the body dies, nothing remains, everything dies. There is no difference between a man and a machine. A machine has no soul, neither does man have a soul.
The ultimate result was that his follower, Joseph Stalin, killed thirty million Russians after the revolution without any difficulty. If man is only a machine, there is no question of compassion and love, and there is no question of violence either. If you destroy a bicycle you will not feel any prick in your conscience. You have not killed anybody, you have not murdered anybody. A bicycle has no consciousness, no life; it is already dead. How can you murder a dead thing?
Because of Karl Marx’s materialist communism, Joseph Stalin was able to kill thirty million people from his own land without any trouble, without feeling any disturbance in his mind about what he was doing for a single night. He tortured more men than any other man in the whole of history. It was possible for Adolf Hitler to destroy six million Jews in Germany and altogether nearabout forty million people in the Second World War. A materialist conception about man is going to be destructive because it is coming out of a blind search.
Mind can also be used as a ladder going downward. That’s how the psychologist uses it: from consciousness to sub-consciousness, from sub-consciousness to unconsciousness, from unconsciousness to collective unconsciousness – as yet they have only reached so far. One rung of the ladder has still to be reached. They will certainly reach it: they are groping toward it and that will be the final conclusion of all our psychological in-depth research.
The last rung of the ladder will be the cosmic unconsciousness, utter darkness – a darkness that knows no dawn. Psychology is moving into the darker chambers of human beings; it is making man more and more at ease with his animality because those dark chambers belong to his animal past. This is not the right use of the mind either.
There is one more use. This is the way the mystic uses the mind, in just the diametrically opposite dimension than the psychologist. The ladder is going upward from our so-called consciousness – which is very thin, almost negligible. Just scratch it a little bit and it will disappear and your unconsciousness arises. In the East this consciousness is only called the so-called consciousness. It is so thin, skin-thin, that it has no bearing on our spiritual growth.
If you move upward, for the first time you reach the authentic consciousness that comes through meditation, awareness, alertness, witnessing. Your consciousness becomes a tremendous force. Your whole life starts revolving around your consciousness. It is no longer possible for anyone to drag you into unconscious worlds, no longer possible for anybody to drag you backward into the animal past – those dark nights of the soul that we have passed but which are still dormant in our beings.
This small consciousness that we have is not enough to fight with the nine times more powerful unconsciousness. That’s why you decide one thing but you do something else. Perhaps you have never looked into the fact of your decision-making: small decisions, not of any great importance. You decide to wake up early in the morning at five o’clock, and even when you are deciding it, deep down you know it is not going to happen – and it does not happen.
At five o’clock the alarm clock goes off, you pull your blanket over you, you start convincing yourself that it is too cold, too early, “I am still not fully satisfied with sleep. In fact, just now I was going more deeply into sleep and this crazy alarm clock disturbed me. And there is no hurry. Tomorrow I can wake up at five o’clock.”
And this has been going on your whole life. There are millions of people who have never seen the beauty before the sun rises: the utter silence of the sky, the tremendous magnificence of the stars, the music of celestial silence. In fact, between four and six when the sun rises, those two hours are perhaps the most peaceful, the most magnificent in your twenty-four-hour day. But there are millions of people in the world who will never know about it – although they have decided many times.
But what goes wrong? Your consciousness decides and your unconsciousness cancels. You have heard the proverb: Man proposes and God disposes. There is no God, but I know that there is somebody who disposes: it is your unconsciousness, it is your dark layers of being. Your thin consciousness decides, but your thick layers of darkness cancel, dispose. They have never known about your decision. There is no communication between your consciousness and unconsciousness.
Going beyond this consciousness is the whole alchemy of meditation: attaining to an authentic consciousness which cannot be canceled or overruled by any unconsciousness that may be dormant in your being. Then the emperor has arisen in you, the master has arisen in you.
The second layer, beyond authentic consciousness, is super-consciousness. You become open to the beyond, to the mysterious and to the miraculous. Beyond the super-conscious is the collective super-conscious: you start losing your “I,” your ego, your separateness from existence. Your dewdrop starts melting into the ocean. Collective super-consciousness – and you are almost on the threshold of the divine.
Beyond the collective super-consciousness there is only one step more and that is cosmic super-consciousness. This cosmic super-consciousness has been called samadhi by Patanjali, nirvana by Gautam Buddha, kaivalya by Mahavira. In the East there are a thousand and one words for that ultimate experience. No language is so rich as to be able to translate all those words with their different nuances, different fragrances. In English we are utterly poor, with faraway echoes not authentic translations. The words that are being used are enlightenment, self-realization, illumination, the ultimate awakening, but these are very poor words.
And why don’t they exist in thousands of languages in the world? – because the experience has not existed in those languages. For example, Eskimos have eleven words for snow. No other language has eleven words for snow, but because Eskimos live with it day and night – all the year round, their whole lives – they experience snow in different ways. They know the subtle differences.
In the same way, the cosmic super-consciousness has been expressed by different awakened beings according to their own taste, according to their own choice. Mahavira calls it ultimate aloneness, kaivalya, because he enjoys the freedom of being absolutely alone. Everything else has disappeared: only aloneness, and the purity of it and the utter virgin silence of it. There is no “other” to create any hell, just absolute silence.
And when there is no other, aloneness is only a word – because how can you be alone without the other? The very word alone loses all meaning if there is no comparison and context with the other. Mahavira is aware of it. He says this word kaivalya comes closest to the experience, but the experience is beyond it.
The mystic uses intellect to transcend intellect. Therefore, I say unto you, I am not an intellectual. My whole effort is to help you to go beyond intellect, to reach to the cosmic consciousness, to go beyond thinking. Those who are thinking are still children, playing on the sea beach. Only the mystic is mature, only the mystic goes beyond the horizon. Only he has the courage of an eagle to fly across the sun.
I am not an intellectual. I am simply a mystic. I don’t think about reality, existence, truth. I am experiencing them. They are my very being.
But it is not only you. There are many very sincere people, very honest, who commit the same mistake. Just the other day I saw a review of my two books, The Rebellious Spirit and The New Man, by one of the best and the most honest, sincere and courageous journalists in India, M.V. Kamath. And he says the same thing you are saying: that I am the greatest intellectual of the second part of the twentieth century. He thinks he is praising me – and he has an honest intention. But he does not understand me.
As I looked at his review, things became more and more clear. He is an intellectual and naturally that is his only measure. He knows nothing of mysticism and he commits the fallacy of all the intellectuals. With all good intentions he says in his review that if I were not a controversial man, always surrounded by controversies, I would have had many more admirers in the world.
Now, he does not understand a simple thing: that no great intellectual has ever existed in the world without controversy. Intellect is intrinsically controversial. Only idiots are not controversial.
And secondly, he says I would have had many admirers. He says that with great love, but the misunderstanding is there – with all the good intentions and love and respect. The intellectual likes admirers; the mystic does not care at all. The intellectual, the artist, the showman, the politician all exist on the admiration of people. Their whole life is how to get more and more admiration. That is their nourishment. That’s how they go on inflating their egos.
The mystic has no concern at all about admiration. He is so fulfilled, so contented, that there is no need for any other nourishment. His nourishment showers over him from the beyond. He has found the very life source: he does not live upon the opinions of others. He can stand alone against the whole world.
And that’s what I have been doing all my life: standing all alone – the majority of one against the whole world. And the reason why I can manage to be against the whole world is because I have found my own life source. I don’t depend on anyone. I don’t need any admiration, any compliments, any rewards, any Nobel Prizes. I am enough unto myself.
I am not an intellectual, I am not a giant. I am a simple person who is utterly lost into the beauty of this glorious existence. I have disappeared into the whole. I don’t exist separately.
If the outsiders think like this – and M. V. Kamath is an outsider and perhaps deep down afraid of coming closer to me because he ends his review by saying, “Osho needs to be read. You don’t have to listen to him and you don’t have to see him. You have just to read him. He is the master of words. He brings magic to ordinary words.”
Now, he does not know that I am not a master of words, I am not a poet, I am not a creative artist. I use words just out of sheer necessity, always feeling guilty because no word is big enough to convey what I want to say. Every moment I utter a word I am committing a certain crime against truth because no word is capable of bringing truth to you. But it is perfectly okay for an outsider.
It is not okay for you. You know that if my words have a certain beauty, it is not of the words. It comes from my silence, it comes from my wordless innermost fragrances. Because these words are coming from my heart, they carry some beats of my heart with them. But you know me: you have heard me, and you have seen me, and you have felt me. And you are perfectly aware that if the written word impresses a man like M. V. Kamath and he thinks that is enough, more than enough, he is unnecessarily clinging to a limitation.
I speak words only to provoke you to come to me. If you become satisfied with my words, that is a calamity. Those words were only provocations, invitations, calling you forth: “Don’t be afraid, come a little bit closer” – because the spoken word is alive, the written word is dead. The written word may be beautiful but it is a corpse. The spoken word is still warm, is still carrying the silences of the heart. And to say that there is no need to see me is just showing your blindness.
My words say something. My silences say more. My presence says all.
If you can be in tune with my presence, if my heartbeats can become your heartbeats, only then will you understand my words and the transcendental meaning that surrounds them but becomes visible only to those who drink from my well. Otherwise, to the outsider, it remains invisible.
You have to become an insider. You have to taste the presence of a master, of a mystic. Only then will you know that man is not just what you see in the world; man contains worlds beyond worlds, skies beyond skies.
A mystic is a window into the ultimate, a finger pointing to the moon.
I am not an intellectual, but the fallacy is created because I am compelled to use intellect and words to convey that which is not intellectual, which is not logic: that which is pure love. Out of sheer necessity I have to speak, but my speaking is not that of an orator. I am not a master of words: my speaking is just a simple conversation. At the most, I am only a storyteller, a man who loves to touch your hearts by different devices. Words are only one of my devices.
You are also saying, “there is no competition.” In the world, everywhere, there is competition. Only in the inner, in the subjective, there is no competition – ever. Between two Gautam Buddhas there is no competition.
It happened… I have told you many times; I love it so much. I rejoice in telling it.

It happened that two great mystics, Kabir and Farid, had a meeting. The meeting continued for two days. The disciples of both were immensely excited in the beginning, thinking that something great is going to be communicated by Kabir to Farid or by Farid to Kabir.
But as time passed, their excitement turned into great frustration because neither Kabir nor Farid spoke. Both remained absolutely silent. Sitting side by side, holding each other’s hand in deep love, once in a while smiling, giggling. And those smiles and those giggles irritated the disciples even more, but they never uttered a single word. And the day of departure came soon…
Farid had had to go; he was on a pilgrimage and just because Kabir’s village was nearby, his disciples had told him, “It will be a great occasion if we stay at least for one or two days with Kabir.” And Kabir’s disciples had also asked him: “It will not look right if we don’t invite Farid, who is passing by the side of the village.”
Farid had agreed, and Kabir himself came to receive Farid outside the village. They hugged each other, and two days passed in utter silence. Those two days appeared to the disciples like two centuries. After two days they hugged each other again, had a good belly laugh, and departed.
As they parted, the disciples of both masters, who had been keeping themselves controlled with great difficulty because of the presence of the other master and his disciples… When they were left alone, the disciples of Kabir were very angry – and it was the same situation with the disciples of the other master. They said, “You have been talking to us every day and …what happened to you? You simply became as if you didn’t know how to speak!”
Kabir said, “You don’t understand. We are both in the same space: two bodies, one soul. Who is going to speak to whom? And what is there to speak? He knows it, I know it.”
And the reply of Farid to his disciples was the same: “Don’t be stupid! That fellow is exactly where I am. You are not perceptive enough, otherwise you could have seen. Our bodies were separate, but our beings were merging and melting into each other. There was no need to say anything. Everything was understood without being said.”

In the world of the mystics there is no competition ever. Even if all the mystics of all the ages gathered together, there would not be any competition. There would be great rejoicing, dancing, singing, but there would not be any addresses, any lectures, any discourses. And there would be no question of competition.
Competition is a word belonging to the ego, and the mystic comes into existence when the ego disappears. There is no question of any hierarchy – who is higher, who is lower, who is greater. All these childish categories are left far behind.
And finally you say, “I also feel a sense of urgency.” That’s beautiful. Every one of you should feel the sense of urgency because you are blessed with the presence of a master. You are blessed to be in tune with a mystic. In me you have seen Gautam Buddha, Jesus Christ, Zarathustra, Kabir, Farid. They are all one with me.
You should feel the urgency because the whole world needs what I am saying to you, and needs it urgently.
And don’t think that only I can spread the message. I can ignite you, I can make you aflame. Then go and shout from the rooftops and spread the fire around the world. If you are touched by me, if you are thrilled and your heart has started dancing, then go with deep compassion for anyone who is ready to share your joy.
Share it, spread it. Humanity needs it more than ever.

Osho,
Why do I always have to cry when I am touched by love?
You are fortunate. If love cannot bring tears to your eyes, then that love is dead.
It is a great misfortune that tears have become associated with sadness, with sorrow. That is only one dimension of their being. But their more significant manifestation is in love, in gratitude, in prayerfulness, in silence, in peace. When you are feeling so full, tears are just the overflow of your contentment, of your joy.
Tears have to be given a new meaning, a new poetry and a totally new dimension – which they have lost because humanity has lived in misery, and tears have become part of that misery.
Secondly, because humanity has been dominated by man, he has made it a point of his ego and pride that he will not cry: “It is feminine to cry, it is womanish to have tears.” This is not true. It is an ugly, male chauvinist idea. Not only ugly, but unnatural and untrue because a man’s eyes have as many tear glands as a woman’s eyes have. Nature has not made any difference in tear glands.
It is obvious that the intention of nature is not to discriminate between man and woman, but for centuries man has been very egoistic and he feels that tears are a kind of weakness. He has stopped his tears, but he is not aware what the consequence of this has been: he has also stopped his love. And he has also created situations for himself that are dangerous.
More men go mad than women for the simple reason that man goes on controlling. A moment comes when the repression becomes too much and there is a breakdown. The woman does not control. When she feels like crying, she cries. She is more natural than man. That has given her a few more experiences which man has missed. The woman is healthier, she lives longer – five years more than man. She is more calm and quiet. Fewer women go crazy, fewer women commit suicide – although they talk about it! Sometimes they even try it, but very half-heartedly.
But man goes on collecting, and a point comes where he is no longer in control. Either he commits suicide or he commits murder or he goes mad.

Just sitting here is one of my attorneys from America, Swami Prem Niren. He came into deeper and deeper contact with me when I was in American jails for those twelve days. He followed me from jail to jail and he was the only person who was seeing me during all those days, almost every day. His eyes were always full of tears and I could see how much he loves me and how helpless he felt. He was doing everything that it was possible to do.
All the other attorneys were paid. Naturally they were simply doing their job. He was the only attorney who was not a servant, who was a lover; who was not being paid. He was one of my sannyasins; my life was at risk, and it was natural for him to fight with totality and intensity. The last day, when I was released from the jail, we were sitting in the hotel. We had our own hotel, our own disco, and our own restaurant in Portland, Oregon, America.
In our own hotel, he was sitting by my side with another of my sannyasins, Isabel, and he was crying like a child. And just the other day he was sitting on this side of me and then I again saw tears. Two years ago I had left him in America with tears, and yesterday I found him again with tears.
But perhaps he is not even aware of his tears. When he came here just a few days ago, he talked to one of my secretaries, Anando: “Why does Osho go on saying this, that ‘my attorneys had tears in their eyes’?”
When I heard this, I could not believe it – just yesterday he was sitting here with tears. Perhaps thousands of years of conditioning have blocked his awareness of his own tears, of his own love, of his own feminineness. A better world, a better humanity, and more people will enjoy tears. They are such a blessing.

You are asking, “Why do I always have to cry when I am touched by love?” What do you want? What more do you want? Certainly you are thinking that those tears are something wrong. Is crying when touched by love something wrong? You are carrying a wrong conditioning. It is absolutely right. When touched by love, what can you do? Words won’t help; only tears can convey what is happening deep down in your heart. Tears are the most valuable treasure that you have.
But man has been distorted in every way. Man’s nature has been pruned according to the ideas of the vested interests. Nations need armies and they do not want man to be at all touched by love. Their tears have to be dried up and their love has to be blocked, otherwise they will not be able to kill and murder and massacre people – people who are just like you, and people who have not done anything wrong to you, and people whose wives, whose children, whose old parents may be waiting for them just as your parents, your wife, your children are waiting for you.
But to create the soldier, man has to be destroyed completely. He has to be made into a robot – and robots don’t cry, robots are not touched by love. Because armies were needed, man was distorted. Because women were not needed in the armies, they were left to the side. It was good for women because they have remained more natural.
Never be ashamed of your tears. Be proud that you are still natural. Be proud that you can express the inexpressible through your tears. Those tears are your songs, unuttered. Those tears are your heart, which cannot use words.
Never feel ashamed of your tears. Eyes that have lost their tears have lost their most beautiful, their most glorious treasure.
I would like my people in particular to be absolutely natural, to be utterly innocent, uninhibited. And when tears are flowing, rejoice! You are still alive! Because don’t you know dead people cannot cry, dead people cannot have tears? And the people, who think they are alive and cannot cry and cannot have tears, are living in a fallacy. They have died long ago. The day their tears died, they also died, because their love died.
Except love you don’t have any soul.

============================================================

Osho,
Why am I not curious about anything anymore?
Devageet, seven hundred and fifty years ago there was a mystery school exactly like this. The mystery school belonged to one of the greatest Sufis, Mevlana Jalaluddin Rumi. The Turkish word mevlana means “beloved master.” It has never been used for anyone else.
In front of his mystery school was written in bold letters: “This place is not for those who are only curious.”
Curiosity has no spiritual meaning. Curiosity is something like itching in your mind: if you itch it goes, if you don’t itch it also goes. Curiosity has no passion in it; it is very superficial – just by the way. An inquiry, a question arises in you, but it is not your quest, you are not going to dedicate your life to searching for the answer for it. You are not even going to commit yourself to the exploration.
Curiosity is cheap. If somebody answers, good. If nobody answers, that too is okay. You are not deeply interested. It is not arising out of your heart. Curiosity has to disappear before you can attain a passionate inquiry into existence.
So, Devageet, it is not a bad sign, but a tremendously important indication that you are on the right path. The path does not belong to the curious ones. It belongs to those who are committed, dedicated; who are ready even to sacrifice their lives for the experience of truth. As the curiosity disappears you are no longer a student; you become a disciple.
That’s the only difference between the student and a disciple. The student is only curious, gathering knowledge from all the sources without much concern. It is not his essential search – just gathering knowledge to cover up his ignorance. But the ignorance remains there, and the more it is covered, the more dangerous because you start forgetting it. And a man who has forgotten his ignorance is a man utterly lost.
To go on remembering that you are ignorant is to go on remembering that the night is not over and your morning has not yet come: that you still have a long way to go before the darkness disappears and you see the first signs on the horizon of the sun rising with all its colors and all its beauty and all its blessings.
The curious person is not at all accountable for anything deep. The moment you become passionately interested to know, it becomes a question of life and death. Without knowing, your life seems to be just a desert without any oasis anywhere. You have to know; only then will your life have some significance, some meaning, some relevance, some reason why you should go on existing.
But the disciple is only a beginning, not the end: the right beginning. A moment comes when your passionate longing to know turns into still deeper waters. It becomes a longing not just to know, but to be. Knowledge is always something there. There is a distance between you and the known. You are not one with it; the knower is separate from the known. That is the state of knowledge. It cannot quench your thirst. The water is there, you are there, but there is no connecting link.
Your thirst will become even more fiery. That great moment also comes in the life of the disciple when he drops the quest for knowing and starts the quest for being. The curious person is only interested in information. The disciple is interested in knowledge. The devotee is interested in transformation. He is not content to know the truth. He will be contented only when he becomes the truth. And in fact it is just poverty of language that I have to use the word becoming. No one ever becomes the truth because everyone is already the truth.
Truth is your very being, not your becoming. It is not a process, it is not a path that has to be traveled, it is not some faraway goal that you have to reach. It is something in your innermost being that has always been there from eternity to eternity. Whether you know it or not, whether you realize it or not, whether you recognize it or not – it does not matter. It is there.
The devotee does not become the truth; he discovers that he is the truth. And this discovery is the greatest discovery possible for human consciousness. So it is perfectly good that you are not curious about anything anymore. It is a sign of maturity, of moving from the state of the student to the disciple. And as I know you, Devageet, you have already moved even from the state of the disciple to the ultimate glory of being a devotee. Your quest, your inquiry is no longer a dry exploration. It has become your love, it has become your very heartbeat. Naturally, all curiosity will disappear.
One day you will realize that even to know about truth, to know about godliness, to know about beauty… You are no longer interested in knowing. Because knowing about water is not going to help, even knowing scientifically that it consists of oxygen and hydrogen is not going to quench your thirst.
The most glorious moment on the path comes when your whole interest and passion become concentrated on a single point: of discovering yourself; of discovering that you have always been, that you are – even in this moment – and irrespective of whether you understand or not, you will always remain your authentic, your essential, your existential being. It contains all: satyam shivam sundaram – the truth, the godliness and the tremendous beauty that arises from the recognition of your being truth, of your being part of a divine existence.
Your every gesture becomes a dance, your every silence becomes a song, your words become aflame with a new fire, with a new light. Your whole life becomes a source of a magnetic force.

Just a few days ago, a child was born in France. The mother had been working in an atomic plant. While she was pregnant, for nine months she was exposed to atomic radiation and the doctors and the surgeons were very interested to know how it would affect the child. And they were surprised. The child was very healthy, very radiantly healthy. They were thinking he might be blind, they were thinking he might be crippled. Those people had never seen such a beautiful child – so alive and so vibrant.
But then there was another shock and surprise: as they put the child on the table all the surgeons and the doctors’ instruments started moving toward the child. The child had become a magnetic force.
Exposure to continuous radiation in very minute doses has been found by Japanese scientists to be very health-giving. Bigger doses can kill. As the quantity becomes bigger it becomes dangerous. A qualitative change comes in through greater quantity. At the very minimum, soft doses of radiation can create immense health and well-being.
One scientist in Japan has been working for twenty years in Hiroshima and Nagasaki on this particular project: Is there any possibility of a certain quantity of radiation being life-affirmative? And when he came back after twenty years to the university he belongs to, his colleagues could not believe it. They had all aged twenty years and that man seemed to have become younger than when he had gone. He is sixty-five but he looks forty-five. He had discovered a tremendous thing.
He loves me immensely, and he has sent me a few small things. You cannot think that they cost twenty thousand dollars, just a small bottle of radioactive material. He has been using it for one year. He just puts it in his bathtub and the water becomes radioactive, but in a very soft and minimum dose. He has sent me a belt that he has been using for one year. It is filled with radioactive material from Hiroshima, and that belt, he feels, has taken away his old age, has taken away his diseases.
He was immensely concerned about my health. He is going to come. I have not used those things that he has sent because what is a soft dose to one person may be too much to another, and I have a very delicate physical structure. So I am waiting for him first to see the difference between me and himself, and then to decide.

As you move from the disciple to the state of the devotee, suddenly you start radiating something that has been dormant in you for centuries. You become a magnet – not an ordinary magnet, but a spiritual magnet. People will start moving toward you, not knowing why, but a tremendous desire to be with you and a great feeling of well-being and a great turning inward.
I started my journey alone, and without informing anybody I have found that my caravan is becoming bigger and bigger and bigger. People have come from faraway lands around the world – wondering why they are going, not knowing the inner pull.
Devageet has a heart of a small child, utterly innocent. His transformation from disciplehood to the glorious space of being a devotee has come to him very naturally, very spontaneously, without any effort on his part. Just being in my presence, just being with me, he has moved millions of light-years.
It is natural, Devageet, that your curiosities will disappear. Soon you will find another thing disappearing: your longing for knowledge. These are good indications of coming back home. Perhaps just one step more and you will have forgotten curiosities, questions, quest for knowledge – and you will simply relax in the new light that you have found within yourself: perfectly at ease, cool and calm, not a single worry in the world, at ease with the trees and the birds and the ocean and the stars.
You love to laugh, you have a great sense of humor – and according to me all the religions in the past have missed the great religious quality of the sense of humor. The reason was that they were all against life. They could not be for laughter: they were all against love – how could they be in favor of laughter? They were life-denying not life-affirming ideologies.
Hence you don’t see a single instance in the life of Jesus when he would have laughed. Even before he was crucified he lived as though he was continuously being crucified. The crucifixion of Jesus seems to be the ultimate outcome: “This guy will never be satisfied unless he is crucified.”

“Why were you kissing my young daughter in that dark corner last night?” said the angry father.
“Now that I’ve seen her in the daylight,” said Ernie, “I sort of wonder myself.”

In the darkness you have been curious and you have been many more things, but in the light you start sort of wondering, “What have I been doing?”

It was the couple’s twenty-fifth wedding anniversary and the wife said, “Darling, you have been a very good husband over the years and I would like to show you my appreciation. Is there anything that you would like on this special day?”
The husband thought for a while and then said, “Yes, actually there is. You have always forbidden me to look into the top drawer of your cupboard. I would really like to see what is in there.”
His wife agreed and he opened it. Inside there were two eggs and about ten thousand dollars in cash. “What are the eggs for?” he inquired.
“Well,” said his wife, “I guess it’s time you should know. Every time I was unfaithful to you, I put an egg in the drawer.”
“Twice in twenty-five years,” smiled the husband, “that’s understandable. But what is all that money?”
“Well, darling,” she replied, “Each time I had a dozen eggs, I sold them.”

Devageet, it is very good not to be curious about unnecessary things, because one never knows…

Osho,
I really enjoy meditation and am absolutely contented with my life. But now it has been so long since I had any great passion or great joy or great pain that I am wondering if I have become dull and stuck, or if this is the way things are supposed to be.
It is part of this great pilgrimage. The moment you become contented, in the beginning it feels like the journey is over and you are tremendously blissful. But as time passes, contentment settles down. You are peaceful, you are happy, you are at ease, but an old habit of millions of lives starts raising its head: there seems to be no excitement. Have you become dull or have you died? This is just an old habit and it has to be understood.
Excitement is for those who are miserable. Without excitement they cannot live; their misery will be too heavy. A little excitement in their lives, a new love affair, getting a lottery opened in their name – these small things keep them going. These excitements function like lubricants and they go on in their miserable lives hoping another excitement may be coming. And what are your excitements? Moving into a new house and you are excited? Purchasing a new car and you are excited?

I have heard about a man who was tired of his beautiful house. Finally, everything becomes tiring, boring. The house was beautiful and just behind the house was a beautiful lake and beyond the lake the mountains and the forest – but the same scene every day, morning, afternoon, evening. There was no excitement.
He called a real estate agent and told him that he wanted to sell this boring house. The real estate man was completely puzzled. He had never in his life seen such a beautiful house with such peaceful surroundings. It was almost paradise. So he said, “I will advertise it and it will be sold, there is no problem.” And he advertised it in the newspapers.
The next day the man read the advertisement and he was so excited: a beautiful marble house surrounded by a lake – and just beyond the lake a primeval forest, thick, with trees so high as if they are trying to touch the stars. The description was so poetic, and of course there was no mention of his name or his address, only the phone number of the real estate man.
He immediately phoned and said, “Whatever the price, I want to purchase this house.”
The real estate man said, “This is too difficult a problem. This is your house!”
He said, “My God, you have written such a poetic piece about it. I had completely forgotten the lake; I had started taking it for granted. The forest, the mountains… Yes, I remember now; when I entered this house for the first time there was so much excitement.”

But excitement is a momentary thing. You cannot remain excited forever; otherwise your blood pressure will rise so high you will simply pop off! Excitement always means going up to a certain point and then going down. It is always up and down. Falling back into misery, searching again for some excitement; this is the ordinary run of life.
But when you attain contentment through meditation – when you come to a peaceful inner space where nothing moves, where time stops – in the beginning it is a tremendous ecstasy, not only excitement. But soon you will become accustomed to it, and that’s what is happening to you. You have neither become dull, nor are you stuck. It is just natural. It is the way things are supposed to be.
You have to learn a new art of seeing your contentment, your peace, your silence, your happiness – not as something that you had yesterday too. You have to learn to forget the past completely. To be more exact, you have to die to the past so that every day your peace and your contentment are fresh, ecstatic, as if you have discovered them just now.
Die every moment to the past and be reborn again and again. Each moment has to be a death and a resurrection. Unless you learn the art of dying and resurrecting you will feel a little bored because it is the same, always the same, nothing changes.
You have lived your millions of lives in the past only through changes, hoping for some excitement. Arriving, you have to learn some new art. Some new dimension has to open into your being: how to live with the eternal. You have known only living with the changing, with the impermanent, with the ephemeral. Now learn the new art of living with the eternal, the unchanging, the absolutely still, unmoving – something beyond time and space.
Once you have learned this new art, you will find every day new flowers in your contentment, new stars in your silence, new showers of blissfulness and ecstasy. But you have to forget your yesterdays otherwise it will look like the same repetition.
I am not bored, and I have lived in utter contentment, in absolute peace. Nothing moves within my being. All is totally silent and still. But because I never think of yesterdays I am immensely ecstatic every moment. What is past is past; I have never looked back. It is the same contentment, the same peace, the same silence – but because I go on dropping the past it is always new for me.
Learn the art of keeping the eternal always fresh. Don’t allow any dust to gather on the mirror of the eternal.
A Zen story… In the world of Zen it is a beautiful tradition that masters send their disciples to other masters just to see the reality from some other angle. Even masters who have been contradicting each other their whole lives exchange disciples, so the disciple can see the truth from a totally different standpoint.
It happened…

One disciple was always getting into the same space as you. He was utterly content, there was no complaint, nothing was missing. But this eternal silence without any change was against the old, very deep-rooted habit of the search for excitement. Now there was no excitement possible.
The master called him – he had not been calling him for many days – and then slapped him. The disciple could not believe it. He had not said anything. He had not done anything. He asked, “Why have you hit me?”
The master said, “You needed a little change. And moreover you have to go to the opposing monastery of my eternal enemy. Now you have to live with that master!”
The disciple said, “But you have always been contradicting him. You have never agreed on any point with that man, neither has he ever agreed with you. Why are you sending me to him?”
The master said, “Never ask the master why. He knows, and there is no need for you to know it. Simply go and ask the other master to accept you as a disciple.”
His whole contentment, meditation, silence – everything was disturbed. Tidal waves of thought that he had completely forgotten – this was too much! For what was he being punished? He forgot all about boredom and all about life having no excitement any more. Now there was great excitement. But if the master says, “You have to go…”
He went to the other master very reluctantly, very unwillingly, almost in a state of split. He knew that this man was wrong: he had been listening to his master and he was so logical in his refutation of the other man.
But finally he knocked on the door of the monastery. The master himself came out and he said, “What is the matter? What do you want? You belong to my enemy.”
The disciple said, “I know. I never wanted to come here but your enemy, my master, has sent me to request that I should be accepted as your disciple.”
The master said, “This is very strange. And you followed whatever he said?”
The disciple said, “I had to. He has also hit me very hard – and he is a dangerous fellow! If I don’t follow, he will beat me every day: morning, afternoon, evening, in the middle of the night. He is not reliable. I thought it prudent to come to you.”
The master closed his door in his face and said, “Your master is very compassionate. Go back to him.”
This was even more puzzling. He said, “You have been contradicting my master, writing books against him, teaching your disciples not to listen to him – not even to talk to his disciples – and suddenly today you have changed your mind. You say, ‘Your master is very compassionate.’”
The old man laughed and he said, “Yes, he is very compassionate. He disturbed you out of compassion, to give you a sense of: ‘Don’t be stupid! You are settling. All the waves in your mind are disappearing, all the thoughts becoming silent.’ It is out of his compassion that he has disturbed you and he has sent you to me so that I can disturb you more. I am against him, I am against everything that he says, but I am sorry: I cannot accept you. You will have to go back. You have already arrived; just one step more!”
He went back to his master and said, “He has rejected me and the reason he gives is: ‘Your master is too compassionate. Go back to him.’”
The master said, “Start meditating again.”
And it was again excitement, and again a beginning into the unknown, but soon – because he was already a great adept – things settled; contentment, peace. But now there was no desire for excitement any more. It was stupid.

But it comes to everybody out of a deep-rooted inheritance of your past lives. It is so deep-rooted that it has gone into your blood, into your bones, into your marrow.
You are not becoming dull and you are not stuck. You yourself are saying, “I really enjoy meditation and am absolutely contented with my life, but now it has been so long since I had any great passion or great joy or great pain that I am wondering if I have become dull and stuck, or if this is the way things are supposed to be.” This is the way things are supposed to be.

Bernie had been out of town and was surprised when he got back to find his wife, Stella, in bed with a strange man. The stranger, naked and obviously well-satisfied, was sprawled on the bed.
“Why you son-of-a-bitch!” Bernie exploded.
“Wait, darling,” cried Stella. “You know that fur coat I got last winter? This man gave it to me. Remember the diamond necklace you like so much? This man gave it to me. And remember when you could not afford a second car and I got a Toyota? This man gave it to me.”
“For God’s sake, it’s drafty in here!” shouted Bernie. “Cover him so he doesn’t catch cold!”

Just be a little understanding. Everything is going perfectly beautifully.
Just a few jokes for you – not to disturb you, but just as a little holiday from your contentment. Just for a few moments to forget your meditation and contentment.

It was a late night again in the bar when the door opened and a voice called out, “MacTavish your house is on fire!”
One man rushed out and after running a hundred yards down the street, suddenly skidded to a halt. “Wait a minute!” he said to no one in particular. “My name is not MacTavish.”

The veteran preacher was instructing a class of new ministers on the importance of facial expressions harmonizing with their sermons.
“When you speak of heaven,” he said, “let your face light up, let it be bright with a heavenly gleam, let your eyes shine with reflected glory. But when you speak of hell – well, your ordinary face will do.”

A Frenchman, a Swiss and an Italian are on a flight to Italy in their little private plane. As the weather gets bad they get lost in the clouds. The Frenchman puts his hand out of the window and suddenly says, “I touched the Eiffel Tower. This must be France.”
After a while the Swiss man puts his hand out of the window and says, “We are home. This is Switzerland; I touched the mountains.”
Finally the Italian sticks his hand out of the window and says, “This must-a be Italy.”
“How do you know?” asked the others.
The Italian pulls his hand in and says, “They stole-a my watch-a.”

============================================================

Osho,
How can I love better?
Love is enough unto itself; it needs no betterment. It is perfect as it is; it is not in any way to be more perfect. The very desire shows a misunderstanding about love and its nature. Can you have a perfect circle? All circles are perfect; if they are not perfect, they are not circles.
Perfection is intrinsic to a circle and the same is the law about love. You cannot love less, and you cannot love more because it is not a quantity; it is a quality that is immeasurable.
Your very question shows that you have never tasted what love is, and you are trying to hide your lovelessness in a desire of: “how to love better.” No one who knows love can ask this question. Love has to be understood not as a biological infatuation. That is lust. That exists in all the animals: there is nothing special about it. It exists even in trees. It is nature’s way of reproduction. There is nothing spiritual in it, and nothing especially human.
So the first thing is to make a clear-cut distinction between lust and love. Lust is a blind passion; love is the fragrance of a silent, peaceful, meditative heart. Love has nothing to do with biology or chemistry or hormones. Love is the flight of your consciousness to higher realms – beyond matter and beyond body. The moment you understand love as something transcendental then love is no longer a fundamental question.
The fundamental question is: how to transcend the body, how to know something within you which is beyond – beyond all that is measurable. That is the meaning of the word matter. It comes from a Sanskrit root, matra, which means measurement. It means that which can be measured. The French word metre comes from the same root.
The fundamental question is: how to get away from the measurable and how to enter into the immeasurable – in other words, how to go beyond matter and open your eyes toward more consciousness. And there is no limit to consciousness. The more you become conscious, the more you realize how much more is possible ahead. As you reach one peak, another peak arises in front of you. It is an eternal pilgrimage.
Love is a by-product of a rising consciousness. It is just like the fragrance of a flower. Don’t search for it in the roots; it is not there. Your biology is your roots, your consciousness is your flowering.
As you become more and more an open lotus of consciousness, you will be surprised, taken aback, with a tremendous experience that can only be called love. You are so full of joy, so full of bliss; each fiber of your being is dancing with ecstasy. You are just like a rain cloud that wants to rain and shower. The moment you are overflowing with bliss, a tremendous longing arises in you to share it. That sharing is love.
Love is not something that you can have from someone who has not attained blissfulness. And this is the misery of the whole world: everybody is asking to be loved and pretending to love. You cannot love because you don’t know what consciousness is. You don’t know the satyam, the shivam, the sundaram.
You don’t know truth, you don’t know the experience of the divine, and you don’t know the fragrance of beauty. What have you got to give? You are so empty, you are so hollow; nothing grows in your being, nothing is green. There are no flowers within you, your spring has not yet come.
Love is a by-product. When the spring comes and you suddenly start flowering, blossoming, and you release your potential fragrance – sharing that fragrance, sharing that grace, sharing that beautitude is love. And there is no question of making it better. It is already perfect; it is always perfect. If it is, it is perfect. If it is not perfect, it is not there. Perfection and love cannot be separated.
If you had asked me, “What is love?” it would have been more truthful, honest, sincere, authentic. But you are asking me, “How can I love better?” You have already accepted as a fact that you know what love is – not only that, your question implies that you already love. Now the question is how to better it.
I don’t want to hurt you, but I am helpless. I have to say the truth to you: you don’t know what love is. You can’t know because you have not yet gone deeper in your consciousness. You have not experienced yourself. You know nothing of who you are. In this blindness, in this ignorance, in this unconsciousness, love does not grow. This is a desert in which you are living. In this darkness, in this desert, there is no possibility of love blossoming.
First you have to be full of light and full of delight – so full that you start overflowing. That overflowing energy is love. Then love is known as the greatest perfection in the world. It is never less and never more. But our very upbringing is so neurotic, so psychologically sick that it destroys all possibilities of inner growth. You are being taught from the very beginning to be a perfectionist, and then naturally you go on applying your perfectionist ideas to everything – even to love.
Just the other day I came across a statement: A perfectionist is a person who takes great pains, and gives even greater pains to others. And the outcome is just a miserable world.
Everybody is trying to be perfect. And the moment somebody starts trying to be perfect, he starts expecting everybody else to be perfect. He becomes a condemner. He starts humiliating people. That’s what all your so-called saints have been doing down the ages. That’s what your religions have done to you – poisoned your being with an idea of perfection.
Because you cannot be perfect, you start feeling guilty, you lose respect for yourself. And the man who has lost respect for himself has lost all the dignity of being human. Your pride has been crushed, your humanity has been destroyed by beautiful words like perfection.
Man cannot be perfect. Yes, there is something that man can experience but which is beyond the ordinary conception of man. Unless man also experiences something of the divine, he cannot know perfection.
Perfection is not something like a discipline, it is not something that you can practice, it is not something for which you have to go through rehearsals – but that is what is being taught to everybody. And the result is a world full of hypocrites, who know perfectly well that they are hollow and empty, but go on pretending all kinds of qualities which are nothing but empty words.
When you say to someone, “I love you,” have you ever thought what you mean? Is it just biological infatuation between the two sexes? Then once you have satisfied your animal appetite, all so-called love will disappear. It was just a hunger and you have fulfilled your hunger and you are finished. The same woman who was looking the most beautiful in the world, the same man who was looking like Alexander the Great – you start thinking how to get rid of this fellow!
It will be very enlightening for you, to understand this letter written by Paddy to his beloved Maureen.

My darling Maureen,
I met you last night but you did not show up. Next time I will meet you again whether you show up or not. If I am there first, I will write my name on the gatepost to let you know. And if it is you that is first, rub out my name and nobody will be any the wiser.
Darling Maureen, I would climb the highest mountain for your sake, and swim the wildest sea. I would endure any hardships to spend a moment by your side.
Your ever-loving,
Paddy.
PS I’ll be over to see you on Friday night if it is not raining.

The moment you say to someone “I love you,” you don’t know what you are saying. You don’t know that it is just lust hiding behind a beautiful word, love. It will disappear. It is very momentary.
Love is something eternal. It is the experience of the buddhas, not the unconscious people of whom the whole world is full. Only very few people have known what love is – and these same people are the most awakened, the most enlightened, the highest peaks of human consciousness.
If you really want to know love, forget about love, remember about meditation. If you want to bring roses into your garden, forget about roses and take care of the rosebush. Give nourishment to it, water it, take care that it gets the right amount of sun, water. If everything is taken care of, the roses are destined to come in the right time. You cannot bring them earlier, you cannot force them to open up sooner, and you cannot ask a roseflower to be more perfect.
Have you ever seen a roseflower that is not perfect? What more do you want? Every roseflower is perfect in its uniqueness. Dancing in the wind, in the rain, in the sun – can’t you see the tremendous beauty, the absolute joy? A small ordinary roseflower radiates the hidden splendor of existence.
Love is a roseflower in your being, but prepare your being. Dispel the darkness and the unconsciousness. Become more and more alert and aware, and love will come of its own accord, in its own time. You need not worry about it. And whenever it comes it is always perfect.
Love is a spiritual experience – nothing to do with sexes and nothing to do with bodies, but something to do with the innermost being.
But you have not even entered into your own temple. You don’t know at all who you are and you are asking about love. First be thyself; first know thyself – and love will come as a reward. It is a reward from the beyond. It showers on you like flowers, fills your being. And it goes on showering on you, and it brings with it a tremendous longing to share. That sharing can only be indicated in human language as “love.” It does not say much, but it indicates the right direction. Love is a shadow of alertness, of consciousness.
I teach you to be more conscious. And love will come as you become more conscious: it is a guest that comes, that comes inevitably to those who are ready and prepared to receive it. You are not even ready to recognize it.
If love comes to your door, you will not recognize it. If love knocks on your doors, you may find a thousand and one excuses. You may perhaps think it is some strong wind, or some other excuse. You will not open the doors. And even if you open the doors you will not recognize love because you have never seen love before. How can you recognize it?
You can only recognize something that you know. When love comes for the first time and fills your being, you are absolutely overwhelmed and mystified. You don’t know what is happening. You know your heart is dancing, you know you are surrounded by celestial music, you know fragrances that you have never known before, but it takes a little time to put all these experiences together and to remember that perhaps this is what love is. Slowly, slowly it sinks into your being.
Love is not to be found in poetry. My own experience is that the people who write poetry about love are the people who do not know love. I am personally acquainted with great poets who have written beautiful poetry about love, and I know they have never experienced love. In fact their poems are just substitutes, consolations. By writing about love they are deceiving themselves and others that they know love.
Only mystics know love. Other than mystics there is no category of human beings who have ever experienced love. Love is absolutely the monopoly of the mystic. If you want to know love you will have to enter into the world of the mystic.
Jesus says, “God is love.” He has been part of a mystery school of the Essenes, an ancient school of mystics. But perhaps he did not graduate from the mystery school because what he is saying is just not right. God is not love; love is God. And the difference is tremendous; it is not just a change of words.
The moment you say God is love you are simply saying that love is only an attribute of God. He is also wisdom, he is also compassion, he is also forgiveness. He can be millions of things besides love. Love is only one of the attributes of God. And, in fact, even to make it a small attribute of God is very irrational and illogical. Because if God is love then he cannot be just; if God is love then he cannot be cruel enough to throw sinners into eternal hell, if God is love then God cannot be the law.
One great Sufi mystic, Omar Khayyam, shows more understanding than Jesus when he says, “I will go on just being myself. I am not going to take any notice of the priests and the preachers because I trust that God’s love is great enough. I cannot commit a sin that can be greater than his love. So why be worried? Our hands are small and our sins are small. Our reach is small – how can we commit sins that God’s love cannot forgive? If God is love then he cannot be present on the last judgment day to sort out the saints and throw the remaining millions and millions of people into hell for eternity.”
The teachings of the Essenes were just the opposite. Jesus quotes them wrongly. Perhaps he was not very deeply rooted in their teachings. Their teaching was “Love is God.” That is such a tremendous difference. Now God becomes only an attribute of love; now God becomes only a quality of the tremendous experience of love. Now God is no longer a person but only an experience of those who have known love. Now God becomes secondary to love. And I say unto you, the Essenes were right.
Love is the ultimate value, the final flowering. There is nothing beyond it; hence, you cannot perfect it. In fact, before you attain it you will have to disappear. When love will be there you will not be there.
A great Eastern mystic, Kabir, has a very significant statement – a statement that can be made only by one who has experienced, who has realized, who has entered into the inner sanctum of ultimate reality. The statement is: “I had been searching for truth, but it is strange to say that as long as the searcher was there, truth was not found. And when the truth was found, I looked all around – I was absent. When the truth was found, the seeker was no more; and when the seeker was, truth was nowhere.”
Truth and the seeker cannot exist together. You and love cannot exist together. There is no coexistence possible: either you or love. You can choose. If you are ready to disappear, melt and merge, leaving only a pure consciousness behind, love will blossom. You cannot perfect it because you will not be present. And it does not need perfection in the first place. It always comes as perfect.
But love is one of those words that everybody uses and nobody understands. Parents are telling their children, “We love you,” and they are the people who destroy their children, they are the people who give their children all kinds of prejudices, all kinds of dead superstitions. They are the people who burden their children with the whole load of rubbish that generations have been carrying. And each generation goes on transferring it to another generation. The madness goes on, becoming mountainous.
Yet all parents think they love their children. If they really loved their children, they would not like their children to be their images because they are just miserable and nothing else. What is their experience of life? – pure misery, suffering. Life has not been a blessing to them but a curse. And still they want their children to be just like themselves.

I was a guest in a family. I was sitting in their garden in the evening. The sun was setting and it was a beautiful, silent evening. The birds were returning back to the trees, and the small child of the family was sitting by my side. I just asked him, “Do you know who you are?”
And children are more clear, more perceptive than the grown-ups because the grown-ups are already spoiled, corrupted, polluted, with all kinds of ideologies, religions. That small child looked at me and he said, “You are asking me a very difficult question.”
I said, “What is the difficulty in it?”
He said, “The difficulty is that I am the only child of my parents, and as long as I can remember, whenever some guests come, somebody says my eyes look like my father’s, somebody says my nose looks like my mother’s, somebody says my face looks like my uncle’s. So I don’t know who I am because nobody says anything looks like me!”
I said, “This is really difficult.”

But this is what is being done to every child. You don’t leave the child alone to experience himself, and you don’t leave the child to become himself. You go on loading your own unfulfilled ambitions on the child.

My personal physician is Dr. Amrito. His father was also a well-known physician. His father has left a strange condition in his will: Amrito will be able to get his inheritance if he fulfills the condition – and the condition is that the day he is accepted by the Royal College of Physicians as a fellow of the society, he will be able to get the money from the bank. If he never becomes a fellow, if he is not accepted by the Royal College of Physicians – which is the most significant fellowship in the whole world as far as physicians are concerned.
When I came to know about it I could see the incomplete ambition of the poor father. He would have longed his whole life to become a fellow of this royal society. Now he is burdening his son with his ambition. He will be gone, but still he wants his ambition to be fulfilled. And if the son cannot fulfill the condition he will be left as a beggar on the streets, he will not be able to inherit his father’s lifelong savings. And he is the only son, the money will rot in the bank, but he cannot get it.
Fortunately he managed, and managed far better than the father would ever have dreamed of. He was accepted as a Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians – the youngest in their whole history. People are accepted when they become old, experienced, when they have written many books and papers and done many researches and contributed much. Amrito did everything very quickly. He was the youngest fellow of the Royal College.

Every parent wants his child to be in his image. But a child has a destiny of his own. If he becomes your image he will never become himself. And without becoming yourself you will never feel contentment, you will never feel at ease with existence. You will always be in a condition of missing something.
Your parents love you, and they also tell you that you have to love them because they are your fathers, they are your mothers. It is a strange phenomenon and nobody seems to be aware of it. Just because you are a mother does not mean that the child has to love you. You have to be lovable; your being a mother is not enough. You may be a father; that does not mean that you automatically become lovable. Just because you are a father does not create a tremendous feeling of love in the child.
But it is expected, and the poor child does not know what to do. He starts pretending, that’s the only possible way. He starts smiling when there is no smile in his heart; he starts showing love, respect, gratitude – and all are just false. He becomes an actor, a hypocrite from the very beginning, a politician. We are all living in this world where parents, teachers, priests – everybody has corrupted you, displaced you, has taken you away from yourself.
My effort here is to give your center back to you. I call this centering, meditation. I want you simply to be yourself, with a great self-respect, with a dignity that existence needed you. And then you can start searching for yourself. First come to the center, and then start searching for who you are.
Knowing one’s original face is the beginning of a life of love, of a life of celebration. You will be able to give so much love because it is not something that is exhaustible, because it is immeasurable it cannot be exhausted. The more you give it, the more you become capable of giving it.
And the greatest experience in life is when you simply give without any conditions, without any expectations of even a simple “thank-you.” On the contrary, a real, authentic love feels obliged to the person who has accepted his love. He could have rejected it.
When you start giving love with a deep sense of gratitude to all those who accept it, you will be surprised that you have become an emperor – no longer a beggar asking for love with a begging bowl, knocking on every door. And those people on whose doors you are knocking cannot give love to you. They are themselves beggars.
I have heard about two great astrologers. Every morning they used to meet on a certain crossroad. From there their paths separated; they practiced in different parts of the city. But it was almost a daily ritual: meeting on the crossroad before departing toward their sections of the city. They used to show their hands to each other, asking, “What is my destiny today?” And they were great astrologers! They were telling people their destinies and they did not know their own destinies for which they had to consult another astrologer who was consulting them! They each read the lines of the other and predicted.
Beggars are asking each other for love and feel frustrated, angry because the love is not coming. But this is bound to happen. Love belongs to the world of emperors, not of beggars. And a man is an emperor when he is so full of love that he can give it without any conditions.
Then comes an even greater surprise: that when you start giving your love to anybody, even to strangers – because the question is not to whom you are giving it; just the very joy of giving is so much that who cares who is on the receiving end? When this space comes into your being, that you go on giving to each and everybody; not only to human beings but to animals, to the trees, to the faraway stars because love is something that can be transferred even to the farthest star just by your loving look. Just by your touch, love can be transferred to a tree – without saying a single word. It can be conveyed in absolute silence.
And when I am saying it, I am not only saying it. I am a living example of whatever I am saying to you. Can’t you feel my love? – although I have never said it to you. It need not be said; it declares itself. It has its own ways of reaching into the very depths, into your being.
First be full of love, then the sharing happens. And then the great surprise, that as you give you start receiving from unknown sources, from unknown corners, from unknown people; from trees, from rivers, from mountains. Love starts showering on you from all the nooks and corners of existence. The more you give, the more you get. Life becomes a sheer dance of love.
To me, this is the state of enlightenment: pure love. And except pure love, there is no God.

Osho,
Could you tell me if you are crucifying me or burning me?
Jayesh, just now I have been talking about love. Your question opens another dimension of love.
There is a cross on which a man like Jesus was crucified. It is of destruction and death; hate, violence and anger. It does not create anything; it only destroys. It is ugly.
But there is also another cross, the cross of love. It destroys in you all that is false, and it resurrects in you all that is authentic, all that is true. It kills you on one hand, and it revives you on the other hand. It kills only that which you are not, but what you have been identifying yourself with. It destroys your false identity, your personality, your hypocrisy.
And as your falseness is destroyed, your truth shines forth, radiates with tremendous beauty. The ancient seers of the East have called the master a death and a resurrection. The disciple goes through the being of the master. All that is false will be burned, and all that is true will come out in its immense glory and splendor, freed from all chains and bondages, in absolute beauty, freedom, grace and eternal joy.
Jayesh, I am certainly crucifying you – but this is the “you” that you are not. Every creator has to destroy to create. Just see a master sculptor…

I am reminded of a very beautiful story about Michelangelo. He was passing through the market where marble rocks were sold, and in front of the greatest shop he saw a huge marble rock lying on the other side of the road. He asked the shopkeeper, “How much will it cost for me to take that rock?”
The shopkeeper said, “It has been lying there for almost a decade. Nobody seems to have any interest in it. You are the first man in these ten years who has even inquired about it. I will give it to you for free. Just take it away; it is unnecessarily taking up my space. It is so ugly and so strange that I don’t think you can make anything out of it.”
The sculptor took it, and after three years he came back to the shop and invited the owner to see something that he had made. He had made a beautiful statue of Jesus with his mother, when Jesus was brought down from the cross. He is lying almost dead, bleeding, unconscious, in the lap of his mother.
Just a few years ago the statue was destroyed by a madman. It was thought to be one of the greatest pieces of art – and the madman destroyed it and said in the court, “I have destroyed it deliberately to become world famous.” He became world famous. His picture was all over in all the magazines and papers; his name suddenly became known throughout the world.
But this beautiful statue – I have seen a picture of it. Jesus looks so beautiful, and his mother with tears in her eyes – the statue looks so alive that it seems Jesus is going to stand up. It is one of the most mysterious creations of man.
The owner of the shop could not believe it when the sculptor said, “It is from the same rock that you gave me for free.”
The shopkeeper asked him, “But how could you even dream that that ugly rock could be transformed into such a beautiful piece?”
The sculptor said, “I did not dream about it. In fact, as I was passing by the side of the rock, Jesus called, ‘I am encaged in this rock. Help me to be freed.’ And all that I have done is not to create Jesus and Mary; I have simply taken away the unnecessary parts of the rock. My work has been only that of eliminating the false, the unnecessary, and what has remained is God’s grace.”

The function of the master is the same – to take away all that is false in you. And the real, the true and the authentic will be revealed the moment the false is taken away. The master never gives you anything. He only takes away the false, and the truth is already there. Just the unnecessary has to be eliminated.
Yes, Jayesh, I am crucifying you so that you can have a resurrection. But my cross is that of love; it is not to kill you. In fact you are dead as you are. It is to give you a taste of eternal life. It is to revive you, it is to call you from your grave to come out. Yes, in the beginning it looks like crucifixion, but it is really part of the process of resurrection.
Your question is significant. And you are also asking me, “Could you tell me if you are crucifying me or burning me?” As far as burning is concerned…

Just the other day, a woman came from England. Her sister was a sannyasin. Almost ten years ago, in an accident – and it was her own fault – she burned herself. We tried everything that was possible here and when we saw that perhaps she would not be able to recover in India – all her skin had been burned – I sent one of our doctors to take the girl back to England where better and more up-to-date facilities are available.
He took her to England. We arranged all the expenses for her traveling, for her medical care in England, but she could not be cured. She died. And after ten years this woman comes very angrily, saying, “We cannot ever forget it. My mother is still angry and I am angry that you killed my sister.”
Amrito said, “This is strange. It was her own fault she got burned. We managed every expense here, and seeing that perhaps she needs better facilities, more up-to-date technology, we took her to England. We made every arrangement. Accidents can happen anywhere.”

When I heard this I said, “These people seem to be absolutely stupid. They don’t know anything about India.” Here, everybody finally gets burned! There is of course one alternative. You can get burned and then you can die, or you can die first and then you can be burned. The choice is yours. Most people choose the second, it is just a question of liking, but everybody here in this country has to be burned finally.
So if you are asking about burning, it will happen – but not right now, Jayesh. There is much more for you to do. And as far as you are concerned, burning is not your problem. It is the problem of other sannyasins. You will be dead – unless you choose the other alternative.
You are too young yet to think about such things. I will give you a few maxims to think over instead:

“The saints are the sinners who keep on trying” – meditate over it.
“Take a risk. Even a turtle gets nowhere until he sticks his neck out.”
“A man does not need twenty-twenty eyesight to appreciate a thirty-six, twenty-four, thirty-six vision.”
“Nothing wrong ever happens at the right time.”
“Save your money.” It is particularly significant for Jayesh because he is my treasurer. “Save your money. You never know when your friends will need it.”
Jayesh is a busy man, extremely busy, hence a special maxim for him: “A busy man is usually a happy man, unless he is busy scratching.”
“Never judge a woman’s feet by the shape of her shoes.”
“Success is when you have your name in everything except the phone book.”
“Salesmanship is the difference between rape and rapture.”
“Whiskey may not cure a cold, but no remedy fails with such satisfaction.”
“Not all philosophers are married men, but all married men become philosophers.”

Jayesh, this is not the time for you to be burned, this is the time to have a good time.

The priest, traveling on a first class sleeper train, had a double compartment all to himself. Having just finished his dinner in the dining car, he returned to his compartment, but was shocked to find two scantily-dressed, sexy-looking girls inside.
He immediately cried out, “You girls are in the wrong compartment. I’m a respectable man, the pillar of my community, and there has never, ever been the smallest whiff of scandal about me in my whole life. So,” the priest continued, pulling himself up to his full height, “one of you girls will have to go!”

Jayesh, when the burning will come, it will come. We will celebrate it – it is a promise. Meanwhile, enjoy life as much as you can. It is none of your business to worry about things that are going to happen after your death.
Life is so precious. Not a single moment has to be wasted in thinking what will happen after death. Here in India, it is certain that burning will happen. So you can be absolutely unworried and unconcerned. You will not be the one who will have to take care of the burning, and you will not be the one who will be burned on the funeral pyre. You will be a witness standing in the crowd of the celebrant sannyasins. The only difference will be that you will not be visible anymore.
But that is not a misfortune. Just think of the great adventures when you become invisible!

============================================================

Osho,
Why is it so difficult to be in a state of let-go?
The world needs workaholics. It needs people to be slaves, to be proletarians, to be laborers and function just like machines; hence all the so-called moralists and puritans have been teaching people that work has some intrinsic value. It has none.
It has some value, but of the lowest kind: it is a need. Because people have stomachs, they need bread and butter, and they need clothes and a roof over their heads. This natural need has been exploited to the extreme. People are forced to work, but whatever they produce does not come to them. It goes to the people who don’t work.
The society has been forever an exploitative society. It has been divided into the “haves” and the “have-nots.” The “have-nots” have to work just to survive, and the “haves” go on accumulating mountains of money. It is a very ugly situation – inhuman, primitive, insane. The people who work are poor, hungry, starving. They don’t have time for literature, for music, for paintings. They can’t even conceive that there are worlds of tremendous beauty, of art; they cannot even imagine that there is something like meditation. It is enough for them to get one meal a day.
Just the other day I was informed that Ethiopia is ready for another famine. Just a year ago millions of people died in Ethiopia and the whole world watched. It not only watched: America destroyed billions of dollars worth of foodstuff in the ocean – but it could not be given to the poor who are starving. The countries of Europe destroyed even more because they had so much surplus – mountains of butter. And the new crops were coming so they needed the old crops to be taken out of their warehouses. They were short of warehouses and just by their side one thousand people in Ethiopia were dying every day, just out of hunger.
And the European countries spent two billion dollars just to destroy the surplus foodstuff. It is not known how much the cost of the food was that they destroyed in the ocean; two billion dollars is only the cost of destroying it.
And now, again, Ethiopia is facing another calamity. And the European countries have agreed with Ethiopia that they will give their surplus, but only on one condition. Man seems to be one of the most useless things in the world. It seems man exists for all kinds of conditions and ideologies, not vice versa. The European countries had a condition because in Ethiopia there is a Marxist government, and they made it a condition that: “We will give you food – we have a surplus, there is no problem – but you will have to stop your Marxist plans absolutely.”
The food was supposed to have reached by now, but it has not even moved from the warehouses in Europe. And the reason the European countries are giving is that: “You are still continuing your Marxist plans.”
Can you see the insanity of it? They are more concerned with Marxist plans, which have nothing to do with them. They are not concerned with millions of people dying again. And it is not only a question of other countries – naturally nobody has the responsibility for other countries. In the same country, for example, in America, thirty million people are on the streets without food, without clothes, without shelter. And it is a strange, ironical coincidence that exactly the same number of Americans, thirty million, are dying in hospitals, in nursing and care homes because they have stuffed their bodies with too much food, and they cannot stop. They will die because of eating too much, and a similar number of people will die because they don’t have anything to eat.
These thirty million people are eating the share of the other thirty million who are on the streets. They are ready to work, but there is no work. And when there is no work, nobody is interested in feeding the poor. The poor are fed only if they are needed for work.
Down the ages the majority has been poor, and their survival was dependent on their utility as productive mechanisms. The moment they were not needed they were left to die in hunger and starvation. And they are the real owners of the whole wealth of the world because they are the producers. But cunning people have managed conspiracies with politicians, with priests, to keep the society divided into two different categories: those who are really human beings – the people who are rich, super-rich – and those who are just human beings in name, but are being used as commodities, as productive mechanisms.
Because of this situation the vested interests have been teaching only one thing down the ages: that is work, and work hard so that you can produce more, and the rich can become even richer.
The value of work is only to produce enough for everybody. Perhaps four or five hours work a day would be enough for the whole of humanity to live peacefully and comfortably. But this insane desire to be rich, this insane greed which knows no limits; without any understanding that the more money you have, the less value your money has.
It is a simple law of economics: the law of diminishing returns. You have one house: it is valuable, you have to live in it, you need it. You have two houses, you have three houses, you have hundreds of houses… The value goes on diminishing as the number of houses goes on growing.
But there is a small class in the world, which has absolutely valueless money. For example, the richest man in the world is now a Japanese who has twenty-one billion dollars cash in his banks. What is he going to do with it? Can you eat it? And money attracts more money: just from sheer interest that man will go on becoming more and more rich. Beyond a certain limit money loses all value. But greed is absolutely mad. The whole human society has lived under a kind of insanity.
That’s why it is so difficult to be in a state of let-go because it has always been condemned as laziness. It is against the workaholic society. Let-go means you start living in a saner way. You are no longer madly after money; you don’t go on working continuously. You work just for your material needs, but there are spiritual needs too. Work is a necessity for material needs, let-go is necessary for spiritual needs. But the majority of humanity has been completely boycotted from any spiritual growth.
Let-go is one of the most beautiful spaces. You simply exist, doing nothing, sitting silently, and the grass grows by itself. You simply enjoy the songs of the birds, the greenness of the trees, the multidimensional, psychedelic colors of the flowers. You don’t have to do anything to experience existence; you have to stop doing. You have to be in an absolutely unoccupied state, with no tensions, with no worries.
In this state of tranquility you come into a certain attuning with the music that surrounds us. You suddenly become aware of the beauty of the sun. There are millions of people who have never enjoyed a sunset, who have never enjoyed a sunrise. They cannot afford it. They are continuously working and producing – not for themselves, but for the cunning vested interests: those who are in power, those who are capable of manipulating human beings.
Naturally they teach you that work is something great – it is in their interest. And the conditioning has become so deep that even you don’t know why you cannot relax.
Even on holidays people go on doing something or other. They cannot enjoy a holiday, just relaxing on the sea beach and enjoying the ocean and the very fresh and salty air. No, they will do any stupid thing. If they have nothing to do they may take their refrigerator apart – which has been functioning perfectly well – or they may destroy an old grandfather clock, which has been functioning for centuries. They are trying to improve upon it, but basically they cannot sit silently, that is the problem. They have to do something, they have to go somewhere.
On every holiday people are rushing to health resorts, sea beaches – not to rest there; they don’t have time to rest because millions of people are going there. Holidays are the best time to remain at home because the whole city has gone to the sea beach. Cars are going bumper to bumper, and by the time they reach the beach it is full of people; they cannot even find a small place to lie down. I have seen pictures of sea beaches. Even the ocean must be laughing at the stupidity of these people.
For a few minutes they will lie down, and then they need ice cream and they need Coca-Cola. And they have brought their portable television sets and everybody is listening to his transistor… And then again the marathon race back home because the time is over. More accidents happen in the world on holidays than on any other days: more people are killed, more cars are crashed. It is strange! And for five days in the week – the working days – people are hoping, waiting with great longing for the holiday. And in those two days, which are the weekend, they are simply waiting for their offices and their factories to open. People have completely forgotten the language of relaxation. They have been made to forget it.
Every child is born with an inner capacity; you don’t have to teach the child how to relax.
You just watch a child – he is relaxed, he is in a let-go. But you won’t allow him to enjoy this state of paradise. You will soon civilize him – because every child is primitive, uncivilized. And the parents and the teachers, everybody, is after the children to civilize them, to make them part of the society – and nobody bothers that the society is absolutely insane. It will be good if the child remains as he is, is no longer initiated into the society and your so-called civilization.
But with all good wishes the parents cannot leave the child alone. They have to teach him to work, they have to teach him to be productive, they have to teach him to be competitive. They have to teach him, “Unless you are at the top you have failed us.”
So everybody is running to be at the top. How can you relax?
When, for the first time in India, railway lines were being laid down… I have heard a beautiful story…

The British engineer who was overseeing the work that was going on was amazed to see that every day a young Indian, a villager, would come and lie down under the shade of a big tree and watch the workers working and the engineers instructing them. The engineer became interested: This is a strange fellow! He comes every day, he brings his food with him, he takes his lunch and rests, he sleeps in the afternoon under the shade of the tree.
Finally the engineer could not resist the temptation and he asked the villager, “Why don’t you start working? You come every day anyway, and you waste your time just lying down, watching.”
The villager asked, “Working? But for what?”
The engineer said, “You will earn money!”
The villager asked, “But what will I do with the money?”
The engineer said, “Stupid, you don’t know what can be done with the money? When you have money you can relax and enjoy!”
The poor villager said, “This is strange because I am already relaxed and enjoying! Going in such a roundabout way: working hard, earning money and then enjoying and relaxing – but I am doing it already!”

Children come with the intrinsic, intuitive quality of let-go. They are utterly relaxed. That’s why all children are beautiful. Have you ever thought about it? All children, without exception, have a tremendous grace, aliveness and beauty. And these children are going to grow, and all their beauty and their grace will disappear. It is very difficult to find a grown-up man with the same grace, with the same beauty, with the same aliveness.
If you can find a man with childlike innocence and relaxation, you have found a sage.
That’s how we have defined the sage in the East: he attains his childhood again. After experiencing all the ups and downs in life, finally he decides – the decision comes by itself out of experience – that before death comes, he has to be again the same as he was in his childhood.
I teach you let-go because that’s the only thing that can make you a sage. No church will help, no theology, no religion because none of them teach you let-go. They all insist on work, on the dignity of labor. They use beautiful words to enslave you, to exploit you. They are in conspiracy with the parasites of the society.
I am not against work; work has its own utility – but only utility. It cannot become your life’s be all and end all. It is an absolute necessity that you need food, that you need clothes, that you need a shelter. Work, but don’t become addicted to work. The moment you are out of work, you should know how to relax. It does not need much wisdom to relax. It is a simple art, and it is very simple because you already knew it when you were born. So it is already there; it just has to be made active from a dormant position, it has to be provoked.
All methods of meditation are nothing but methods to help you to remember the art of let-go. I say remember because you know it already. And you know it still, but that knowledge is being repressed by the society.
Simple principles have to be remembered. The body should be the beginning. Lying down on your bed – and you lie down on your bed every day, so there is no special necessity to do so. When you lie down on the bed, before sleep comes, start watching with closed eyes the energy from your feet. Move from there, just watch inside: Is there some tension somewhere – in the legs, in the thighs, in the stomach? Is there some strain, some tension? If you find some tension somewhere, simply try to relax it, and don’t move from that point unless you feel the relaxation has come.
Go through the hands because your hands are your mind; they are connected with your mind. If your right hand is tense, the left side of your brain will be tense. If your left hand is tense, the right side of your brain will be tense. So first go through the hands – they are almost the branches of your mind – and then reach finally to the mind.
When the whole body is relaxed the mind is already ninety percent relaxed because the body is nothing but extensions of the mind. Then simply watch the ten percent tension that is in your mind, and just by watching the clouds will disappear. It will take a few days for you. It is a knack. And it will revive your childhood experience – when you were so relaxed.
Have you ever watched? Children go on falling every day, but they don’t get hurt, they don’t get fractures. You try it; whenever the child falls you also fall.

A psychoanalyst tried an experiment. He announced in the newspapers, “I will pay enough money if somebody is ready to come to my house and just follow my child for the whole day. Whatever my child does, you have to do that.”
A young wrestler turned up and he said, “I am ready. Where is the child?”
But by the middle of the day the wrestler was flat on his back! He already had two fractures because everything that the child was doing he had to do. And the child got excited because this was strange, so he would jump unnecessarily, and the wrestler had to jump; he would climb the tree, and the wrestler had to climb; and he would jump from the tree, and the wrestler had to jump.
And this continued. The child completely forgot about food, about everything; he was enjoying the misery of the wrestler so much.
By the afternoon the wrestler simply refused. He said to the psychoanalyst, “Keep your money! This child of yours will kill me by the end of the day. I am already ready to go to the hospital. This child is dangerous! Don’t do this experiment with anybody else.”

Every child has so much energy, and still he is not tense. Have you watched a child sleeping? Have you watched a child just sucking his own thumb – enjoying it, dreaming beautiful dreams? His whole body is in a deep let-go.
It happens, it is a known fact: every day, all over the world, drunkards fall, but they don’t get fractures. Every morning they are found in some gutter and brought home. But it is a strange fact that they go on falling.

I have heard about a drunkard who was coming home and got hit on the head by an electric pole. He looked at the pole and he saw at least eight poles. He said, “My God, how am I going to reach home?”
He tried this way and that way, but nothing helped. Every time the same electric pole would hit him hard. Finally he shouted for help.
A policeman came and asked, “What is the matter?”
He said, “I am surrounded by electric poles and I cannot get out. And you know my wife! I have to reach home. I have been struggling for almost two hours. Who has done this? – because in the day I saw that there was only one electric pole!”
The policeman took him away from those imaginary poles. He had been struggling for two hours, but he was not hurt because a drunkard is relaxed.

I have known accidents in which only drunkards remained unhurt; everybody else was hurt.

Once a train fell from a bridge. That happens almost every year in India, two or three times. Bridges simply collapse, particularly the newly built bridges because there are so many people to be bribed before you can get the government’s permission to build the bridge. Finally the constructor, the builder, has to make money out of the bridge – he has spent so much. You have to bribe almost every person who is concerned.
Naturally he does not use cement, but only sand. So the first time the train comes onto the bridge, the whole train goes into the river with the bridge.
Once it happened just near my village. I rushed to look. Only one man had remained unhurt, and that was the village drunkard. When I saw him he asked me, “What has happened? In fact, I don’t know why I was traveling in this train. Some idiots put me in the train. I resisted, but before I could get out, the train moved and then suddenly I found myself swimming in the river. I don’t know what happened in the middle. The middle portion of the story is completely missing.”
I said, “Just come home with me because everybody else has to go to the hospital.” A few people were unconscious, a few had died, a few had many fractures – multiple fractures. Everybody was in a mess except that drunkard, who was asking me, “What has happened?”
I took him back home. He was asking me again and again on the way, “You can tell me, I will not tell anybody.”
I said, “I don’t know. You were on the train!”
He said, “That I know. I remember a few people pushed me into the train, and I was absolutely reluctant because I didn’t want to go anywhere. I was going to my home. I thought, ‘Perhaps the train is going toward my home.’ And then finally I found myself in the river! But in a way it is good because for at least two, three months I have not taken a bath. And the cold water in the river has also made my senses come back. I am a little conscious.”

The drunkard will not get hurt because he does not know he is falling, so he does not become tense. He simply falls without becoming tense. It is the tenseness that gives you fractures. If you can fall in a relaxed way you will not be hurt. Drunkards know it, children know it – how did you manage to forget?
Start from your bed, every night, and within a few days you will be able to catch the knack. Once you know the secret – nobody can teach it to you, you will have to search within your own body – then even in the day, at any time, you can relax. And to be a master of relaxation is one of the most beautiful experiences in the world. It is the beginning of a great journey toward spirituality because when you are completely in a let-go, you are no longer a body.
Have you ever observed a simple fact: that you become aware of your body only when there is some tension, some strain, some pain? Have you ever become aware of your head without a headache? If your whole body is relaxed, you simply forget that you are a body. And in that forgetting of the body is the remembering of a new phenomenon that is hidden inside the body: your spiritual being.
Let-go is the way to know that you are not the body, but something eternal, immortal. There is no need for any other religion in the world. Just the simple art of let-go will turn every human being into a religious person – because religion is not believing in God, religion is not believing in the pope, religion is not believing in any ideological system. Religion is knowing that which is eternal within you – satyam shivam sundaram – that which is the truth of your existence, that which is your divinity, and that which is your beauty, your grace, your splendor.
The art of let-go is synonymous with experiencing the immaterial, the immeasurable: your authentic being.
There are a few moments when, without being aware, you are in a let-go. For example, when you are really laughing – not just from the head but also from your belly, belly laughter – you are relaxed without your knowing, you are in a let-go. That’s why laughter is so health-giving. There is no other medicine which can help you more in attaining well-being. But the same conspirators who have stopped your awareness of let-go have stopped laughter. The whole of humanity has been turned into a serious, psychologically sick mass.
Have you heard the giggle of a small child? His whole body participates in it. And when you laugh, it is very rare that your whole body laughs – it is just an intellectual, heady thing.
My own understanding is that laughter is far more important than any prayer because prayer will not relax you. On the contrary, it may make you more tense. In laughter you suddenly forget all the conditioning, all the training, all seriousness. Suddenly you are out of it – just for a moment. Next time you laugh, be alert about how relaxed you are. And find out other times when you are relaxed.
After making love you are relaxed, although the same company of conspirators does not allow you to be relaxed even after making love. The man simply turns to the other side and pretends to go to sleep, but deep down he is feeling guilty that he has committed the sin again. The woman is crying because she feels she has been used. And it is absolutely natural to feel so because she gets no nourishment from love. She never gets any orgasmic experience. Just fifty years ago there was not a single woman in the whole world who had experienced orgasm. In India it is extremely difficult to find a woman who knows what orgasm is.
There cannot be a greater conspiracy against humanity. The man wants to finish the whole thing as quickly as possible. Inside him he is carrying The Bible, the Koran, Shrimad Bhagavadgita, and they are all against what he is doing. He is also convinced that he is doing something wrong. So naturally, the quicker it is over the better. And afterward he feels tremendously bad. How can he relax? He becomes more tense. And because he is so quick the woman never comes to the peak. By the time she starts, he is finished! Naturally, the woman starts believing that man is something more like an animal.
In the churches, in the temples, you will find only women, old women particularly. And when the priest talks about sin, they know! It was absolutely sin because they had gained no pleasure out of it; they were used like any commodity – sexual objects. Otherwise, if you are free of guilt, free of all inhibitions, love will give you a tremendous experience of let-go.
So you have to look into your life, for where you can find some natural experience of let-go. Listening to me you can experience a let-go. It happens every day, but you are not aware of it. I can see your faces changing, I can see your silences deepening. I can see when you laugh that your laughter is no longer chained and handcuffed, that your laughter is now your freedom. I can observe every day that you go on becoming more and more relaxed: as if you are not listening to a talk but listening to soft music, not to words but to my silences. If you cannot experience a let-go in my presence here, it will be very difficult for you to find it anywhere else.
But there are moments when you are swimming… If you are really a swimmer, you can manage just to float, not to swim. And you will find tremendous let-go, just going with the river, not even making any movement against the current; becoming part of the current.
You have to gather experiences of let-go from different sources, and soon you will have the whole secret in your hands. And it is one of the most fundamental things, particularly for my people. It will free you from workaholic conditioning.
It does not mean that you will become lazy. On the contrary, the more relaxed you are, the more powerful you are, the more energy gathers when you are relaxed. Your work will start having a quality of creativity – not production. Whatever you will do, you will do with such totality, with such love, and you will have tremendous energy to do it.
So let-go is not against work. In fact, let-go transforms work into a creative experience.

A few jokes for you and for you all. Have a total laugh, which takes away all tensions from your face, from your body, from your stomach, and you will suddenly feel a totally different kind of energy within you. Otherwise most people are continuously feeling knots in their stomachs.

Nathan Nussbaum went to consult a world-famous specialist about his medical problem.
“How much do I owe you?” asked Nat.
“My fee is five hundred dollars,” replied the quack.
“Five hundred dollars? That’s impossible!” exclaimed Nathan.
“In your case,” the specialist replied, “I suppose I could adjust my fee to three hundred dollars.”
“Three hundred dollars for one visit? Ridiculous!” cried Nathan.
“Well then,” asked the doctor, “can you afford one hundred and fifty dollars?”
“Who has so much money?” Nathan moaned.
“Listen,” said the quack, “just give me fifty dollars and be gone.”
“I can give you twenty dollars,” said Nathan. “Take it or leave it.”
“I don’t understand you,” said the specialist. “Why did you come to the most expensive doctor in New York?”
“Listen, doctor,” explained Nathan, “when it comes to my health, nothing is too expensive.”

Paddy’s friend, Joe, was taking a night course in adult education. “Who is Ronald Reagan?” he asked Paddy.
“I don’t know,” Paddy replied.
“He is the president of the United States,” said Joe. “Now, do you know who Margaret Thatcher is?”
“No,” said Paddy.
“She is the prime minister of Britain,” said Joe. “You see? You should go to night school like I do.”
“Now I have a question for you,” said Paddy. “Do you know who Mick O’Sullivan is?”
“I don’t,” admitted Joe.
“Well,” said Paddy, “he is the guy who is screwing your wife while you are at night school.”

Jesus and Moses are out one Sunday afternoon for a round of golf. Moses drives first and the ball goes straight down the fairway. Jesus gets ready and on his first drive slices the ball into some tall grass.
“Holy Moses!” cries Jesus. But Moses, being a good fellow, offers Jesus the chance to place his ball on the fairway with no penalty. But Jesus is stubborn and turns down the offer. Moses then says, “Come on Jesus, you can’t take a shot in such tall grass.”
“If Arnold Palmer can do it,” replies Jesus, “so can I.” Jesus then takes a smash and knocks the ball, “splash!” into a pond. Then Moses hits his second shot straight onto the green and returns to watch Jesus. Jesus is rolling up his jeans.
“Jesus, please!” cries Moses, “I implore you to just place your ball on the fairway. It will take a miracle to make such a shot!”
“If Arnold Palmer can do it,” replies Jesus, “so can I,” and he strides off across the top of the water.
A gardener, who has been watching the scene, approaches Moses and says, “Just who does that guy think he is, Jesus Christ?”
“No such luck,” replies Moses. “He thinks he is Arnold Palmer!”

Osho,
What is it to give and what is it to receive? I understand now that I am only just beginning to glimpse these. Receptiveness feels like dying to me, and automatically everything inside goes on red alert! Help! Existence seems so huge.
Prem Dhiresha, I can understand what is troubling you. It is troubling almost everybody. It is good that you have recognized it because now, changing the situation is possible. Unfortunate are those who are suffering from the same problem but are not aware of it. Because of their unawareness there is no possibility of any transformation.
You have taken courage to expose yourself. I am immensely glad about it. I want all my people to be courageous enough to expose themselves, howsoever ugly it seems.
The conditioning is to go on hiding the ugly and go on pretending about the beautiful. That creates a schizophrenic situation. You go on showing yourself – what you are not; and you go on repressing yourself – what you are. Your life becomes a continuous civil war. You are fighting with yourself, and any fight with yourself is going to destroy you. Nobody can win.
If my right hand and left hand start fighting, do you think any hand can win? I can manage sometimes to let the right hand feel good as a winner, and sometimes to change the situation and let the left hand feel it is the winner. But nobody can really be the winner because they are both my hands.
Almost every human being is carrying a split personality. And the most significant fact is that he identifies himself with the false part and he denies his reality. In this situation you cannot hope to grow up as a spiritual being.
What Dhiresha is saying is tremendously important to understand. She is asking, “What is it to give?” Have you ever asked yourself what it is to give? You think you are already giving too much to your children, to your wife, to your girlfriend, to the society, to the Rotary Club, to the Lions Club – you are giving so much. But the fact is, you don’t know what it is to give.
Unless you give yourself you don’t give at all.
You can give money, but you are not the money. Unless you give yourself, that means unless you give love, you don’t know what giving is.
“…And what is it to receive?” Almost everybody thinks he knows what it is to receive. But Dhiresha is right in questioning and exposing herself that she does not know what it is to receive. Just as unless you give love you don’t know what it is to give, the same is true about receiving: unless you are capable of receiving love, you don’t know what it is to receive. You want to be loved, but you have not thought about it: are you capable of receiving love?
There are so many hindrances which won’t allow you to receive it. The first is that you don’t have any self-respect; hence when love comes toward you, you don’t feel yourself adequate, enough to receive it. But you are in such a mess that you cannot even see a simple fact, that because you have never accepted yourself as you are, you have never loved yourself, how can you manage to receive somebody else’s love? You know you are not worthy of it, but you don’t want to accept and recognize this stupid idea that has been fed to you – that you are not worthy of it.
So what do you do? You simply refuse love. And to refuse love you have to find excuses.
The first and the most prominent excuse is, “It is not love. That’s why I cannot accept it.” You cannot believe that somebody can love you. When you yourself cannot love you, when you have not seen your beauty and your grace and your grandeur, how can you believe it when somebody says, “You are beautiful. I can see a depth in your eyes, unfathomable, of tremendous grace. I can see in your heart a rhythm, in tune with the universe.”
You cannot believe all this; it is too much. You are accustomed to being condemned, you are accustomed to being punished, you are accustomed to being rejected, you are accustomed to not being accepted as you are. These things you can take very easily.
Love will have a tremendous impact on you because you will have to go through a great transformation before you can receive it. First you have to accept yourself without any guilt. You are not a sinner as the Christians and other religions go on teaching you.
You don’t see the stupidity of the whole thing. Some guy far away in the past, one Adam, disobeyed God – which is not much of a sin. In fact, he was absolutely right to disobey him. If anybody committed a sin it was God, by prohibiting his own son, his own daughter, from eating the fruit of knowledge and eating the fruit of eternal life. What kind of father? What kind of God? What kind of love?
Love demands that God should have told Adam and Eve: “Before you eat anything else, these two trees have to be remembered. Eat as much from the Tree of Wisdom and eat as much from the Tree of Eternal Life as you like, so that you can also be in the same space of immortality in which I am.”
That should be a simple thing for anyone who loves. But God prohibiting Adam from wisdom means he wants him to remain ignorant. Perhaps he is jealous, afraid, apprehensive that if Adam becomes wise, he will become equal to him. He wants to keep Adam in his ignorance so that he remains inferior. If he eats the fruit of eternal life, then he will be a god himself.
This God who prevented Adam and Eve must have been very jealous, utterly ugly, inhuman, unloving. And if all these things are not sin, then what can sin be? But religions have been teaching you, Jews and Christians and Mohammedans, that you are still carrying the sin that Adam committed. There is a limit to stretching lies out for so long. Even if Adam had committed a sin, you cannot carry it. According to these religions, you were created by God but you are not carrying godliness. You are carrying Adam and Eve’s disobedience.
This is the Western way to condemn you: you are a sinner. The Eastern way comes to the same conclusion but from different premises. They say everybody is loaded with immense sin and evil deeds, committed in millions of past lives. In fact, the burden of a Christian or a Jew or a Mohammedan is far less. You are only carrying the sin that Adam and Eve committed. And it must have become very diluted, centuries upon centuries. You are not a direct inheritor of Adam and Eve’s sin. It has passed through many millions of hands: by now the quantity must be almost homeopathic!
But the Eastern concept is even more dangerous. You are not carrying somebody else’s sin. In the first place, you cannot carry somebody else’s sin. Your father commits a crime – you cannot be sent to jail. Even ordinary human common sense will say that if the father has committed the sin or the crime, he has to suffer. The son or the grandson cannot be sent to the gallows because the grandfather committed a murder.
But the Eastern concept is much more dangerous and poisonous: it is your own sin that you are carrying, not that of Adam and Eve. And it is not a small quantity; it has been growing with each life! And you have lived millions of lives before this life, and each life you have committed so many sins. They have all accumulated on your chest. The burden is Himalayan; you are crushed under it.
This is a strange strategy to destroy your dignity, to reduce you into a subhuman being. How can you love yourself? You can hate, but you cannot love. How can you think that somebody may be able to love you? It is better to reject it because sooner or later the person who is offering you his love is going to discover your reality, which is very ugly – just a long, long burden of sin. And then that person is going to reject you. To avoid rejection it is better to reject love. That’s why people don’t accept love.
They desire it, they long for it. But when the moment comes and somebody is ready to shower you with love, you shrink back. Your shrinking has a deep psychology. You are afraid. “This is beautiful, but how long will it last? Sooner or later my reality will be revealed. It is better from the very beginning to be alert.”
Love means intimacy, love means two persons coming closer, love means two bodies but one soul. You are afraid. Your soul, a sinner’s soul, burdened with the evil deeds of millions of lives… No, it is better to hide it; it is better not to come into a position where the person who wanted to love you rejects you. It is the fear of rejection that does not allow you to receive love.
You cannot give love because nobody has ever told you that you are born a loving being. They have told you, “You are born in sin!” You cannot love and you cannot receive love either. This has diminished all possibilities of your growth.
Dhiresha is saying, “I understand now that I am only just beginning to glimpse this.”
You are fortunate because there are millions of people in the world who have become completely blind to their own conditionings, to the ugly burdens that the older generation has given them. It is hurting so much that it is better to forget all about it.
But by forgetting it you cannot remove it. By forgetting a cancer you cannot operate upon it. By not recognizing it, keeping it in the dark, you are taking the greatest unnecessary risk against yourself. It will go on growing. It needs darkness; it needs you not to know about it. Sooner or later it will cover up your whole being, and nobody else will be responsible for it except you.
So if, Dhiresha, you feel that you are glimpsing, a few windows are opening in you.
“Receptiveness feels like dying to me.” Have you ever thought about it, that receptiveness feels like dying to you? But it is true. Receptiveness feels like dying because receptiveness looks like humiliation. To receive something, particularly love, means you are a beggar. Nobody wants to be on the receiving end because that makes you inferior to the giver.
“Receptiveness feels like dying to me and automatically everything inside goes on red alert.” This red alert is implanted in you by the society that you have always respected, by the same people you thought were your well-wishers. And I don’t say that they are intentionally trying to harm you. They have been harmed by others and they are simply transferring whatsoever they have received from their parents, from their teachers, from the older generation.
Each generation goes on giving its diseases to the new generation, and naturally the new generation becomes more and more burdened. You are the inheritor of all the superstitious, repressive concepts from the whole of history. What goes on red alert is not something that belongs to you, Dhiresha. It is your conditioning that goes on red alert. And your last sentence is just an effort to find a rationalization for it.
That is also one of the great dangers everybody has to be aware of. Don’t rationalize. Go to the very roots of every problem, but don’t find excuses because if you find excuses you cannot remove those roots.
The last statement of Dhiresha’s is a rationalization. Perhaps she has not been able to see its intrinsic quality. She says, “Help! Existence seems so huge.”
Now she is thinking that she is afraid of receiving because existence is so huge, she is afraid of giving because existence is so huge. What is the point of giving your small love, just like a dewdrop, to the ocean? The ocean will never know about it; hence there is no point in giving and there is no point in receiving either. Because the ocean is so huge, you will be drowned in it. Hence it looks like death. But this is your rationalization.
You don’t know anything about existence; you don’t know anything about yourself – which is the closest point of existence to you. Unless you start from your own being, you will never know existence. That is the starting point, and everything has to begin from the very beginning.
Knowing yourself, you will know your existence. But the taste and the fragrance of your existence will give you courage to go a little deeper into the existence of others. If your own existence has made you so blissful, it is a natural longing to enter into other mysteries that surround you: human mysteries, mysteries of the animals, mysteries of the trees, mysteries of the stars…
And once you have known your existence you are no longer afraid of death. Death is a fiction; it does not happen, it only appears. It appears from the outside.
Have you ever seen your own death? You have always seen somebody else dying, but have you seen yourself dying? Nobody has; otherwise even this minimum of life would become impossible. You see every day that somebody is dying, but it is always somebody else; it is never you.
The poet who wrote, “Never ask for whom the bell tolls; it tolls for thee,” has a deeper understanding than you. He must have been a Christian because when somebody dies in a Christian village the church bell rings to inform everybody – people who have gone to their farms, to their orchards, people who have gone to work somewhere. The church bell reminds them: somebody has died. So they all have to come back to give the last farewell.
But the poet has a tremendous insight when he says, “Never ask for whom the bell tolls; it tolls for thee.”
But in your actual life it never rings for thee. One day it will ring, but then you will no longer be here to hear it. You never think of yourself at the threshold of death – and everybody is standing on the threshold. You always see somebody else dying; hence the experience is objective, not subjective.
The other is not really dying, but only changing houses. His life force is moving into a new form, into a new plane. Only the body is left without life energy – but the body never had it.
It is just like in a dark house when a candle is burning and the whole house is lighted. Even from the outside you can see the light: from the windows, from the doors – but the house does not have the light as an intrinsic part of it. The moment the candle finishes, the house will be in darkness. In fact it has always been in darkness; it was the candle that was the light.
Your body is already dead. What gives you the impression that it is alive is your life force, your being, which radiates through the body, which fills the body with aliveness. All that you see when people die is that something has disappeared. You don’t know where it has gone – whether it has gone anywhere or simply ceased to be. So from the outside the fiction of death has been created.
Those who have known themselves know, without any doubt, that they are eternal beings. They have died many times, yet they are alive.
Death and birth are only small episodes in the great pilgrimage of the soul. The moment you come in contact with yourself, your fear of death will immediately disappear. And that opens a totally new sky to be explored. Once you know that there is no death, all fear disappears: the fear of the unknown, the fear of the dark; whatever the form, all fears disappear. For the first time you start being a real adventurer. You start moving into different mysteries that surround you. For the first time existence becomes your home.
There is nothing to be feared: it is your mother; you are a part of it. It cannot drown you, it cannot destroy you. The more you know it, the more you will feel nourished; the more you know it, the more you will feel blessed; the more you know it, the more you will be. And then you can give love because you have it. And then you can receive love because there is no question of rejection.
Prem Dhiresha, your question will be helpful to all my people. I thank you for your question and for your courage to expose yourself. This courage is needed by everyone because without this courage you cannot hope for any possibility of transformation – into a new world, into a new consciousness, into your authentic being, which is the door to ultimate reality and to ultimate benediction.

============================================================

Osho,
I don't understand why enlightened masters are critical of each other. Are they not all working toward the higher good? Are they not different flavors of the same truth?
The question you have asked is almost impossible to answer for the simple reason that you are not enlightened yet. You don’t know the ways of the enlightened ones. You don’t know their devices, you don’t know their methods; hence the misunderstanding.
An ancient story may help you. In a great city there were two big sweet shops, and one day the owners of both the shops started fighting with each other for some reason. Naturally, they had no other way to fight, so they started throwing sweets at each other. And the whole city gathered and people were enjoying the sweets that were falling on the street.
When two enlightened masters criticize each other it brings tremendous joy to those who can understand. Its taste is just unbelievable. They are not enemies: their fight is not of the ego. Their fight has a totally different context.
They fight because they know one thing: that the goal is one, but the paths are many. And each master has to defend his path, knowing perfectly well that the other paths are as valid as his. But if he starts saying that all the paths are valid, he will not have the impact, the influence on his people. The journey is long and he needs absolute trust.
He is not a philosopher propounding a system of philosophy. His basic concern is that your commitment to the path should be total. To make it total he condemns all other paths, he criticizes all other ways. It is just out of compassion for you. He knows the people on the other path will also reach, and he knows that out of compassion the master on the other path has to criticize him, has to criticize his ways.
This is just a simple methodology to protect the disciple from influences that can take him astray. And the mind is very, very clever in going astray. If all the paths are valid, then what is the necessity of commitment? If all the paths are valid, then what is the necessity of being total?
If all the paths are valid, then why not travel all the paths? Why not go on changing, enjoying different ways, different methods, different sceneries? Each path will pass through different lands: there are paths that will go through the desert, and there are paths that will go through the mountains, and there are paths that will pass through beautiful, flowering trees.
But if you travel for some time on one path and then you change the path, you will have to start again from ABC. Whatever you have learned on one path is invalid on another path, and if you go on keeping it within you it is going to create tremendous confusion. You are already in a great mess. No master wants you to be more confused.
Your mind always wants change. It does not know devotion; it loves fashions, its interest is always in some novelty. So it will go on moving from one path to another path, becoming more and more confused because each path has its own language, each path has its own unique methods, and each master is going to defend his path against all the other paths.
If you move on many paths you will collect contradictory arguments; you will become so much divided you will not know what to do. And if it becomes your habit to change paths – because the new has a certain attraction for the mind – you will move a few feet on one path, a few feet on another path, but you will never complete the journey.

One day Jalaluddin Rumi took all his students, disciples and devotees to a field. That was his way to teach them things of the beyond, through the examples of this world. He was not a theoretician; he was a very practical man. The disciples were thinking, “What could be the message, going to that faraway field and why can’t he say it here?”
But when they reached the field, they understood that they were wrong and he was right. The farmer seemed to be an almost insane man. He was digging a well in the field – and he had already dug eight incomplete wells. He would go a few feet and then he would find that there was no water. Then he would start digging another well – and the same story continued. He had destroyed the whole field and he had not yet found water.
The master, Jalaluddin Rumi, told his disciples, “Can you understand something? If this man had been total and had put his whole energy into only one well he would have reached the deepest sources of water long ago. But the way he is going he will destroy the whole field and he will never be able to make a single well. With so much effort he is simply destroying his own land, and getting more and more frustrated, disappointed. What kind of a desert has he purchased? It is not a desert, but one has to go deep to find the sources of water.”
He turned to his disciples and asked them, “Are you going to follow this insane farmer? Sometimes on one path, sometimes on another path, sometimes listening to one, sometimes listening to another… You will collect much knowledge, but all that knowledge is simply junk because it is not going to give you the enlightenment that you were looking for. It is not going to lead you to the waters of eternal life.”

Masters tremendously enjoy criticizing others. If the others are really enlightened, they also enjoy being criticized. They know that the purpose of both is the same: to protect the vagrant mind of the disciple, to keep him on one track. They have to deny that there is any other path anywhere that can lead you except this one.
This is not said out of an egoistical attitude; this is said out of love. This is simply a device to make you committed, devoted. The journey is long, the night is long, and if you go astray you can go on round and round for eternity without finding anything.
But in your unconscious state of mind, in your unenlightened space of being, the question seems to be relevant. You are asking: “I don’t understand why enlightened masters are critical of each other.”
Don’t bother why they are critical about each other; you will understand it when you become enlightened. Before that it is none of your business! If enlightened people enjoy criticizing, they must have some reason of their own, and you are not in a state to understand.
Gautam Buddha, one of the most famous enlightened persons in human history, had eight contemporaries who were enlightened in the same small state of Bihar in India. Even the name “Bihar” came about because eight enlightened masters were continuously wandering, finding their people, searching for those who could fall in tune with them. Bihar means wandering; the name has come from those eight enlightened people. And they were condemning each other like anything.
Two out of the eight have left traditions that are still alive. One was Gautam Buddha; the other was Vardhaman Mahavira. Gautam Buddha has left the great tradition of Buddhism. Mahavira has left another tradition, Jainism. Both were in the same space, but immensely critical of each other – no agreement on any single point.
It happened many times that they were in the same city. Once it happened that they were staying in the same caravanserai. Half of the serai was occupied by Gautam Buddha and his disciples and half of the serai was occupied by Mahavira and his disciples. Traditionally it has been asked why they did not meet. Neither the Buddhists have the answer, nor the Jainas have the answer. Both were enlightened; it would have been tremendously beautiful for them to have met.
But I know why they did not meet. They did not want their disciples to be confused because Mahavira had a totally different approach: of utter austerity, of great discipline, of arduous effort. His way was the way of the warrior. Gautam Buddha’s approach was not that of a warrior, but that of an utterly relaxed human being. In comparison to Gautam Buddha’s path, Mahavira was an extremist – while Gautam Buddha insisted on the middle way: avoid all extremes. Just be exactly in the middle and you are right. Every extreme is dangerous because it excludes the other extreme, and the truth should not exclude anything. The truth should be inclusive of all. So just be in the middle and both the extremes become just like the two wings of a bird and the bird is just in the middle. And you can use both the extremes to fly across the sun to the farthest star.
Mahavira’s standpoint was: unless you choose a single dimension of effort and unless you are totally devoted to it, without being worried that you are becoming an extremist – because only from the extreme point can you jump into the beyond.
Now, both are right. But if a person who has never followed any path hears that both are right, he will be simply confused. Before your enlightenment you have to choose. After your enlightenment you are absolutely free to declare that all paths lead to the same place. But while you are leading people on the path you have to be consistently insistent that except this path everything else has to be completely forgotten.
You have to be one-pointed, just like an arrow moving toward the target, not bothering about other arrows moving from different angles, different aspects. If the arrow starts thinking of different angles and different aspects it is not going to reach the target. It will be lost in utter confusion.
People who have followed Mahavira have arrived and people who have followed Gautam Buddha have also arrived. If you ask me what brings them home, it is totality, absolute dedication and unconditional commitment. It does not matter which path you are on, these conditions will have to be fulfilled. In fact, the path does not matter at all: what matters are these three conditions. If you can fulfill these three conditions, even the wrong path will lead you to the right goal. And if you cannot fulfill these three conditions, the path may be absolutely right, but you are not going anywhere.
And one thing more has to be understood. I was saying this about the enlightened ones, but there are many who are simply fakes. You cannot make the distinction.
Just a few days ago I received a big letter from one of my very learned sannyasins, Swami Doctor Amrito. He has many Ph.D.’s and D.Litt.’s, and has written many books. He has written eight books about me. Now there is some man who talks as if he were enlightened, and many sannyasins in Holland are going to him. Seeing the situation my international secretary, Prem Hasya, has announced in all the newspapers that the man is a fake and sannyasins should not go there.
Amrito himself was going there, so he was very much shocked because he was also thinking that the man seems to be enlightened. And without knowing him I know that man cannot be enlightened because I know his master. I don’t know that man; I know his master. He used to live in Mumbai and once I went just to have a look at him.
He was known as Beedie Baba because he was continuously smoking beedies. Great enlightenment! Except that I could not see any indication of enlightenment. A great chain-smoker…
This Dutchman became his follower. He was surrounded by a few uneducated, uncultured Indians because he used to smoke beedies and talk about the ultimate. In India every village has one or two idiots doing the same business. This is the country of idiots and enlightened ones!
But for centuries the enlightened people have talked and the idiots have gathered all the beautiful words. It is very easy to talk about the ultimate, brahma, and quote a few statements from the scriptures. Every Indian is spiritual, but just on the surface. Deep down I have not seen a more materialistic people anywhere in the world: so much greed, so much ambition, so much repressed lust – and on the surface, a parrot-like spiritual talk.
The Indian consists not of one person, but two. The real population of India is not nine hundred million, it is double that because each Indian is two Indians! One is the real, which is hidden in darkness, and one is the unreal, which goes on repeating beautiful phrases.
The Western seekers don’t have any understanding about these parrots, so when they hear great words about which their tradition knows nothing… Their minds are conditioned by a very poor Christianity, mundane, ordinary, which does not have great philosophical flights.
But in India you can talk to anybody and you will be surprised that everybody knows about reincarnation, and everybody is afraid of death. Strange! If you know about reincarnation, why should you be afraid of death? Indians are the most cowardly people in the whole world. And when I say this I have absolute evidence for it. There is no other country in the world that has been enslaved for two thousand years continuously.
Why did India remain enslaved for two thousand years? A country that knows about reincarnation, which knows that the soul is eternal, which knows that you cannot be killed… But this knowledge is only parrot-knowledge; when the time comes, this knowledge is not of any help.
Small tribes have ruled over this big, vast continent because nobody wants to get into trouble unnecessarily. And because for centuries this country has been hearing beautiful words, tremendous revelations, by and by everybody has become saturated with them. So they are capable of rationalizing everything, even slavery.
For twenty centuries Indian scholars, Indian saints were even rationalizing the state of slavery: that it is a fire test of your patience, of your trust in God, of your nonviolence. And behind these beautiful words there was nothing but cowardliness – because Indians are afraid of being killed. That’s why they don’t kill others: it is dangerous. If you start killing others, you have to risk your life too. Indians have chosen not to fight and they have made a great philosophy out of it, of “nonviolence.” It is protective of their cowardly souls.
They are the poorest people in the world. Half of the population is starving and any day in the coming thirteen years, five hundred million people are going to die in this country. But still they will go on rationalizing that it is fate, it is destiny; that everything is in the hands of God. Not even a leaf on a tree moves without God’s orders; everything happens according to God. If he wants us to be slaves, what can we do? If he wants us to be poor, what can we do? If he wants us to have more and more children, what can we do?
The rich go on becoming richer and the poor go on producing more and more children.
Even the poorest beggar knows more about metaphysics, about great ideologies. And when the Western man comes – he may be well educated but his education is in science, his education is in logic, his education makes him a great intellectual. But in the heart he remains very naive. Then any Beedie Baba, any idiot can make a great impact on him.
This Dutch man lived for months together with Beedie Baba. He does not mention his well-known name, Beedie Baba; he mentions only his legal name, Nisarg Datta Maharaj. He has written many books on Nisarg Datta Maharaj; he has made Nisarg Datta famous all over the world. I have looked through those books – sheer nonsense!
Now Amrito has written to me, “Osho, you have to tell Hasya to withdraw her statement because I have seen this Dutch man and to me he looks enlightened.”
Enlightened people don’t look enlightened, they are enlightened! And poor Amrito, this is not for the first time… He gets caught anywhere; it has happened many times. And he is going round and round. He met another idiot’s follower, that idiot was Muktananda, and he had an American follower, Baba Free John. Now he has changed his name because now he declares himself enlightened and he has dropped any connection with Muktananda. Now he has become Da Free John.
And Amrito went there and inquired of me, “Can I write a book on Da Free John?”
I said, “Amrito, if your whole life is just to write about any idiot you come across, then don’t waste your time in Holland – come to India, and you will find so many people. Go on writing.”
He has written about Sri Aurobindo, he has written about J. Krishnamurti, he has written about Da Free John, he has written about me, and now he is caught up with this other Dutch fellow.
I said, “If this is going to be just your profession, to write, if you are some kind of spiritual journalist, then it is okay. But this is not going to lead you toward enlightenment.”
He became very confused. It was bound to happen because when he read my statement about Sri Aurobindo – that he was not enlightened – Amrito was shocked. Now, what can I do about it? I know he was not enlightened and he was befooling people. He was declaring to people – and that was the only attraction because thousands of people around the world became interested in Sri Aurobindo for a single reason.
He was telling people, “Up to now there have been enlightened people, self-realized people; they have attained immortality. But now I have come to bring a new experience to the world and that experience is physical immortality. Spiritual immortality many have attained; I have brought the whole alchemy of making you physically immortal.”
Naturally all kinds of people who are afraid of death immediately became interested – and these kinds of statements have a beauty. Naturally, you cannot contradict Sri Aurobindo while he is alive; he is the proof that he is immortal. And you cannot contradict him when he dies – who to contradict!
One day he died. And, one of my friends was also there in his ashram. “For three days,” he told me, “it was not declared to the world that Sri Aurobindo had died.” They kept it a secret because this would shatter all the following and the whole business.
But how long can you keep a dead body? And in Sri Aurobindo’s ashram they were thinking and believing that he had gone deep into samadhi, that he would come back. But instead of coming back, his whole body started stinking. When the body started stinking, they became worried: “It seems the fellow is gone!”
Then they declared to the world: “Sri Aurobindo has gone so deep in his samadhi that the doctors are saying he is dead.”
So they have made a beautiful marble grave for him and they still believe… Many have left, but a few idiots are absolutely impossible – they are still waiting for that one day when he will knock from inside. He has gone in search of the alchemy for his disciples to become physically immortal.
Then there was a woman who was really running the ashram. She was a film actress from France, and she had become attracted to the idea of immortality. Women will be very much attracted to it, particularly film actresses whose professional life is very short, just five to seven years. Before that they are extras, after that again they are extras. Naturally they want physical immortality, and if in the middle of youth they can become physically immortal, they can remain always on the top of the list of celebrities.
This French actress became the mother of the ashram. After Sri Aurobindo died, and while she was alive, she managed the false and absolute lie of Aurobindo. She said, “He has gone in search of a few missing links. But I am here; I am immortal.” And by coincidence she lived for almost a hundred years, so naturally she created the idea in many that perhaps she was the chief disciple and Aurobindo had made her immortal. But one day she also popped off!
And when I told Amrito, “Don’t get into all this nonsense,” he said, “I had never thought about all this.” But he goes on from one person to another person. Just curiosity; it seems to be an unquenchable curiosity.
Not only do enlightened people criticize other enlightened people; they also have to criticize those who are not enlightened and are pretending to be so. It is an absolute necessity that the false should be exposed. That too is part of compassion, so you don’t get caught up with the false.
And you are asking, “Are they not all working toward the higher good?” You cannot understand anything about the people who are enlightened. They are not working at all – neither for higher good nor for anything else. They are simply delighting and sharing their love, their light, their life – everything they have, their blissfulness and their peace and their silence. And this is simply a delight; it is not a work. They are not working for some higher good. They themselves are the highest good. There is no need for them to work for any higher good – that is Christian language.
I have told you that the man who is enlightened is satyam shivam sundaram. He is the very truth itself, he is not working for any other truth. He is godliness himself; he is not working for any other good. And he is beauty himself; he is not trying to lead you toward some beauty.
He is present. You can drink out of his well and be absolutely contented, right now, this very moment. A man of enlightenment is no longer interested in the future. There is no future as far as he is concerned; everything is always in the present. Existence is always in the present. His whole joy is not to lead you toward some good, but just to bring you back to yourself – because all that is beautiful, all that is good and all that is great is within you, not anywhere else.
And finally you are asking, “Are they not different flavors of the same truth?”
By the very nature of the situation you cannot ask the right question. And I am compelled to give you the right answer although you are asking the wrong question: every enlightened man has all the flavors of truth. It is not that one enlightened man has one flavor, another enlightened man has another flavor; that this one has a different perfume, that one has a different perfume.
The moment you are enlightened truth blossoms in you with all the flavors together simultaneously. Every enlightened man is complete and perfect in himself. There is nothing missing in him.
It will be good for you, rather than asking about enlightened people and worrying about what they are doing and why they are doing it… The simple way is to become enlightened and you will know!
Between enlightenment and the state of unenlightenment, it is a very long distance call! And languages are different: something is said, something else is heard – and this has been going on for centuries, misunderstanding upon misunderstanding.

The phone rang at the maternity hospital and an excited voice at the other end of the line said, “Send an ambulance quickly. My wife Maureen is about to have a baby!”
“Calm down,” replied the nurse. “Tell me, is this her first baby?”
“No,” said Paddy, “this is her husband speaking.”

Paddy was very, very ill indeed, so Maureen sent for the doctor. After a brief examination the doctor announced that Paddy was dead.
“I am not,” said Paddy from his bed.
“Be quiet!” said Maureen. “Do you think you know better than the doctor?”

“My wife, Bridget,” Sean confided to Paddy, “is an angel.”
“You are lucky,” said Paddy, “my wife Maureen is still alive.”

Hymie Goldberg was having his first session with the psychoanalyst.
“Do you cheat on your wife?” asked the shrink.
“My God,” said Hymie, “who else could I cheat on?”

A Californian psychiatrist was driving along in his car, when he saw a man lying on the sidewalk. He stopped his car and got out. It turned out the man had been mugged and left for dead.
“Quick,” said the shrink, “tell me who did this to you; he needs help immediately!”

An Indian businessman who had made millions after a childhood of poverty was on his deathbed giving advice to his son.
“Listen, son,” he said, “I owe my success to two principles: honesty and wisdom. Honesty is if you promise to deliver some goods, no matter what happens, even if it means bankruptcy, deliver!”
“I will try to remember, father,” replied the boy. “And what about wisdom?”
“Wisdom is simple, my boy,” continued the father. “Never make any promises.”

From the place where you are, don’t be worried about the actions of people who are existing on a totally different plane. If you really want to understand them, reach to the same consciousness and you will understand without fail.
I have been acquainted with almost all the enlightened people who have lived on the earth. My whole life I have been searching in every nook and corner of the earth, and a few things have emerged out of my research into the enlightened being.
They are absolutely perfect in all dimensions possible, with all flavors. And it is a sheer necessity for them to criticize others, knowing perfectly well that the people they are criticizing will understand their compassion. They may have moved through different paths; they have moved. It is almost like a mountain: you can move from different directions, you can choose different pathways, you will have different experiences on the way, but when you reach to the top it is the same experience, absolutely the same sweetness, the same fragrance.
But if you belong to the category of the arhats you may remain silent, without criticizing anybody because you don’t have any followers.
There are two categories of people who have achieved enlightenment; one is called the arhat. The literal meaning of the word is one who has conquered. The second is the bodhisattva; the literal meaning is one who has awakened. The ultimate experience is the same, whether you are an arhat or a bodhisattva. But there are differences in their actions and in their words.
Therefore arhats have remained silent. Naturally there is no question of criticizing anybody. They have never asserted any truth, they have never tried to manifest any of their experience. They have never bothered that somebody may be there who can be helped. They never become saviors of anybody. They have a very small boat; only one can sit in their small boat, and they go to the further shore alone. And because they don’t have disciples, there is no question of any criticism. They are the silent ones.
But the bodhisattvas are people of immense compassion. The arhats in comparison look a little hard, unconcerned about others who are struggling in darkness and death. Bodhisattvas are tremendously interested in giving you a hand and pulling you up from your ditch and putting you on the right path. And of course the right path is the path that they have followed; that is the only path they know exactly. They don’t know about any other path because they have never followed it. And it is absolutely correct to make it completely clear to the disciple that this is the only path, so he does not go astray.
By the time the arhats and the bodhisattvas reach to the peak, they experience the same light and the same bliss and the same ecstasy. But the arhats still remain silent. Bodhisattvas still remain concerned about people who have been left behind on the path.

There is a beautiful story about Gautam Buddha, who is a bodhisattva. When he reached the gate of paradise there was a great celebration because never before had such a great enlightened being reached paradise. He has a beauty of his own, a grace that is incomparable, and a compassion that is infinite.
The doors were wide open; there was celebration in paradise. But the story is that Gautam Buddha refused to enter paradise, on the grounds that he had left many on the way. He would stand at the gate until the last human being had entered the gate. He would be ultimately the last.
The story says that he is still standing outside the gate, waiting for his disciples and devotees whom he has promised. He cannot go against his promise.

Gautam Buddha criticized the seers of the Vedas, he criticized the seers of the Upanishads, he criticized Mahavira, he criticized everybody that he could find – Krishna, Rama, all the Hindu gods. For forty-two years continuously he was criticizing every old scripture, every old prophet, every old savior – but he is not an enemy of anyone. He was criticizing all those people so that you can be unconditioned, so that you can be freed from the clinging with the past – which cannot help you.
When a living enlightened being is present, he cannot allow you to remain clinging with the dead, which can only be a weight on your heart but cannot become wings for your freedom.
It needs tremendous insight and meditative understanding to have a little glimpse of the world of the enlightened person. I have criticized many. Only a few of them were enlightened; most of them were simply frauds. The frauds have to be absolutely exposed to humanity.
Even those who were enlightened have become only a tradition, a convention, a dead belief. You have to be freed from their grip too because they cannot help you, they can only hinder your path. They can become your chains, but they cannot become your freedom.
I can become your freedom. I am your freedom.
When I am gone I hope there may still be courageous people in the world to criticize me, so that I don’t become a hindrance on anybody’s path. And those who will criticize me will not be my enemies; neither am I the enemy of those whom I have criticized. The working of the enlightened masters just has to be understood.
You should remember only one word, and that is compassion – compassion for you, compassion for all those who are still not centered in their being, who are still far away from themselves, who have to be called back home.

============================================================

Osho,
How does watching lead to no-mind? I am more and more able to watch my body, my thoughts and feelings and this feels beautiful. But moments of no thoughts are few and far between. When I hear you saying, “Meditation is witnessing,” I feel I understand. But when you talk about no-mind, it doesn't sound easy at all. Would you please comment?
Meditation covers a very long pilgrimage. When I say, “meditation is witnessing,” it is the beginning of meditation. And when I say, “Meditation is no-mind,” it is the completion of the pilgrimage. Witnessing is the beginning, and no-mind is the fulfillment. Witnessing is the method to reach to no-mind. Naturally you will feel witnessing is easier. It is close to you.
But witnessing is only like a seed, and then comes the long waiting period. Not only waiting, but trusting that this seed is going to sprout, that it is going to become a bush; that one day the spring will come and the bush will have flowers. No-mind is the last stage of flowering.
Sowing the seeds is of course very easy; it is in your hands. But bringing forth the flowers is beyond you. You can prepare the whole ground, but the flowers will come on their own accord; you cannot manage to force them to come. The spring is beyond your reach – but if your preparation is perfect, spring comes; that is absolutely guaranteed.
The way you are moving is perfectly good. Witnessing is the path and you are starting to feel, once in a while, a thought-less moment. These are glimpses of no-mind, but just for a moment.
Remember one fundamental law: that which can exist just for a moment can also become eternal because you are given not two moments together, but always one moment. And if you can transform one moment into a thought-less state, you are learning the secret. Then there is no hindrance to changing the second moment, which will also come alone with the same potential and the same capacity.
If you know the secret you have the master key, which can open every moment into a glimpse of no-mind. No-mind is the final stage: when mind disappears forever and the thoughtless gap becomes your intrinsic reality. If these few glimpses are coming, they show you are on the right path and you are using the right method.
But don’t be impatient. Existence needs immense patience. The ultimate mysteries are opened only to those who have immense patience.
I am reminded… In old Tibet it was customary, respectful, that every family should contribute to the great experiment of expanding consciousness. So the first child of each family was given to the monasteries to be trained in meditation. Perhaps no country has done such a vast experiment in consciousness.
The destruction of Tibet at the hands of communist China is one of the greatest calamities that could have happened to humanity. It is not only a question of a small country; it is a question of a great experiment that was going on for centuries in Tibet. The first child was given to the monasteries when he was very small – five, or at the most six, years old. I am reminded of one incident: there would have been millions like it…
A six-year-old child… Tibet knew that children can learn witnessing better than grown-ups. The grown-ups are already utterly spoiled. The child is innocent and as yet the slate of his mind is empty. To teach him emptiness is absolutely easy. But the entrance of a child into a monastery was very difficult, particularly for a small child. I am telling you about only one incident but there would have been hundreds of incidents happening like this. It is bound to be so.

A small child, six years old, is leaving. His mother is crying because life in a monastery for a small child is going to be so arduous. The father tells the child, “Don’t look back! It is a question of our family’s respectability. In the whole history of our family a child has never looked back – not even once. Whatever the entrance test for the monastery is, even if your life is at risk, don’t look back. Don’t think of me or your mother and her tears.
“We are sending you for the ultimate experiment in human consciousness with great joy, even though the separation is painful. But we know you will pass through all the tests. You are our blood, and of course you will keep the dignity of your family.”
The small child rides on the horse with a servant riding on another horse. A tremendous desire arises in him when the road turns, just to have a look again back to the family house, to its garden. His father must be standing there, his mother must be crying, but he remembers that his father has said, “Don’t look back.”
And he does not look back. With tears in his eyes, he turns with the road. Now he cannot see his house anymore and one never knows how long it will take – perhaps years and years – until he will be able to see his father and mother and his family again.
He reaches the monastery. At the gate of the monastery the abbot meets him, receives him gracefully, as if he is a grown-up, bows down to him as he bows down to the abbot. And the abbot says, “Your first test will be to sit outside the gate with closed eyes, unmoving, unless you are called in.”
The small child sits at the gate, outside the gate with closed eyes. Hours pass, and he cannot even move. There are flies sitting on his face, but he cannot remove them. It is a question of the dignity that the abbot has shown to him. He does not think any more like a child; so respected, he has to fulfill his family’s longing, the abbot’s expectations.
The whole day passes, and even other monks in the monastery start feeling sorry for the child. Hungry, thirsty – he is simply waiting. They start feeling that the child may be small, but he has great courage and guts.
Finally, by the time the sun is setting and the whole day has passed, the abbot comes and takes the child in. He says, “You have passed the first test, but there are many more peaks ahead. I respect your patience, being such a small child. You remained unmoving, you did not open your eyes. You did not lose courage, you trusted that whenever the time is right you will be called in.”
And then years of training in witnessing: the child was only allowed to see his parents again after perhaps ten years, twenty years had elapsed. But the criterion was that until he experienced no-mind, he could not be allowed to see his parents, his family. Once he achieves no-mind, then he can move back into the world. Then there is no problem.

Once a man is in a state of no-mind, nothing can distract him from his being. There is no power bigger than the power of no-mind. No harm can be done to such a person. No attachment, no greed, no jealousy, no anger – nothing can arise in him. No-mind is an absolutely pure sky without any clouds.
You say, “How does watching lead to no-mind?”
There is an intrinsic law: thoughts don’t have their own life. They are parasites; they live on your identifying with them. When you say, “I am angry,” you are pouring life energy into anger because you are getting identified with anger.
But when you say, “I am watching anger flashing on the screen of the mind within me,” you are not giving any life, any juice, any energy to anger anymore. You will be able to see that because you are not identified the anger is absolutely impotent, has no impact on you, does not change you, does not affect you. It is absolutely hollow and dead. It will pass on and it will leave the sky clean, the screen of the mind empty.
Slowly, slowly you start getting out of your thoughts. That’s the whole process of witnessing and watching. George Gurdjieff used to call it “non-identification.” In other words you are no longer identifying with your thoughts. You are simply standing aloof and away – indifferent, as if they might be anybody’s thoughts. You have broken your connections with them. Only then can you watch them.
Watching needs a certain distance. If you are identified there is no distance, they are too close. It is as if you are putting the mirror too close to your eyes: you cannot see your face. A certain distance is needed. Only then can you see your face in the mirror.
If thoughts are too close to you, you cannot watch. You become impressed and colored by your thoughts. Anger makes you angry, greed makes you greedy, lust makes you lustful because there is no distance at all. They are so close that you are bound to think that you and your thoughts are one.
Watching destroys this oneness and creates a separation. The more you watch, the bigger is the distance. The bigger the distance, the less energy your thoughts are getting from you. And they don’t have any other source of energy. Soon they start dying, disappearing. In these disappearing moments you will have the first glimpses of no-mind.
That is what you are experiencing. You say: “I am more and more able to watch my body, my thoughts and feelings, and this feels beautiful.” This is just the beginning. Even the beginning is immensely beautiful – just to be on the right path, even without taking a single step, will give you immense joy for no reason at all.
And once you start moving on the right path, your blissfulness, your beautiful experiences are going to become more and more deep, more and more wide, with new nuances, with new flavors, with new fragrances.
You say, “But moments of no thoughts are few and far between.” It is a great achievement because people don’t know even a single gap. Their thoughts are always in a rush hour: thoughts upon thoughts, bumper-to-bumper – the line continues, whether they are awake or asleep. What you call your dreams are nothing but thoughts in the form of pictures because the unconscious mind does not know alphabetical languages. There is no school, no training institute that teaches the unconscious language.
The unconscious is very primitive; it is just like a small child. Have you looked at the books of your small children? If you want to teach the child, you have to make a big picture first. So in children’s books you will see pictures, colorful pictures, with very little writing. The child is more interested in the pictures. He is primitive, he understands the language of pictures.
Slowly, slowly you make the pictures and the language associate. Whenever he sees the mango he knows, “it is a mango,” and he starts learning that underneath the picture of the mango there is a certain word describing it. His interest is in the mango, but the word mango slowly becomes associated. As the child grows, the pictures will become smaller and there will be more language. By the time he enters university, the pictures will have disappeared from the book; only language will remain.
By the way, this reminds me to tell you that television has brought humanity back to a primitive stage because people are again looking at pictures. There is a danger in the future: it is already apparent that people have stopped reading great literature. Who bothers to read, when you can see the film on the TV? This is a dangerous phenomenon because there are things that cannot be reproduced in pictures. Great literature can be only partially reproduced in pictures. The danger is that people will slowly start forgetting language and its beauty and magic, and they will again become primitives, watching the television.
Now the average American is watching television for seven and a half hours every day. This is going to destroy something that we have achieved with great difficulty. Now, this man who is watching television for seven and a half hours per day – you cannot expect him to read Shakespeare, Kalidas, Rabindranath Tagore, Herman Hesse or Martin Buber or Jean Paul Sartre. The greater the literature, the less the possibility of putting it into pictures.
Pictures are colorful, exciting, easy, but they are no comparison to language. The future has to be protected from many things. Computers can destroy people’s memory systems because there will be no need. You can keep a small computer the size of a cigarette packet in your pocket: it contains everything that you will ever need to know. Now there is no need to have your own memory. Just push a button and the computer is ready to give you any information you need.
The computer can destroy the whole memory system of humanity that has been developed for centuries with great difficulty. Television can take away all great literature, and the possibility of people like Shelley or Byron being born again in the world. These are great inventions, but nobody has looked at the implications. They will reduce the whole of humanity into a retarded state.
What you are feeling is a great indication that you are on the right path. It is always a question for the seeker whether he is moving in the right direction or not. There is no security, no insurance, no guarantee. All the dimensions are open: how are you going to choose the right one?
These are the ways and the criteria of how one has to choose. If you move on any path – any methodology – and it brings you joy, more sensitivity, more watchfulness, and gives a feeling of immense well-being, this is the only criterion that you are going on the right path. If you become more miserable, more angry, more of an egoist, more greedy, more lustful, those are the indications you are moving on a wrong path.
On the right path your blissfulness is going to grow more and more every day, and your experiences of beautiful feelings will become tremendously psychedelic, more colorful – colors that you have never seen in the world, fragrances that you have never experienced in the world. Then you can walk on the path without any fear that you can go wrong.
These inner experiences will always keep you on the right path. Just remember that if they are growing, that means you are moving. Now you have only a few moments of thoughtlessness. It is not a simple attainment; it is a great achievement because in their whole lives people do not know even a single moment when there is no thought. These gaps will grow.
As you become more and more centered, more and more watchful, these gaps will start growing bigger. And if you go on moving without looking back, without going astray, if you keep going straight the day is not far away when you will feel for the first time that the gaps have become so big that hours pass and not even a single thought arises. Now you are having bigger experiences of no-mind.
The ultimate achievement is when twenty-four hours a day you are surrounded with no-mind.
This does not mean that you cannot use your mind. That is a fallacy propounded by those who know nothing about no-mind. No-mind does not mean that you cannot use the mind; it simply means that the mind cannot use you.
No-mind does not mean that the mind is destroyed. No-mind simply means that the mind is put aside. You can bring it into action any moment you need to communicate with the world. It will be your servant. Right now it is your master. Even when you are sitting alone it goes on, yakkety-yak, yakkety-yak – and you cannot do anything, you are so utterly helpless.
No-mind simply means that the mind has been put in its right place. As a servant it is a great instrument. As a master it is very unfortunate, it is dangerous, it will destroy your whole life.
Mind is only a medium for when you want to communicate with others. But when you are alone, there is no need of the mind. So whenever you want to use it, you can use it.
And remember one thing more: when the mind remains silent for hours, it becomes fresh, young, more creative, more sensitive, rejuvenated through rest.
Ordinary people’s minds start somewhere around three or four years of age, and then they go on continuing for seventy years, eighty years without any holiday. Naturally they cannot be very creative. They are utterly tired – and tired with rubbish. Millions of people in the world live without any creativity. Creativity is one of the greatest blissful experiences. But their minds are so tired, they are not in a state of overflowing energy.
The man of no-mind keeps the mind in rest, full of energy, immensely sensitive, ready to jump into action the moment it is ordered. It is not a coincidence that the words of the people who have experienced no-mind, start having a magic of their own. When they use their mind, it has a charisma, it has a magnetic force, it has tremendous spontaneity, and the freshness of the dewdrops in the early morning before the sun rises. And the mind is nature’s greatest, evolved medium of expression and creativity.
So the man of meditation – or in other words, the man of no-mind – changes even his prose into poetry. Without any effort, his words become so full of authority that they don’t need any arguments. They become their own arguments. The force that they carry becomes a self-evident truth. There is no need for any other support from logic or from scriptures. The words of a man of no-mind have an intrinsic certainty about them. If you are ready to receive and listen, you will feel it in your heart – the self-evident truth.
Look down the ages: Gautam Buddha has never been contradicted by any of his disciples; neither has Mahavira, nor Moses, nor Jesus. There is something in their very words, in their very presence that convinces you. Without any effort to convert you, you are converted. None of the great masters have been missionaries; they have never tried to convert anyone, but they have converted millions.
It is a miracle – but the miracle consists of a rested mind, of a mind that is always full of energy and is used only once in a while.
When I speak to you, I have to use the mind. When I am sitting in my room almost the whole day, I forget all about the mind. I am just a pure silence, and meanwhile the mind is resting. When I speak to you, those are the only moments when I use the mind. When I am alone, I am utterly alone, and there is no need to use the mind.
You say: “When I hear you say, ‘Meditation is witnessing,’ I feel I understand. But when you talk about no-mind, it doesn’t sound easy at all.”
How can it sound easy? It is your future possibility. You have started meditation: it may be in the beginning stages but you have a certain experience of it that makes you understand me. But if you can understand meditation, don’t be worried at all.
Meditation surely leads to no-mind, just as every river moves toward the ocean without any maps, without any guides. Every river, without exception, finally reaches the ocean. Every meditation, without exception, finally reaches the state of no-mind.
But naturally, when the Ganges is in the Himalayas wandering in the mountains and in the valleys, it has no idea what the ocean is, it cannot conceive of the existence of the ocean. But it is moving toward the ocean because water has the intrinsic capacity of always finding the lowest place, and the oceans are the lowest place. So rivers are born on the peaks of the Himalayas and start moving immediately toward lower spaces, and finally they are bound to find the ocean.
Just the reverse is the process of meditation. It moves upward to higher peaks, and the ultimate peak is no-mind. No-mind is a simple word, but it exactly means enlightenment, liberation, freedom from all bondage, the experience of deathlessness and immortality.
Those are big words and I don’t want you to be frightened, so I use a simple word, no-mind. You know the mind, you can conceive of a state when this mind will be non-functioning.
Once this mind is non-functioning, you become part of the mind of the cosmos, the universal mind. When you are part of the universal mind your individual mind functions as a beautiful servant. It has recognized the master, and it brings news from the universal mind to those who are still chained by the individual mind.
In fact when I am speaking to you, it is the universe using me. My words are not my words; they belong to the universal truth. That is their power, that is their charisma, that is their magic.

Osho,
Are there real differences in different races, or is it just superstition?
There are differences not only between the races, but even in the individuals. Each individual has a uniqueness about himself. There is no other individual exactly like you. You are alone.
And this is the dignity of the individual – that he is not a replica, not a repetition, not a carbon copy. What is true about individuals is in a different way true about races. Because each race of humanity has passed through a different terrain, a different history, it has grown different psychologies, different minds. It is absolutely natural that the Eskimos will certainly be different from the people who have not even known how it feels when snow is falling.
Eskimos have eleven names for snow. No other language has eleven names for snow because only Eskimos know the slight differences which make the eleven names, which are not synonymous. But to know those slight and subtle differences you have to be in the same geography, in the same climate, and you have to pass through the same experiences.
Different races have passed through different lands, through different experiences, and naturally they have grown certain characteristics. According to me, that makes the earth more beautiful because it gives variety.
But your question is: “Are there real differences…or is it just superstition?”
There are real differences – and there are many more which are only superstitions, which are not real differences. Naturally, a man born in Tibet will have different superstitions from a man born in India. For example: heaven, according to the Indian tradition, is a very cool place, almost air-conditioned; cool breezes all day long, never hot. But Eskimos and Tibetans will not agree with this heaven! They are tired of the cold.
In fact, in Tibet for centuries there has been a strange tradition that whenever a child is born, he is immediately dipped into ice-cold water nine times – a newborn child! Nine children out of ten die, but the reasoning behind such an act is out of a deep understanding of Tibet. If a child is not strong enough to survive those nine dips in the ice-cold water it is better for him to die because he will remain sick, unhealthy, miserable his whole life.
It looks cruel because it is killing almost nine children out of ten. But it is out of compassion, not out of cruelty. They know perfectly well what is ahead. If the child is not capable, has not the stamina to face Tibetan ice – eternal ice that has never melted all year round – if he is weak from the very beginning, his whole life will be miserable. It is better to die before suffering a life of unnecessary pain and misery. And the child who survives certainly proves he is capable of living in the eternal snows, perfectly healthy.
Tibetans are very healthy people, but the reason is that the unhealthy ones have been canceled from the very beginning. Their heaven is warm and remains warm all the year round. Snow never falls in their heaven; it falls in their hell. Their hell is utterly cold, far worse than Tibet.
These are all superstitions: they also make differences.

One of my friends, a professor of Sanskrit, wanted to go to Tibet. He was doing some research on a few Sanskrit scriptures that had disappeared from India. But their translations were in existence in Tibet: he wanted to translate them back into Sanskrit.
Those were very important scriptures, particularly concerned with Gautam Buddha. Perhaps Hindus burned those scriptures in India, but because Tibet became Buddhist, before they were destroyed they were translated into Tibetan. They exist in Chinese, they exist in Japanese; only in Indian languages do they not exist – and Buddha was born in this land, he was speaking the language of the people of this land.
So this man’s research was really very significant in bringing Buddha back to his own land. But he was a high-caste brahmin, and he had learned Tibetan with great effort. Of course Sanskrit was his family language. He belonged to a very learned family; they used Sanskrit in their family instead of any other language of the people, so he was perfectly capable of translating from Tibetan into Sanskrit.
But I told him, “I expect to see you back within three days.”
He said, “What are you saying? It will take at least three years.”
I said, “Forget all about it! I know you – and I know something about Tibet.”
He said, “I don’t understand, you always make strange statements.”
He went to Tibet. He was a high-caste brahmin with all the superstitions of the brahmins. The brahmin has to take a cold bath in the river before sunrise; then he has to do his religious worship – and only after that can he take his breakfast. As he reached Tibet, he remembered me. My statement was not wrong. He took only one bath and that was enough. He forgot all about translations.
By the third day I had to receive him at the airport. I said, “What do you think about my statement?”
He said, “I would have been killed in three years. Just one day was enough. Even now I am still shivering; the coldness has entered into my bones. Without taking a bath before sunrise I cannot even take my breakfast. So the choice was either to live without food or to have a cold bath before sunrise.”
I said, “That’s why I had said what I said. You are a fanatic brahmin; you will not drop your stupid idea. It is perfectly good in India, in fact the best time to take a bath is before the sun rises; only then is it cool. As the sun rises things become hotter. The moments before sunrise are the most beautiful in India. But that is not the case with Tibet.”

Now, the Dalai Lama, the head of the state of Tibet and also the head of the Buddhist church of Tibet, has escaped from Tibet. He lives in India and thousands of Tibetans have come with him.
I was giving a meditation camp in Bodhgaya, where Gautam Buddha became enlightened, and thousands of Tibetans had come just to pay their respects to Gautam Buddha and the place and the tree under which he became enlightened. Hearing that I was also staying just near the place where Gautam Buddha became enlightened, and that hundreds of my people were meditating there, they became curious. They came to see me.
I have never felt so miserable in my life because they stink and I am allergic to smells. They are the smelliest fellows in the whole world! Their holy scripture says: “At least one bath every year is absolutely necessary.” They are covered with the dust of Indian roads, perspiring – but they will not take a bath. Only one bath per year is allowed. They use the same clothes they were using in Tibet, many layers of clothes. It is very difficult to make a Tibetan naked: you take off one layer of clothes, another layer; you take that off and you find another layer. And each layer becomes dirtier!
I had to tell my people, “Prevent these people from coming to me. They have been living for years now in India, but they have not changed their superstition.”
A more intelligent humanity will not follow superstitions, will not follow what is right in one place but may not be right in another place. Intelligence demands that you respond to the situation in which you are. So there are superstitious differences, and those differences make humanity not beautiful, they make humanity stupid.
I believe in the old saying: When in Rome, act like the Romans – order spaghetti. That is why I have refused my sannyasins… They have been continuously trying to persuade me to come to Italy and I am saying, “No. Either spaghetti or me!” And this is not a superstition!

One of my secretaries was a beautiful Italian woman, well educated. She was a professor in the university of Rome. She had all the degrees in philosophy, post graduation, Ph.D., D.Litt., and she was the first Italian to come into contact with me. She destroyed my interest in spaghetti because one day she prepared spaghetti for me.
That woman never used to take a bath, I don’t think she had ever taken one in her whole life. Her face had layers of powder, centuries old! She went on putting on more powder but she would not take a bath. I used to tell her to sit a little far away.
Very lovingly she brought the spaghetti. I could not refuse – it looked too unmannerly – so I said to her, “Leave it on my dining table, but you leave the room.”
She said, “I would just like to see you eating spaghetti.”
I said, “Please leave the room, and then I will take care of the spaghetti.” And as I went close to my dining table, the spaghetti smelled exactly like the woman smelled. I had to throw it down the toilet. Even after twenty years, whenever I remember I start smelling the spaghetti. I don’t know the real smell of spaghetti, but I don’t want to know.

But there are beautiful differences that should be protected. Humanity should remain a beautiful garden with all kinds of flowers. Even the wild flowers should be protected. They all make life richer, more beautiful, more adventurous.

The people that run international car shows have discovered that the nationality of the visitors can be determined by the way in which the visitors approach a car. If a visitor opens the hood to look at the engine, he is a German. If he is interested in the style and the lines of a car, he is French. If he tries the horn, he is Italian. And if he checks the size and the price tag, he is a Jew.

“Man, am I scared!” confided Paddy to Seamus, looking furtively around the pub. “I just got a card from a guy saying that he would shoot me if I did not stay away from his wife.”
“Well, stay away from his wife,” advised Seamus, “and you have got no problem.”
“How can I?” moaned Paddy, “he did not sign his name.”

Hymie Goldberg was telling his friends about his sailing holiday and how his boat had capsized in rough weather, throwing him into the water.
“I had abandoned all hope,” said Hymie, “and as I sank for the third time, my past lives seemed to rise up before me in a series of grim, realistic pictures.”
A murmur of sympathy came from the group listening. But before Hymie could continue, his friend Moishe Finkelstein spoke up sharply saying, “And did you happen to notice a picture of me lending you five dollars late in 1960?”

The sun never sets on the British Empire because God would not trust an Englishman in the dark.

Nathan Nussbaum from Israel is visiting Paris. He goes to a brothel and insists on the services of a girl called Gloria. Gloria is unavailable, but when Nathan shows a thousand-dollar bill, she is brought to him and they spend the night together.
On the following two nights again a thousand-dollar bill changes hands and Nathan and Gloria spend the nights in passion.
Finally Gloria asks why she is receiving such generous attention.
“Well,” says Nathan, “you see, I am from Israel.”
“Why, so am I,” exclaims Gloria.
“Yes, I know,” replies Nathan. “It happens that your grandmother lives in the same building as my parents and when she heard I was going to Paris, she asked me to give you the three thousand dollars you asked for.”

============================================================

Osho,
Why am I scared to accept myself the way I am?
Everybody is in the same situation. Everybody is scared to accept himself the way he is. This is how all the past centuries of mankind have cultivated, conditioned every child, every human being.
The strategy is simple but very dangerous. The strategy is to condemn you and to give you ideals so that you are always trying to become someone else. The Christian is trying to become a Jesus, the Buddhist is trying to become a Buddha. To distract you from yourself seems so clever a device that perhaps the people who have been doing it are themselves unaware of it.
What Jesus said on the cross – his last words to humanity – is immensely significant in many ways, particularly in this context. He prayed to God, “Father, forgive these people because they know not what they are doing.”
This is applicable to every father and to every mother, to every teacher and every priest and every moralist; to the people who manage culture, society, civilization, and who try to mold every individual in a certain way. Perhaps they also don’t know what they are doing. Perhaps they think they are doing everything for your good. I don’t suspect their intentions, but I certainly want you to be aware that they are ignorant, they are unconscious people.
A small child is born into the hands of an unconscious society. And the unconscious society starts molding the child according to its own ideals, forgetting the one thing which is the most fundamental: that the child has a potential of his own. He has to grow, not into a Jesus or into a Krishna or into a Buddha. He has to grow to be himself.
If he misses growing into being himself he will remain utterly miserable his whole life. His life will become just a hell and a curse, and he will not know what has gone wrong. He has been put in the wrong direction from the very beginning.
And he thinks the people who have put him in the wrong direction love him, are his benefactors. Actually they are his greatest enemies. The parents, the teachers, the priests and the leaders of the society are the greatest enemies of every individual who has been born on the earth up to now. Without being aware, they are distracting you from yourself.
And to distract you, you have to be absolutely conditioned about one thing: that you are unworthy, undeserving, of no use at all as you are. Of course you can become worthy of respect, dignity, if you follow the rules and regulations given to you by others. If you are able to manage to be a hypocrite you will be a prestigious citizen of the society.
But if you insist on being sincere, honest, authentic, yourself, you will be condemned by everybody. And it needs tremendous courage to be condemned by everybody. It needs a man with a steel spine to stand on his own and declare: “I am not going to be anybody else but myself. Good or bad, acceptable or not acceptable, prestigious or not prestigious, one thing is certain – that I can be only myself and nobody else.”
This needs a tremendously revolutionary approach toward life. This is the basic revolt that each individual needs if he wants ever to be out of the vicious circle of misery.
You are asking me: “Why am I scared to accept myself the way I am?” Because you have not been accepted by anyone the way you are. They have created the fear and the apprehension that if you accept yourself you will be rejected by everybody.
This is an absolute condition of every society and every culture that has existed up to now: that either you accept yourself and be rejected by all, or you reject yourself and gain the respect and honor of your whole society and culture. The choice is really very difficult.
Obviously the majority is going to choose respectability. But with respectability come all kinds of anxieties, anguishes; a meaninglessness, a desert-like life where nothing grows, where nothing is green, where no flower ever blossoms, where you will walk and walk and walk and you will never even find an oasis.
I am reminded of Leo Tolstoy. Just a few days ago in Moscow there was an international exhibition of books, and one of my sannyasins, Lani, was there. She was surprised – and my Russian sannyasins were there, and they were also surprised: world-famous publishing houses were exhibiting their books, but our stall was the most crowded. At any one time there were not less than one hundred people there the whole day that the exhibition was open.
One old man, looking at my picture, asked Lani, “Is this man something like Leo Tolstoy?” – just because of my beard. Tolstoy had a beautiful beard.
Tolstoy used to have a dream that psychoanalysts of different schools have been interpreting for almost the whole century. The dream was very strange, but not to me. To me it needs no psychoanalysis, but simple common sense. The dream was repeated every night continuously for years. It was strangely nightmarish, and Tolstoy awoke in the middle of every night, perspiring, although there was no danger in the dream.
But if you can understand the meaninglessness of the dream… That was the problem that became the nightmare. This dream represents almost everybody’s life. No psychoanalytic school has been able to figure out what kind of dream it is because there is no parallel, it is unprecedented.
The dream used to be the same every night. A vast desert, as far as you can see just desert and desert and two boots, which Tolstoy recognized as his, go on walking. But he is missing, just the boots go on making noise in the sand. And it continues because the desert is endless. They never reach anywhere. Behind he can see the prints of the boots for miles, and ahead he can see the boots going on walking.
Ordinarily you will not think it is a nightmare. But if you think a little more closely: every day, every night the same dream of utter futility, reaching nowhere. There seems to be no destiny, and nobody is in the boots, they are empty.
He told all the well-known psychoanalysts of his day in Russia. Nobody could figure out what it meant because there is no book that describes any dream which can even be called a little bit similar to this. It is absolutely unique.
But to me there is no question of any psychoanalysis. It is a simple dream, representing every human being’s life. You are walking in a desert because you are not walking toward the goal that is intrinsic in your being. You are not going to reach anywhere. The more you go away, the more you will be going away from yourself. And the more you look for any meaning the more you will find utter emptiness and nothing else. That is the meaning. The man is missing; only the boots are walking.
You are not in what you are doing. You are not in what you are being. You are not in what you are pretending. It is utter hollowness, pure hypocrisy.
But the way it has been created is a simple method: Tell everybody, “As you are, you are absolutely undeserving – even to exist. As you are, you are just ugly, an accident. As you are, you should be ashamed of yourself because you don’t have anything worthy of honor and respect.” Naturally, every child starts doing things that are supposed to be honorable. He goes on becoming more and more false, more and more phony, more and more distant from his authentic reality, his very being – and then the fear arises.
Whenever a longing is felt to know yourself, it is immediately followed by great fear. The fear is that if you find yourself you are going to lose respect for yourself – even in your own eyes.
The society is too heavy on every individual. It makes every effort to condition you so heavily that you start thinking that you are the conditioning – and you become part of the society, against your own being. You become a Christian, you become a Hindu, you become a Mohammedan, and you forget completely that you were born just as a human being, with no religion, with no politics, with no nation, with no race. You were born just a pure possibility of growth.
According to me, sannyas is to bring you back to yourself, whatsoever the consequences, whatsoever the risk. You have to come back to yourself. You may not find a Jesus there. There is no need: one Jesus is enough. You may not find a Gautam Buddha. It is perfectly okay because too many Gautam Buddhas in existence will be simply boring.
Existence does not want to repeat people. It is so creative that it always brings something new in each individual, a new potential, a new possibility, a new height, a new dimension, a new peak.
Sannyas is a revolt against all societies and all cultures and all civilizations, for the simple reason that they are against the individual. I am absolutely for the individual. I can sacrifice every society and every religion and every civilization – the whole history of mankind – just for a single individual. The individual is the most valuable phenomenon because the individual is part of existence.
You will have to drop your fear. It has been imposed on you; it is not natural. Watch every small child: he accepts himself perfectly; there is no condemnation, there is no desire to be anybody else. But everybody, as he grows, is distracted. You will have to gather courage to come back to yourself. The whole society will prevent you; you will be condemned. But it is far better to be condemned by the whole world than to remain miserable and phony and false and live a life of somebody else.
You can have a blissful life and there are not two ways, only one single way. This is: you have just to be yourself, whatever you are. From there, from that deep acceptance and respect for yourself, you will start growing. You will bring flowers of your own – not Christian, not Buddhist, not Hindu – just absolutely your own, a new contribution to existence.
But it needs immense courage to go alone on a path leaving the whole crowd on the highway. To be in the crowd one feels cozy, warm; to go alone, naturally one feels afraid. The mind goes on arguing within that, “the whole of humanity cannot be wrong, and I am going alone.” It is better just to be part of the crowd because then you are not responsible if things go wrong.
Everybody is responsible. But the moment you depart from the crowd you are taking your responsibility in your own hands. If something goes wrong, you are responsible.
But remember one very fundamental thing: responsibility is one side of the coin and the other side is freedom. You can have both together or you can drop both together. If you don’t want to have responsibility, you cannot have freedom, and without freedom there is no growth.
So you have to accept responsibility for yourself and you have to live in absolute freedom so that you can grow, whatever you are. You may turn out to be a rosebush, you may turn out to be just a marigold flower, you may turn out just to be a wild flower that has no name. But one thing is certain: whatever you turn out to be, you will be immensely happy. You will be utterly blissful.
You may not have respectability – on the contrary, you may be condemned by everybody – but deep inside, you will feel such an ecstatic joy that only a free individual can feel. And only a free individual can grow in higher layers of consciousness, can reach to the heights of the Himalayan peaks.
Society has kept everybody retarded, it has made everybody stupid. It needs idiots; it does not want intelligent people around. It is afraid of intelligence because intelligence is always in revolt against slavery, against superstition, against all kinds of exploitation, against all kinds of stupidities, against all discriminations between races, nations, classes, colors. Intelligence is continuously in revolt.
Only the idiot is always obedient. Even God wanted Adam to be an idiot because it was his vested interest that Adam and Eve remain idiots so they could go on worshipping him.
In my vision the Devil is the world’s first revolutionary, and the Devil is the most significant person in the whole of history. The whole civilization and progress owe much to the Devil – not to God at all. God wanted only a stupid Adam, a stupid Eve; and if Adam had followed God you would still be chewing grass in the Garden of Eden!
Man has moved because he revolted against God. God was the establishment. God represents the establishment, authority, the power and the domination. Anybody who is intelligent cannot be converted into a slave; he would rather die than become a slave. He cannot be exploited and he cannot be dragged away from his own center.
My people have to learn the fact that I believe only in the religion of revolt. Except that, there is no religiousness. Except that, there is no possibility of your consciousness rising to the highest potential that you are carrying as dormant energy.

Paddy had recently joined his local skydiving club and had gone up for his first jump. Everything was going perfectly until it was Paddy’s turn to jump.
“Hold it,” shouted his instructor, “you are not wearing your parachute!”
“Oh, that’s okay,” replied Paddy, “we are just practicing, aren’t we?”

Society needs these idiots. They are perfectly obedient, docile, ready to be exploited, ready to be reduced almost into animals.
Don’t be afraid of accepting yourself. That’s where your real treasure is, that’s where your home is. Don’t listen to the so-called wise – they are the poisoners who have killed millions of people, destroyed their lives, taken away all meaning and significance.
It does not matter who you are. What matters is that you should remain exactly what you are because from there starts growth.
A few sutras for you to meditate upon, perhaps they may give you some courage, some intelligence.
“Everybody is ignorant, only on different subjects.” So don’t be worried about being ignorant; everybody is.
“All men are born free, but some get married.” So just be alert, and freedom is yours!
“Illusion is the first of all pleasures.” Remember, the life of growth goes beyond the mundane life of pleasures. Pleasure is not something very significant; it is just like scratching your skin: it feels pleasant, but just for a little while. If you go on scratching you will bring blood to your skin, and then pleasure turns into pain. And you all know that you have turned all your pleasures into pain.
A man of intelligence searches for something that can never be turned into pain and anguish and anxiety and suffering. What I call bliss is not pleasure because bliss cannot be turned into its opposite. There is no opposite of it.
The search should be for the eternal, and everybody has the capacity to experience the eternal. But the pleasures of the physical body or biological infatuation or the pleasures of eating food keep people engaged and take away the small time they have here on this earth to grow.
I have heard…

A man went to a psychiatrist and said, “I am very much concerned. My wife goes on eating and eating and she spends the whole day sitting on the sofa looking at the television. And even while she is looking at the television she is eating something – ice cream – or if she is not eating something, at least she is chewing gum. But her mouth continues.
“Now she has lost all beauty; she has become just a bag of skin with no curves anywhere. What am I supposed to do?”
The psychiatrist said, “Try one thing. It is a sure success; I have tried it on many patients.” He gave the man a photograph of a beautiful nude girl.
The man said, “My God! How is this picture going to help?”
The psychiatrist replied, “You have to understand the whole strategy. Put it inside your refrigerator. Stick it with real German glue, so your wife cannot take it away. Whenever she opens the refrigerator she will see herself, and this beautiful girl. Perhaps she will start reducing her weight. Just give her a comparison.”
For three or four months the psychiatrist waited and waited, and finally he went to the man’s home to find out what had happened. He could not believe it: the man was sitting on the sofa; he had become so fat and he was watching television, chewing gum. The psychiatrist said, “What is the matter? What happened to you?”
The man said, “It is that damned picture! Because of the picture I started going to the refrigerator, just to have a look. But when you open the refrigerator then naturally you want something, the very flavor of so many nice things. So each time I open the refrigerator I start eating. Your device worked, but it backfired.”

People are behaving so stupidly in their lives. People who go on eating. The doctors are prohibiting it; everybody is telling them that it is dangerous. What pleasure do they have? Just a small patch on the tongue experiences taste; once the food has passed that small patch you don’t know any taste, any pleasure. It must be utter stupidity.
But people are after all kinds of pleasures. They are not even aware that they are wasting immensely valuable time: this is the time when somebody becomes a Gautam Buddha, this is the time when somebody becomes a Socrates – the same time, the same energy, the same potential. But you are wasting it in running after things that are meaningless.

“Chivalry is a man’s attempt to defend a woman against every man except himself.”
“Even when you are on the right track you will get run over if you just sit there.”
“To do nothing is the most difficult thing in the world.”

Everybody is doing something. Only very few people know the art of sometimes not doing anything. When you are not doing anything you are simply and purely your being.
Doing and being are two ways of living your life, two styles of living your life. The life of doing is mundane; the life of being is sublime, is divine. I am not saying drop all doing, I am saying doing should be secondary in your life and being should be primary. Doing should be only for the necessities of life, and being should be your real luxury, your real joy, your real ecstasy.

“To be perfectly happy one must be perfectly stupid.”

Whenever you see a happy person, remember it. Stupid people are very happy because they don’t know what they are here for. They don’t know that there is some task to be fulfilled. They are almost like retarded children who go on playing with teddy bears. Your teddy bears can change their shape: somebody’s teddy bear is money and somebody’s teddy bear is women, and somebody’s teddy bear is men – but whatever you are doing you are feeling very happy that money is accumulating, that you have found a new girlfriend, that you are promoted to a higher position. You are utterly happy. Unless you are stupid this is not possible.
A man of intelligence will be able to see without fail that all these small things of life are preventing you from the beyond. They keep you engaged here, and this is not your home. They keep you engaged in a life that is going to end up in a graveyard.
The intelligent man starts asking – and this becomes his fundamental search and quest – “Is there something beyond the graveyard or not? If there is nothing beyond the graveyard, then this whole life is just a dream and meaningless. Unless there is something beyond, life cannot be significant and life cannot be meaningful.” But the stupid person is immensely happy with any toys that the society provides him. Don’t be stupid!

“To err is human, to admit it is divine.”

It is absolutely human to commit mistakes. To admit it, without any guilt, brings a transformation in your being. You are simply admitting your humanity by admitting your mistake. Something of the divine, something of the beyond starts opening up.

“Every cloud has a silver lining and even old clothes have their shiny side.”
“If it were not for the optimist, a pessimist would never know how happy he isn’t.”

People are continuously comparing themselves with others. They become happy, they become unhappy because of the comparisons.
I had a meeting with a very famous Hindu saint. He told a few other people who had gathered to listen to what transpired between us, “The secret of happiness is always to look to those who are unhappy. Look at the crippled and you will feel happy that you are not crippled. Look at the blind and you will feel happy that you are not blind. Look at the poor and you will feel happy that you are not poor.”
I had to stop this idiot! I said, “You don’t understand a simple fact. Once a person starts comparing he cannot stop at only comparing with those who are unfortunate. He will also look at those who are richer than him, who are more beautiful than him, who are stronger than him, who are more respectable than him. Then he will be miserable. You are not giving him the secret of happiness; you are giving him the secret of being in absolute misery.”
It has been taught down the ages in almost all the religious scriptures, in different words, but the essential secret is the same: Feel contented because there are people who are so miserable. Thank God that you are not so miserable.
But this cannot remain one-sided. Once you learn the way of comparison, you cannot compare yourself only with those who are inferior to you. Inevitably you will also have to compare yourself with those who are superior to you – and then there will be immense misery.
In fact, comparison is not the right thing to do. You are yourself, and there is nobody else with whom you can be compared.
You are incomparable. So is the other person. Never compare.
Comparison is one of the causes that is keeping you tethered to the mundane – because comparison creates competition, comparison creates ambition. It does not come alone; it brings all its companions with it. And once you become competitive there is no end to it; you will end before it does. Once you become ambitious you have chosen the most stupid path for your life.

Henry Ford was once asked… And he seems to be one of the wisest men of this century because his small statements make so much sense. He was the first man to say that “history is bunk,” and that is absolutely true.
He was asked, “What have you learned through your successful life?” He was one of the most successful men you can conceive of; from poverty he rose to be the richest man in the world. What he said has to be remembered.
Henry Ford said, “Through all my successful life I have learned only one thing: I have learned to climb staircases, to climb ladders. And then when I reach the last rung of the ladder I feel so stupid and so embarrassed because there is no longer anywhere to go.
“And I cannot say to the people who are behind me, struggling hard to reach the same ladder where I am feeling stupid, what I have been struggling for. And nobody will listen to me if I say to them, ‘Stop wherever you are. Don’t waste time because there is nothing. Once you reach the top you are stuck. You cannot get down because that looks like falling back. You cannot go ahead because there is nowhere to go ahead.’”

The presidents and prime ministers of countries just feel stuck. Now they know there is only one thing that can happen, and that is the fall. There is nothing to rise to; there is nowhere to go except to fall from the place that they have reached. So they cling to their seats.
But this is not the right kind of life. First you go on climbing ladders, struggling with people; then ultimately you are stuck and you cling to the last rung so that nobody can take you away from it. Is this a madhouse?
Man has turned this planet into a madhouse. If you want to be sane, first be yourself – without any guilt, without any condemnation. Accept yourself with humbleness and simplicity.
This is a gift of existence to you. Feel grateful, and start searching for what can help you to grow as you are not to become a carbon copy of somebody else, but just to remain your original self.
There is no ecstasy greater than to be your original face.

Osho,
Is there any possibility that I will ever grow up?
I love the way you have asked the question. It is out of a sincere humbleness. And just because it is arising out of a simple humbleness it opens the doors for your growth.
You are asking, “Is there any possibility that I will ever grow up?” There are all the possibilities. For the humble heart everything is possible, for the egoist nothing is possible. For a person who can accept that “I am nobody,” all doors suddenly open, all the mysteries of existence become available. For the man who can say, “I do not know,” a miracle becomes possible. In his acceptance of not knowing he starts becoming wise because he starts becoming like a child, utterly innocent.
There is every possibility of your growing up. And particularly in this buddhafield, if you are not functioning out of your ego, if you have left your ego outside the Gateless Gate, then everything is possible for you, then the whole existence is available for you. The only thing that blocks is the small ego.
One sometimes wonders why this small ego, phony, false, prevents people from growing. Logically it seems very ridiculous, but existentially it is something like a small speck of dust falling into your eyes and the whole existence disappearing. Your eyes are closed, you cannot open your eyes. Those small pieces of dust have taken the whole of existence away from you. The rainbow in the clouds and the sun and the rain – all have disappeared.
Logically it should not be so: that such small dust particles prevent the view of the whole sky. But in reality they do. So it is not a question of logic; it is question of actual, existential reality.
The small ego functions just like a small dust particle in your vision, and it prevents you from looking at all the possibilities that are available, which have always been available. Just remove that small particle from your eyes. Nothing is changing, all was always available – your eyes were just not capable of seeing it.
With your humbleness great miracles are possible. Just remain humble, innocent, receptive, available, waiting for the guest to knock on your doors.

Two nuns were walking through the woods one evening when they were jumped on by two men who dragged them into the bushes and began to rape them. Sister Mary, bruised and battered, looked up at the sky and began to pray softly, “Forgive him Lord, for he knows not what he is doing.”
Sister Teresa looked over and said, “That’s a pity, mine does.”

A gorgeous blonde walked into the dentist’s office and was obviously very nervous. “Oh doctor,” she cried, “I’m so scared. You know, I think I would rather have a baby than have a tooth filled.”
“Okay,” said the dentist warily, “but make up your mind before I adjust the chair.”

Just remain innocent and laughing and rejoicing and you need not be worried about your growth. It will be happening on its own accord. You don’t have to do anything for it; you have just to create the right atmosphere.
And we have already created that atmosphere here. You can benefit from this atmosphere if you don’t remain an outsider – just a spectator or a curious person.
If you are here, then melt and merge in this beautiful communion which is incomparable in the sense that nowhere on the earth is anything similar happening. Where people are laughing, rejoicing, dancing, singing, melting into each other, the growth will come on its own accord.
Just learn to laugh, learn to dance, learn to sing, learn to be yourself, utterly fulfilled and grateful to existence.

Paddy and Maureen had just had their eighteenth child, so Maureen went to the doctor and asked if he could give her a hearing aid. “A hearing aid?” asked the doctor. “How will that help you plan your family more effectively?”
“Well,” said Maureen, “I’m a little bit deaf, so every night when Paddy says, ‘Would you like to go to sleep or what?’ I always say, ‘What?’”

============================================================

Osho,
I feel and know in my heart, I am your disciple. I don't feel I am yet a devotee although I aspire to be one. Is it the nature of being a devotee that one knows one has become one? Or does the innocence of the devotee make the awareness of it not possible?
Antar Farid, the question you are asking is certainly significant. Its significance is very subtle. I will have to go step by step to make it clear to you.
These are the stages a seeker moves through: the student, the disciple, the devotee. The fourth is also there but it does not belong to the seeker, it belongs to the one who has arrived; that’s why I am not counting it. The seeker is on the path. The student is not aware that he is a student. He may think he is a disciple, he may think he is a devotee; he functions absolutely unconsciously.
I am reminded of a case – it happened in the life of a Sufi mystic, Junnaid:

A man came; he wanted to be a disciple. Junnaid looked at him for a long time. The man started feeling a little nervous: Why is he looking at him for so long and so silently?
Finally Junnaid said, “To be a disciple is very difficult.”
The man said, “Then I am ready to be a devotee.”
Junnaid said, “That is even more difficult. The only thing that is not difficult here is to be a master.”
The man said, “If that is the case, I am ready to be the master.”
Junnaid told his disciples and devotees, “This is a case of unconsciousness. He is not even a student, but the longing is to be a master if it is easier.”

The student comes almost accidentally. Perhaps he reads a book, perhaps a friend talks to him and he becomes curious. But curiosity is so superficial; it cannot make you committed and devoted for a long journey. It is very momentary; hence the student is not accepted in the mystery schools. He is too unripe; he has to wander a few days more or perhaps a few lives more before he can be accepted by a master as a disciple. Another Sufi story will explain it to you clearly…

A man left his home and his village in search of a master. Just outside the village he met an old man sitting under a tree, so silently and so peacefully that he thought, “Perhaps he may know somebody who is a master; otherwise, how am I going to find…?”
Each master is so unique that there are no symptoms that can be recognizable. The young man went to the old man sitting under the tree and asked him, “Do you know a master?”
The old man said, “Certainly. Do you also want to know him?”
He said, “That’s why I have asked you. Show me how I can reach the master and how I will recognize him.”
The old man said, “It is easy. He will be very old – at least thirty years older than me – and he will be sitting under a tree.” And he described the tree, what kind of tree it would be, and he described the moment of meeting. He described it in such detail that the young man was puzzled, how he could manage to describe even the moment of meeting?
But the old man said, “It will take at least thirty years for you to find him.”
The young man thanked the old man and went on in search. Now he has some signs, some indications: a certain tree that he can recognize in the evening when the sun is setting, an old man who will be thirty years older than the man he has just left. Of course it is going to be a long journey, wandering here and there, but the old man said things with such authority, with such certainty, that it was almost indubitable.
He wandered in the desert, and he never came across the tree that was described, he never met a man who was thirty years older than the old man. Every evening when the sun was setting he looked all around. No master appeared.
Utterly frustrated and disappointed, now himself becoming old, tired and tattered with the journey in the desert, he came back home. Strangely enough, the old man was still sitting under the tree.
The last time when he was there and the old man was describing the tree – its leaves, its flowers, its fruit, its height, its foliage, its deep shade even in the middle of a sunny day – he had never looked at the tree under which the old man was sitting. He was describing the same tree, but now the man recognized it. After wandering for thirty years looking at every tree, he had become almost accustomed to looking at the tree first.
“My God,” he said, “this is the tree! I never came across the same tree anywhere.” And the old man was certainly thirty years older, and all the descriptions that he had given about the master were absolutely apparent in the old man – and the sun was setting.
The old man said, “So you have come! I had to wait so long. I was already old enough and ready to die, but just for you I had to wait thirty years.”
The young man said, “This is so stupid! Why didn’t you tell me at the first moment of meeting that this is the tree and you are the master?”
The old man laughed. He said, “I had told it in every possible way, but you were not ripe. Your understanding was almost absent. These thirty years have ripened you and now you can recognize that which you failed to recognize when you met me. I am your master.”

The student is very accidental. There is every possibility that he will never become a disciple. He may go from one place to another, he may gather much knowledge, but he will never become aware of his own being – which is the only true knowledge in existence; the only knowledge that takes you away from darkness to light, away from death to immortality and away from ignorance to innocence. It is the only knowledge that is not information but transformation.
The student is not aware that he is accidental, that he is only curious, that the search has not begun yet because deep in his heart he is not ready to go on a long pilgrimage.
The disciple knows perfectly well that he is a disciple. The first rays of understanding, awareness, have penetrated his being. He knows for sure that he is no longer a student. He feels it deep in his heart, without any doubt, that the miracle has happened: he has become a disciple. He feels the dedication, he feels the love, he feels the commitment. Even if it takes lives to reach, he knows he is on the right path and he will certainly reach. He knows perfectly well that he has found the master.
It is not an intellectual understanding; it is something intuitive, just like love. In fact, the Zen masters have called it “the great affair.” Love is a small affair, but to find a master is a great affair because there is no other love that will be deeper and more fragrant and more profound than that which exists between the disciple and the master. And the disciple is perfectly aware of it.
But the devotee is again a totally different phenomenon. The devotee never knows – not because he is unconscious like the student. Devotion comes so slowly, not making any noise. You don’t hear the footsteps.
The disciple simply grows just as the child grows and becomes a young man and the young man grows and one day becomes old, but you cannot find when it happened. The disciple grows slowly, slowly into a devotee. And to be a devotee is such a total transformation that only the master becomes aware that you have changed from the disciple to the devotee. You yourself cannot be aware of it.
But the difference between the unawareness of the student and the absence of awareness of the devotee is tremendous. The devotee is so full that there is no place left from where he can stand aloof and be aware of what is happening. He is completely enveloped with the experience, and it is so absorbing that he cannot be watchful of it.
To be watchful, to be alert, you need a certain distance. The devotee has lost all distance. It is the master who recognizes for the first time the change, that the climate has changed: the disciple is no longer a disciple.
Another Sufi story may help you. Sufis have such beautiful stories, such unparalleled stories, that each story opens a new vision.

This Junnaid I mentioned was himself once a seeker. He used to tell his disciples, “When I met my master, the master never looked at me for three years. I was sitting from morning till evening. So many people were coming and going and he was talking to people and he did not look at me – as if I did not exist for him yet. But I was persistent because I had felt the presence of the master and I had tasted the sweetness of his surroundings. I remained. In fact the more he ignored me, the more I became certain that there is some secret in his ignoring me.”
After three years the master looked at him for the first time. That was the recognition that he was not a student but a disciple. A student would have got lost in three years. No student can stay that long, waiting just for a look. And then another three years passed and he never looked again.
After three years the master looked again and smiled too. And his smile almost went just like a sharp sword into the heart of Junnaid. Why had he smiled? But the master did not give him a chance to ask. He started talking to other disciples.
Three years passed again, and one day he called him close and kissed his forehead and said, “My son, now you are ready. Now you can go and spread the message.”
But no message had been given to him. For nine years he had been there and the only message was that once he was looked at, once he was smiled at, and once he had been kissed on his forehead.
But if the master is saying “You are ready,” it must be so. Touching the feet of the master in gratitude, he left.
He used to tell his disciples: “I met a very strange man. In nine years he prepared me without even looking at me – but at each change he made the indication. When he became certain that I was a disciple and whatever happened I was going to stay there, he looked at me. But his look was such a shower of love – I could have waited for it for three lives. Three years were nothing. I was immensely glad: the way he looked at me, with such deep love and compassion, I was almost bathed in a new experience.
“Without telling me anything… In those three years my mind had stopped functioning. I just went on looking at the master, his every gesture, and slowly, slowly there was nothing to think about. I even forgot for what purpose I was sitting there – and that was the day he looked at me and I knew the purpose, and I was immensely fulfilled.
“But then three years again passed, and when he smiled the whole of existence smiled. Every fiber of my being felt his smile, such a soft touch, but it went deep into my heart. I knew something had happened, but I was not aware at that time what had happened. I had passed from disciplehood into devoteehood.
“And the day he kissed my forehead, he sealed my certificate as a master. His kiss on my forehead was his only final message. It took me years to figure out slowly what he had meant.”

The kiss of the master to the disciple, to the devotee, is a declaration that the merger has happened, the melting has happened, and now you are ready to spread the fragrance that you are filled with all around.
The student is unconscious. The disciple starts becoming conscious. The devotee is so conscious that he cannot be conscious of his consciousness. It has to be a recognition from the master because from the devotee the distance between himself and the master is absolutely nil. From the devotee one grows into a master, but it is a spontaneous and natural growth.
Farid, I remember these Sufi stories because of your name. Farid is the name of a great Sufi master. You are right: “I feel and know in my heart, I am your disciple.” I agree with you.
You say “I don’t feel I am yet a devotee although I aspire to be one.” Just drop the aspiration and you are one. Only the aspiration is blocking the way. Aspiration is simply a beautiful name for desire, for greed.
Just drop the aspiration and there is no hindrance to your being transformed, transmuted from disciplehood into the wider world of a devotee. And you have certainly stumbled upon a beautiful fact, which cannot be possible just through intellect. You say, “Is it in the nature of being a devotee that one knows one has become one, or does the innocence of the devotee make the awareness of it not possible?”
The second part of your statement is correct; the very nature of the devotee makes it impossible for you to recognize it. There is no space left to stand aside and see. Every knowledge, every awareness needs a distance. You have to stand aside: then you can see and watch, and you can know and you can be aware.
But the devotee has lost all distance between himself and his knowing. He himself has become awareness. Now who is there to be aware of awareness?
This has to be understood: you cannot be aware of your awareness because if you can be aware of your awareness you will be falling into a very logical regress. Then you will have to be aware of your awareness of your awareness, and there is no end to it.
Finally you will always have to decide “Now, this is enough!” In fact you cannot be aware of your awareness because you are awareness. It comes from the recognition of the master. He can see the transformation, the change of the climate in your being. And every master has many things to do. One of the most important things, the final thing, is to give you the indication, the kiss on your forehead recognizing that you have entered into the most mysterious experience of life.
Farid, you will never become aware of your being a devotee, but your longing to be a devotee is a hindrance. Drop it immediately! Don’t take time dropping it, don’t postpone.
There are things that should never be postponed because the tomorrow is never certain. There are things that have to be done just here, immediately, and you will see many doors opening which your aspiration was blocking.
But once you enter into those mysteries you will not be aware because you will become the mystery itself.

Osho,
What does it mean to be in the middle?
To be in the middle means many things. I will have to start my answer from Gautam Buddha because he was the first man to use the words “to be in the middle,” and of course nobody has been able to improve upon the meanings that he gave to the word middle.
He called his path “the middle path.” The first meaning is that if you can avoid both the extremes – the rightist and the leftist – if you can be exactly in the middle of both the extremes, you will not be in the middle. You will have transcended the whole trinity of the extremes and the middle. If you drop both the extremes, the middle disappears on its own accord. Middle of what?
Gautam Buddha’s insistence on the middle is not on the middle; it is in fact a subtle way to persuade you for transformation. To tell you directly to be transformed may make you apprehensive, afraid, but to be in the middle seems to be very simple.
Gautam Buddha played with the word out of sheer compassion. His own word for the middle is majjhim nikai, the middle path. Every extreme has to exclude the other extreme; every extreme has to be in opposition to the other polarity. The negative is against the positive, the minus is against the plus, death is against life. If you take them as extremes, they naturally appear as opposites.
But the man who can stop exactly in the middle immediately transcends all the extremes and the middle as well. And from the higher standpoint of the transformed being, you can see there is no opposition at all. The extremes are not opposites, not contradictory, but only complementary.
Life and death are not enemies, they are part of one single process. Death does not end life, it simply renews it. It gives it a new form, a new body, a new plane of consciousness. It is not against life; looked at rightly, it is a process of refreshing life, of rejuvenating life. The day is not against the night.
In existence there is no opposition in anything; all opposites contribute to the whole. Existence is an organic unity. It does not exclude anything from it. It is all-inclusive.
The man who can stop in the middle comes to know this tremendous experience: that there are no opposites, no contradictories. The whole existence is one, and in that oneness all contradictions, all oppositions, all contraries disappear into a single unity. Then life includes death, then day includes night.
A man who can experience this organic unity becomes fearless, without any anguish and angst. For the first time he realizes his vastness because he is as vast as the whole existence.
One of the great disciples of George Gurdjieff, P. D. Ouspensky, has written a book. I must have seen thousands of books, and perhaps no other man in the whole world can claim to know more about books than I know. But in this whole experience of thousands of books I have never come across another book that can be compared in any way with P. D. Ouspensky’s Tertium Organum.
Tertium Organum means the third canon of thought. He gave this name to this great and incomparably unique book because there have been two other books in the past. The first was written by Aristotle, and he called it The First Organum, the first principle of thought; and the second was written by Bacon, and he called it Novum Organum, a new canon of thought.
Then Ouspensky wrote Tertium Organum, the third canon of thought, and he declared just in the beginning of the book that “although I am calling it the third canon of thought, it existed before the first canon of thought ever existed.” This book contains so many mysteries that each page, almost each paragraph, each sentence seems to be so pregnant with meaning.
I used to love underlining my books. That’s why I have never been interested in reading books from any library. I cannot underline a book that has been borrowed from a library; I cannot put my stamp on it. And I hate to read a book which has been underlined by somebody else because those lines which have been underlined stand out and they unnecessarily interfere in my own conception, my own flow.
This is the only book that I started underlining and I recognized after a few pages that every line has to be underlined. But I could not be unjust to the book. All my books in the library are underlined. Knowing perfectly well after a few pages that this book could be left not underlined but that that would be unjustified, I had to underline the whole book. In that book there are so many things. One that is significant is the reference I am talking about.
P. D. Ouspensky was one of the greatest mathematicians of his time. He knows perfectly well what he is writing, and he says that in mathematics the part can never be bigger than the whole. It is obvious: how can the part be bigger than the whole? But he goes on to say that mathematics is not all: “I have come to know the mystical experience with my master, George Gurdjieff, and now I can say there is a higher mathematics, the mystical mathematics, where the part can not only be equal to the whole, but sometimes it happens that it is bigger than the whole.”
Now you are entering into a strange world, where the part cannot only be equal to the whole, sometimes it can be bigger than the whole. It is simply absurd as far as logic is concerned, and from the mouth of a man who is one of the greatest mathematicians, and he knows it. He makes it clear that “I am embarrassed making this statement. As a mathematician I should condemn it. But what can I do against the existential experience? When it comes to experience, then mathematics or no mathematics, I have to state it exactly as it is.”
The moment somebody transcends the opposites and comes to know them as complementaries, he is not only part of the whole, he becomes the whole.
And let me tell you the final absurdity. Once in a while – in a man like Gautam Buddha, or in a man like Mahavira, or Chuang Tzu, or Lao Tzu – it happens that the part becomes bigger than the whole: absolutely illogical, absolutely unmathematical, but still absolutely right.
A Gautam Buddha not only contains the whole but because of his transformation he is a little bit more than the whole. The whole is not aware of its complementariness. Gautam Buddha is aware of its complementariness, and that’s where he transcends and becomes bigger than the whole although he is just a part of it.
To be in the middle is one of the great methods of transforming yourself into the ultimate. To prepare yourself for being in the middle you will have to drop all extremist ideas. And all your ideas are extremist – either leftist or rightist, either Christian or Mohammedan, either Hindu or Buddhist. You have chosen. You have not allowed a choiceless consciousness, accepting everything that is.
All your prejudices are your choices. I am against all your prejudices for a simple reason: to bring you into the middle.

The pope heard that a certain lady in Ireland had produced ten children, so he sent one of his cardinals to grant her his blessings.
When he met the lady the cardinal was disgusted to learn that she was not a Catholic. “Do you mean to say,” he thundered, “that I have come all this way to meet a sex-mad Protestant?”

If she had been a Catholic, she would have received the blessings of the pope. But unfortunately she is a Protestant. Immediately the prejudiced mind changes its position: from blessings; he starts cursing. He calls that poor woman “a sex-mad Protestant!” This is the way of all prejudices.
A sannyasin is one who has no prejudices, who has not chosen any ideology to be his own, who is choicelessly aware of all that is. In this choicelessness you will be in the middle. The moment you choose, you choose some extreme. The moment you choose, you choose against something; otherwise there is no question of choice. Being in a choiceless awareness is another meaning of being in the middle.

It happened that a very beautiful young prince, whose name was Shron, listened to Gautam Buddha for the first time. Buddha was visiting the capital of the young man’s kingdom, but listening to Gautam Buddha, the prince immediately asked to be initiated. He was well-known as a sitar player and he was also well-known for luxurious living, utterly luxurious.
It was said that even when he was going upstairs, rather than having a railing on the staircase, naked, beautiful women used to stand all along the staircase so that he could move from one woman’s shoulder to another woman’s shoulder. That was his way to go upstairs. He used to sleep the whole day because the hangover of the night before was too much; the whole night was a night of celebrations, drinking, eating, music, dance. There was no time for him to sleep in the night.
All these things were known, well known to the people. Gautam Buddha had never hesitated to give initiation to any man before. Now he hesitated. He said, “Shron, I know everything about you; I would like you to reconsider. Think it over. I am still going to stay in this capital for the four months of the rainy season.”
In the rainy season, Gautam Buddha never used to move around, nor did his sannyasins. Eight months of the year they were continuously wandering and sharing their experiences of meditation and higher states of consciousness. But because twenty-five centuries ago there were only mud roads, and Buddha had not allowed his disciples to have any possessions – not even an umbrella, no shoes, and just three pieces of cloth. One was for any emergency, and two so that you could change every day after the bath; more than three was not allowed. In the rainy season when it was pouring it would have been difficult to keep those three cloths dry, and to walk in the mud, in the pouring rain might make many poor sannyasins sick.
For that reason he had made it a point that for four months you remain in one place, and those who want to see you can come. For eight months you should go to every thirsty person; for four months let others come to you.
So he said, “There is no hurry, Shron.”
But Shron said, “Once I have taken a decision I never reconsider. You have to give me initiation right now.”
Buddha still tried to persuade him that “there is no harm in reconsidering it because you have lived a life of utter luxury. You have never walked on the road, you have been always in a golden chariot. You have never come out of your luxurious palace and gardens. You have lived continuously with beautiful women, with great musicians, with dancers. All that will not be possible when you become a sannyasin – not even two meals a day.” A Buddhist sannyasin is expected only to have one meal.
Gautam Buddha’s insight has been proved correct by science after twenty-five centuries of criticism. Now science has come to the same conclusion: if you can reduce your food to half, your diseases, sicknesses, illnesses will also be reduced to half, and your life will be doubled. Now it can be said scientifically that Buddha was right. It was not a deprivation; it was really a very healthy measure.
He told Shron, “You will not be able. And I don’t like anybody to return to the world because that makes him lose his self-respect. That’s why I say, ‘Consider.’”
Shron said, “I have considered again and again and I still want to be initiated right now. The more you tell me to consider the more I become adamant and stubborn.”
Gautam Buddha had to relent and give him initiation, and from the very second day there was trouble – but a trouble that no sannyasin of Gautam Buddha had expected. A trouble that perhaps Gautam Buddha had expected started happening.
When all the sannyasins had three pieces of cloth, Shron started living naked – from one extreme to the other extreme. When all the Buddhist sannyasins were walking on the road, Shron would always walk by the side of the road in the thorns. When the other sannyasins were resting under the shade of the trees, Shron would always stand in the hot sun in the middle of the day.
Within just six months a beautiful young prince became almost old, a skeleton, black; one could not recognize that this was the man who used to be a great prince and was famous for his utterly luxurious life. His feet were bleeding, his whole body had shrunk, and one night after six months Gautam Buddha went to the tree under which he was sleeping. It is one of the rare occasions when Buddha went in the night to any sannyasin for any reason. There is no other incident, at least in the Buddhist scriptures, this is the only incident.
He woke Shron up and asked him a very strange question: “I have heard that when you were a prince you were also the greatest sitarist in the country. Is that right?”
Shron said, “You could have asked at any time. I don’t see the point in the middle of the night.”
Gautam Buddha said, “Just wait a little, you will see the point.”
Shron said, “Yes, it is true.”
Buddha said, “Now the second question is, if the strings of the sitar are too tight, will there be any music born out of those strings?”
Shron said, “Of course not. If they are too tight they will be broken.”
Buddha said, “If they are too loose, will there be any music?”
Shron said, “You are asking strange questions in the middle of the night. When the strings are too loose they cannot create any music. A certain tension is needed. In fact, to play on a sitar is simple. The real mastery is to keep the strings exactly in the middle, neither too tight nor too loose.”
Buddha said, “This is the point I came to make to you. Life is also a musical instrument: too tight and there is no music, too loose and there is no music. The strings of life have to be exactly in the middle; neither too tight, nor too loose. Only then is there music. And only a master knows how to keep them in the middle. Because you have been a master sitarist I would like you also to become a master of life. Just don’t move from one extreme to another, from luxury to austerity, from pleasures to self-torture. Try to be exactly in the middle.”
In a sense Gautam Buddha is one of the most profound psychologists that the world has produced: to be in the middle in every action of your life. Always find the middle and you have found the path of meditation and the path of liberation.

Osho,
When I enter the “Gateless Gate” my body is filled with some type of uncontrollable vibration. Sitting in your presence in Buddha Hall with closed eyes my whole body vibrates and tears flow from my eyes. I feel the vibration deepening as if someone has touched me. However, I get lost in the darkness with closed eyes and I am very much frightened of what's happening. Then I try to stop all this by keeping my eyes wide open. Osho, would you please comment?
It is natural that when something from the unknown starts happening one feels afraid. Although you are seekers and you want the whole sky to open for you – you want the unknown to touch your heart, you want the stars to enter in your being – you are not aware that when things start happening you will be afraid and trembling.
Now whatever is happening to you is absolutely good. But the fear is natural, and you will have to overcome your fear. It is perfectly good to sit with closed eyes when so much is happening around you and you are feeling strange vibrations and a soft touch to your heart.
Don’t close your eyes out of fear; close your eyes for deeper exploration. There is nothing to be afraid of. This is our existence, this is our world, and there are many, many things of which we are unaware.
As you become more receptive, you will become aware of subtle vibrations and naturally you will start thinking, “Am I going mad or what?” You will start feeling things which, if you are not aware and clear, can drive you nuts.
Close your eyes with love for a deeper contact with those vibrations. Those are the vibrations of a buddhafield. You are fortunate that they are touching you, but your fear can stop the whole process. If you want to be afraid, be afraid only of your fear. Except that, there is nothing to be afraid of.
Close your eyes. But when you close your eyes, another fear comes – of darkness. There is nothing in darkness to be afraid of. It is so silent, so beautiful, so vast. In the light you are always surrounded by a crowd of people or trees – but you are always crowded. Only in darkness are you absolutely alone. That aloneness creates fear.
But our whole effort is to teach you aloneness, to teach you to love without any choice. Light or darkness, both should be explored. Light has its own beauties, its own colors, its own rainbows, its own flowers. Darkness also has its own silences. Light comes and goes, darkness remains.
Darkness is far more eternal than light. It is always there; it does not need any fuel, it is not dependent on anything, on any cause. You cannot destroy darkness; you can destroy light without much difficulty. You cannot do anything directly with darkness; it is there and it will remain forever. Search for its beauties, search for its depth. Out of fear, first you close your eyes. Then another fear grips you – of darkness – so you open your eyes, but then the whole experience starts disappearing. Get out of this misunderstanding.
If you can, just trust me a little bit. I give you the guarantee that what is happening to you is for your good, for your well-being. You are not only entering the Gateless Gate, you are really entering into the gateless gate within you.
Allow it to happen. Rejoice in it so that it can happen more. Dance. In welcoming it, allow your whole heart to be receptive to all these vibrations. You have entered a mystery school. You have to prepare yourself for many more mysteries ahead, but if you misunderstand you will lose something great that was beginning to grow within you.
Be absolutely assured that what is happening to you is going to happen to all. These experiences happen like a chain. If one person becomes absolutely immersed in these unknown vibrations, he will become infectious, contagious to others. Spread your vibrations to others.
Sitting by the side of someone, focus with your eyes closed on the person; particularly, if you can, focus with closed eyes on the neck of the person. Sit behind him. The neck is the most receptive center – and those vibrations will start moving into the other person too. You will see that he is becoming fidgety, looking all around – what is happening?
Every day sit behind somebody else. You have a great and a very enjoyable task. Just sit behind Avirbhava, and you will see the explosion. But don’t misunderstand what is happening to you. Welcome it.

A young lady living in Canada received a present from a friend in Mexico. It was a tiny Chihuahua dog, the so-called Mexican hairless breed.
During the Canadian winter the tiny dog, which was used to tropical heat, began to shiver uncontrollably. No matter how many blankets she put on it, the poor dog could not get warm.
In desperation the girl jumped on her bicycle and pedaled down to the village drugstore. She asked the druggist if he could give her something to keep her Chihuahua warm and maybe grow some hair on it.
The druggist blushed and said, “Miss, I think that is something you should see your doctor about.”
The girl was about to leave when the man added, “But I will tell you one thing, miss. Riding that bicycle is only going to make things worse!”

============================================================

Osho,
Rig Veda says, “Let noble thoughts come to us from every side.” Do you agree with this statement?
I do not agree with Rig Veda and its statement. It appears only to the intellectuals as true.
But those who know, know perfectly well that thoughts are simply thoughts. They are neither noble nor ignoble. They are all chains, prisons; how can they be noble? Mind itself is your slavery, how can it be noble? And the ugliest thing in the statement of Rig Veda is that it is asking, “Let noble thoughts come to us from every side.” You are already too full of all kinds of crap – and you are inviting more crap to come to you from every side?
How can I agree with this statement? It may have been made by a great Hindu seer and saint, but because of this statement, this very statement, whoever has made it has shown his ignorance about human consciousness. He does not know the state beyond the mind.
Unless you know the state beyond the mind you are as blind as anyone else, as ignorant as anyone else, with only one difference: you are a hypocrite, you are a pretender, you are showing the world a false face and hiding your reality. Any man who has made this statement is utterly ignorant about spiritual reality. It does not matter that the statement is contained in the ancientmost holy book of the Hindus. To me, each statement has to stand on its own authority. It doesn’t matter from where it comes, who utters it. The statement itself intrinsically is wrong. It shows only one thing: that whoever uttered it was also wrong.
The whole process of religious consciousness is getting rid of thoughts. Yes, noble thoughts are included in this. It doesn’t matter whether your chains are made of gold or just steel. In fact, the chains that are made of gold are more dangerous than the chains made of steel because the chains made of gold can be misunderstood as ornaments; you can start being attached to them and then there is no possibility of freedom at all.
To call any thoughts “noble” is one of the most dangerous statements to make. It goes against all mystical experience. No thought is noble, and therefore no thought is ignoble either. Thoughts are just thoughts. Their function is to keep you clouded so that you cannot see the sun. Their function is to keep you in darkness so you cannot see the light of the day. They surround you in thick layers and keep you disconnected from existence. This separation is our misery. This is our anguish, this is our hell.
All thoughts have to be removed, irrespective of whether they are made of gold or of steel. Whether they appear to be good or bad, whether they come in moral packages or immoral packages does not matter. In fact, again I would like to repeat: thoughts that appear to be noble are more dangerous than those that are apparently ignoble because there is a tendency within you to get attached to anything that is noble, moral, puritan.
Once you get attached to your chains, how are you going to be free? Once you become attached to your cage, how are you going to open your wings in the sky?
The Rig Veda is certainly the ancientmost scripture in the world. That does not make it in any way significant; it simply makes it more primitive than any other scripture. It was written by more barbarous and more primitive people, less civilized, less cultured – and you can see it in the lifestyles of the Vedic seers.
You can see the difference between a Gautam Buddha and any seer, any sage of the Vedas. They had many wives – and not only that, they had many other women, purchased in the slave markets. Can you conceive of Gautam Buddha purchasing a woman auctioned in the marketplace? It is simply inconceivable to reduce a woman to a commodity; just a sexual object to be used. And all the vedic seers, without any exception, had many wives and many women purchased from the auctions in the marketplace.
You will be surprised to know… Sometimes words go through such a transformation that one becomes absolutely unaware of their meaning. The word vadhu has lost all its original meaning. Now it means the newly-wed wife, but in the times of the Vedas, vadhu meant a woman who had been purchased from the marketplace. You can treat her as a wife, you can use her as a sexual object, but her children will not be legitimate. They will be orphans, illegitimate and condemned by the society.
Strange, the people who are producing them are praised as seers and sages. Their very act of purchasing women is so ugly that to call them sages is simply stupid; they are not even worthy to be called human. And then to produce from those women children who will be condemned for their whole lives as illegitimate…
I say unto you, there is not a single child in the whole world who is illegitimate. Parents may be illegitimate, but not children. How can a child be illegitimate? Every child comes from the same source of life and existence, with the same purity and dignity. No child brings a certificate that “I am legitimate;” and no child comes with a seal on his forehead that he is illegitimate.
But these so-called seers were accumulating immense money. They were in favor of the ugly caste system of India – in fact they created it. One fourth of the country is condemned to live like cattle, and the responsibility goes to the Vedas. They were very ordinary people. If you look at the prayers that they have written in the Vedas, you can see their utter ordinariness.
And that has continued to be the inner unconscious of the Indian mind. They were greedy people: they possessed lands, slaves, and they were very jealous, jealous of each other. They were not humble people, and they were jealous even of their own wives. They had many wives, and they had many purchased women who were almost like prostitutes, but they wanted their wives to be absolutely dedicated only to them. They were very angry people, ready to curse anybody – not only for this life but even for future lives – on any slight provocation. And they still have a certain existence in the Indian mind.

Just a few days ago Jayesh was telling me – because he is looking after all the problems that the Indian government and the Indian bureaucracy have created for this place – one ex-attorney general of Maharashtra appeared to be very much interested in me.
Jayesh asked him, “Have you ever heard Osho, have you ever read anything?” He said, “I have not read anything, I have never heard him.” Jayesh said, “Then in what ways are you interested in him? And why do you want to help me in solving the legal problems against the ashram, which are absolutely invalid?”
He said, “I simply want to help because it is a blessing to work for Osho.” Jayesh was very much influenced, but in the next sentence the man said, “I will work just for the sheer joy and the blessings that will come to me from working for Osho. But money is also needed…”
Jayesh asked me what to do with such people. “He does not know you, he has never read you, he has never heard you. He talks about blessings, looks very spiritual – and ends up with the sentence that money is also needed.”
I said to him, “Ask him to choose between the two: either the blessings or the money.” He said, “Osho, you will destroy my whole work! He is the man I am depending on.” I said, “But make it clear because he cannot have both.” He said, “It was better not to have told you. Now I am in a fix. I know he needs money, I know he is working for money. And if I ask this question, he will certainly be very much annoyed.”
This greed, this money infatuation, this materialism comes exactly down from the seers of the Rig Veda. It still constitutes the unconscious of the Hindu mind. On the surface, everything is spiritual. Underneath, everything is so ugly, so obscene, and the beauty of it is that the Indians go on condemning the whole world as materialist; they are the only spiritual people.
But my own experience is that I have not come across a more materialist people in the whole world than the Indians. Yes, they have a spiritual mask that the others don’t have, so the others appear to be materialistic. And Indians are very much conditioned to talk about spirituality, the ultimate reality. It is just common heritage to talk about great things. But when you scratch a little bit, you will find the most ugly human beings in the world – and the responsibility goes to such people.
The man who said: “Let noble thoughts come to us from every side,” has been praised by Hindu scholars down the ages. I am the first in the whole history of mankind who is condemning this man and his statement. His statement shows absolutely clearly that he knows nothing of meditation.
Noble thoughts are simply noble chains, noble prisons, noble poisons. Every thought has to be dropped. Whether it is good or bad – that is immaterial. You have to rise into a state of thoughtlessness. That state is the only nobility in the world. That is the only authentic spirituality.
But the moment you go beyond thought, you are no longer a Christian, no longer a Hindu, no longer a Jew, no longer a Buddhist – because all these are thoughts. To be a Hindu means you have certain kinds of thoughts; to be a Mohammedan means you have chosen a different collection of thoughts. What is the difference between a Hindu and a Christian? – just the thoughts. Once they both go beyond thoughts, what will be the difference? In the silences of the heart, everybody is exactly the same open sky, without any clouds.
A few sutras for your meditation. You need them urgently because you are reading the wrong kind of literature.

The first sutra: “Not all saints are playing a practical joke on the public. Some are genuinely mad.”
Second: “If everyone does what they believe to be right, there will be assuredly utter chaos in the world.”
Third: “If you see the good in everybody, you are an optimist or you may be simply nuts.”
Fourth: “Just when I nearly had the answer, I forgot the question.”

Osho,
What is real authentic friendliness?
The question you have asked is very complex. You will have to understand a few other things before you can understand what real authentic friendliness is.
The first is friendship. Friendship is love without any biological tones to it. It is not the friendship that you understand ordinarily – the boyfriend, the girlfriend. To use the word friend in any way associated with biology is sheer stupidity. It is infatuation and madness. You are being used by biology for reproduction purposes. If you think you are in love, you are wrong; it is just hormonal attraction. Your chemistry can be changed and your love will disappear. Just an injection of hormones and a man can become a woman and a woman can become a man.
Friendship is love without any biological tones. It has become a rare phenomenon. It used to be a great thing in the past, but a few great things in the past have completely disappeared. It is a very strange thing that ugly things are stubborn, they don’t die easily; and beautiful things are very fragile, they die and disappear very easily.
Today friendship is understood either in biological terms or in economic terms, or in sociological terms – an acquaintance, a kind of acquaintance. But friendship means that if the need arises you will be ready even to sacrifice yourself. Friendship means that you have made somebody else more important than you; somebody else has become more precious than you yourself. It is not a business, it is love in its purity.
This friendship is possible even the way you are now. Even unconscious people can have such a friendship. But if you start becoming more conscious of your being, then friendship starts turning into friendliness. Friendliness has a wider connotation, a far bigger sky.
Friendship is a small thing compared to friendliness. Friendship can be broken, the friend can turn into an enemy. That possibility remains intrinsic in the very fact of friendship.
I am reminded of Machiavelli giving guidance to the princes of the world in his great work, The Prince. One of his guidelines is: Never tell anything to your friend which you would not be able to say to your enemy because the person who is a friend today may turn into an enemy tomorrow.
And the suggestion following that is: Never say anything against the enemy because the enemy can turn into a friend tomorrow. Then you will be very embarrassed. Machiavelli is giving a very clear insight: that our ordinary love can change into hate, our friendship can become enmity any moment. This is the unconscious state of man: where love is hiding hate just behind it, where you hate the same person you love but you are not aware of it.
Friendliness becomes possible only when you are real, you are authentic and you are absolutely alert of your being. And if love arises out of this awareness, it will be friendliness. Friendliness can never change into its opposite. Remember this as a criterion: that the greatest values of life are only those which cannot change into their opposite – in fact there is no opposite.
You are asking, “What is real authentic friendliness?”
It will need a great transformation in you to have a taste of friendliness. As you are, friendliness is a faraway star. You can have a look at the faraway star, you can have a certain intellectual understanding, but it will remain only an intellectual understanding, not an existential taste.
Unless you have an existential taste of friendliness, it will be very difficult, almost impossible to make a distinction between friendship and friendliness.
Friendliness is the purest thing you can conceive about love. It is so pure that you cannot even call it a flower, you can only call it a fragrance which you can feel and experience, but you cannot catch hold of. It is there, your nostrils are full of it, your whole being is surrounded by it. You feel the vibe, but there is no way to catch hold of it. The experience is so big and so vast and our hands are too small.
I said to you that your question is very complex – not because of the question, but because of you. You are not yet at the point from where friendliness can become an experience. Be real, be authentic and you will know the purest quality of love – just a fragrance of love surrounding you always. And that quality of the purest love is friendliness. Friendship is addressed to someone, somebody is your friend.
Once Gautam Buddha was asked, “Does the enlightened man have friends?” and he said, “No.” The questioner was shocked because he was thinking the man who is enlightened must have the whole world as his friend.
But Gautam Buddha is right, whether you are shocked or not. When he says, “The enlightened man has no friends,” he is saying he cannot have friends because he cannot have enemies. They both come together. Friendliness he can have, but not friendship.
Friendliness is unfocused, unaddressed love. It is not any contract, spoken or unspoken. It is not from one individual to another individual; it is from one individual to the whole existence, of which man is only a small part because trees are included, animals are included, rivers are included, mountains are included, stars are included. Everything is included in friendliness.
Friendliness is just the way of your being real and authentic; you start radiating it. It comes on its own accord, you don’t have to bring it. Whoever comes close to you will feel the friendliness.
That does not mean that nobody will be your enemy. As far as you are concerned, you will not be an enemy of anyone because you are no longer a friend to anyone. But your height, your consciousness, your blissfulness, your silence, your peace will annoy many, will irritate many, will make many – without understanding you – your enemies.
In fact the enlightened men have more enemies than the unenlightened. The unenlightened may have a few enemies, a few friends. The enlightened men have almost the whole world antagonistic toward them, because blind people cannot forgive the man who has eyes, and the ignorant cannot forgive one who knows. They cannot feel love toward a man who has attained his fulfillment because their egos are hurt.

Just the other day, I received four letters from four different American prisons. All the four prisoners are asking for sannyas. One American prisoner has been reading my books. Since I was in that prison for one day, the authorities became interested, the prisoners became interested, so they must have ordered my books. The prisoner has been reading those books.
Although he is an American, he writes, “Osho, reading your books, listening to you on the television… And when you were in this prison for one day, I was also here.” He has been there for almost five years. “It was a blissful experience for me and I will never forget the day we were together in the same cell. It was been the most important day of my life.
“And I have been carrying something in me which I want to express to you. You have not committed any sin. Of that I was absolutely certain the moment I saw you. But to be innocent seems to be a greater crime than any other, and because you were talked about on the radio, on the television, your books were read all over the country, there came a moment when you were a more important figure than the president of America. That’s what triggered the whole process of destroying your commune, imprisoning you – just to humiliate you.”

I was surprised that a prisoner would have such a deep insight. He is saying “People like you are bound to be condemned because even the greatest, most powerful people look like pygmies before your consciousness and your height. It is your fault,” he is saying to me. “If you had not been so successful, you would have been ignored. If your commune had not been so successful, nobody would have bothered about you.”
The enlightened man has no friends, no enemies, but only a pure love, unaddressed. He is ready to pour into anybody’s heart who is available. That is real, authentic friendliness.
But such a man will provoke many egos, will hurt those who think they are very important and powerful people. The presidents and the queens and the prime ministers and the kings will become immediately worried, concerned. A man who has no power has suddenly become the focus of attention of the people, attracts more people than the people who have power and money and prestige. Such a man cannot be forgiven. He has to be punished whether he has committed any crime or not. And a man of enlightenment cannot commit a crime; that is just a sheer impossibility.
But to be innocent, to be friendly, to be loving for no reason at all, just to be yourself is enough to trigger many egos against you. So when I say, “The enlightened man has no enemies,” I mean that from his side he has no enemies. But from others’ side, the greater his height, the more will be their antagonism against him, the more will be the enmity, hatred, condemnation. This is how it has been happening for centuries.
Nirvano was just telling me the other day that the day I was fined four hundred thousand dollars – more than half a crore rupees – knowing perfectly well that I don’t possess a single paisa, a single cent, the attorney who was working for Nirvano told her, “They have done it again.”
She asked him, “What are you saying?” and he said, “Yes, they have done it again. They have again crucified Jesus, they have again punished a man who is utterly innocent – but his innocence hurts their egos.”
Just an intellectual understanding will not be enough – although it is good to have some intellectual understanding because that may help you move toward existential experience. But only the experience will give you the full taste of the tremendous sweetness, the beauty, the godliness and the truth of love.

Osho,
Can it be true that sex is already over? I have been your sannyasin for four and a half years and my body is thirty-one years of age. I never planned to drop sex, but now it feels like it has dropped me. Am I a “quicky” or what?
Dhyan Satyama, the place you are in and the space you are in – four and a half years is really too long. You can understand by the laughter of the people. They are in the same boat.
If you meditate, sex is going to drop by itself. Sex is part of your unconsciousness, and it is a blissful experience if it drops by itself. If you force it to drop, it never drops. On the contrary, it becomes perverted; it starts finding ways from the back door. Unless it drops by itself, it never drops.
Meditation is the secretmost method of going beyond the body and all that the body contains. Sex is part of your body, your biology. It is not part of your consciousness. The moment you start rising up in your consciousness, sex is left far behind. Naturally, at the age of thirty-one one starts wondering, “Something seems to have gone wrong.” Nothing has gone wrong, everything has gone right. You should feel blessed that you are free from the greatest imprisonment of your being.

Adam and Eve were standing underneath the Tree of Knowledge, looking at the apple in Eve’s hand. Eve turned to Adam and said, “After we have eaten the apple, we are going to do what?”

Naturally the poor woman was not yet aware about “what” – and they had eaten only one apple! It seems you have been eating too many apples; then one becomes a quicky.

Little Ernie’s mother was worried about his progress at school, so she took him to see the psychiatrist. The shrink decided to give him an aptitude test and asked the nurse to put a hammer, a wrench and a screwdriver on the table. “If he grabs the hammer,” said the shrink, “he will be a carpenter. If he grabs the wrench, he will be a mechanic. If he grabs the screwdriver, he will be an electrician.”
Ernie fooled them all. He grabbed the nurse.

It does not matter what your age is; sex has nothing to do with age. It can disappear at any moment or it may not disappear even when one leg is in the grave. It all depends whether your life is just a horizontal phenomenon or something vertical also.
That verticalness can happen any moment – particularly for those who are in meditation. You can start moving differently than any other animal is capable of – except a few men. It is unfortunate that I have to say “except a few men.” Intrinsically, every man is capable of going beyond sex.
But people think sex is life. They think the moment sex disappears, there is no point in going on living. Sex was their meaning, their very salt. These are the poorest people in the world, who have not known anything beyond the lowest. They have never raised their eyes toward the stars.

“A man has reached old age when he can’t take yes for an answer.”

So it doesn’t matter, at the age of thirty-one you have become a wise old man. And the beauty of a wise old man is tremendously valuable in comparison to the foolishness of all those who are just young. The young people are bound to fool around; it is rare at this age, to be capable of getting out of this stupidity that we call youth.
Dhyan Satyama, you are exactly what I would like every sannyasin to be. This place is a place for transformation, and the only energy you have got to be transformed is sex.
Sex is your basic life force. If you transform it into higher forms, it is going to disappear from its lower manifestations. But you are not going to miss anything. At each higher state the energy will give you more and more blissfulness. The higher it rises, it becomes a tidal wave of blissfulness. You start feeling orgasmic in every fiber of your being. Sexual orgasm seems to be a faraway echo, almost as if you have seen it in a dream, just a faint memory.
Because what you are now experiencing is so authentic and so real, so solid, you will not need a companion. That too is one of the basic dependencies, and that’s why all couples are in a constant fight. The reason is that nobody wants to be dependent on anyone. It takes away your dignity, your individuality, your freedom. In a subtle sense it makes you a slave.
The man who loves a woman will hate the woman because that woman has become a necessity and one hates to be dependent on anyone. And the same is the case for the woman. Every woman hates the husband, has to hate him because she has become dependent on him for momentary pleasures that don’t last long.
A meditator finally comes into a space where he does not need anyone to give him pleasure. He is full of blissfulness, overflowing. He can share, he can fill the whole world with his blissfulness, his very being has become orgasmic.
Now that is something tremendously significant to be remembered. You are both: man and woman together. Because you are born of a father and a mother – half of your being has been contributed by your father and the other half by your mother – naturally you cannot be just man or just woman. It is a fallacy perpetuated for centuries that man is man and woman is woman. It is absolutely wrong.
Every man has his woman within him and every woman has her man within her. Only the meditator comes to know his whole being. Suddenly his inner woman and the inner man melt and merge into each other. That creates an orgasmic state in him. Now it is no longer a momentary experience that comes and goes; it is something that continues, day in, day out, like heartbeat or breathing. Every moment he is in an orgasmic state.
Naturally, sex disappears. A greater experience has come in. The sun has risen; what is the use of having a candle unnecessarily burning? You are bound to blow it out. If somebody keeps his candle burning in the sun, it only shows one thing: that man is blind.
A meditator comes to know such a vast experience of joy that all other pleasures simply fade away.
You are asking, “Can it be true that sex is already over?”
Yes, it is true, and you need not repent for it. Don’t look back. Look ahead. Something greater is going to open in your being, something like a lotus, which will give you absolute fulfillment and contentment, and freedom, independence, individuality. For the first time, you will feel you are able to fly alone into the vast sky of existence. Your need for the other has disappeared – that is what sex is, the need for the other – and in this state of orgasmic experience within yourself, without the help of anyone else you become capable of sharing your love, not bargaining, not even hoping for something in return.
In other words, this is what I was just talking about – friendliness, friendliness toward the whole existence. Nothing is greater, more glorious. Nothing is more of a splendor and a miracle.
You are saying, Satyama, “I have been your sannyasin for four and a half years and my body is thirty-one years of age.” The body can be of any age…
There are two things which are not necessarily of the same age as the body. The lowest of these two is well understood by the psychoanalyst; the higher is still beyond them. Psychology is still struggling to stand up. It is crawling on the ground at the lowest level of human energies; hence, about the lower it has found a few fundamental truths.
One is the mental age: a man may be seventy years old, yet his mental age may be only fourteen – or vice versa. In cases like Mozart, when he was only four years of age he was able to play on musical instruments like a great master; at the age of five he was already becoming famous. Even great masters of music could not believe the phenomenal energy of Mozart. At the age of five, he was almost as mature mentally as very few people become at the age of seventy.
Psychology has accepted that body and mind don’t grow together. Sometimes, most of the time, the mind is lagging behind and the body goes on growing. A few times, in rare cases, the mind grows ahead and the body lags behind.

When Emerson, a great creative and sensitive man, was asked about his age, he said, “Three hundred and sixty years.” The people who were present could not believe it. They could not believe that Emerson, a man of truth, a very innocent man, a man loved and respected by all those who could understand the heights of consciousness; why should he lie about such a thing? Three hundred and sixty years old? He does not look more than sixty. What to make of it?
Finally, one man asked, “Perhaps I could not rightly hear what you said. Will you please repeat it?”
Emerson laughed and said, “Why are you going in a roundabout way? Why don’t you say directly that you cannot believe that my age is three hundred and sixty years?”
Then another man said, “Now we have to ask you. You look only sixty at the most; you will have to give us evidence that you are three hundred and sixty years of age. And a man of your integrity is expected not to lie.”
Emerson said, “I am not lying. I have lived as much in sixty years as you will be able to live only in three hundred and sixty years. According to my intensity and totality of life, I have lived in sixty years as much as an ordinary man will live in three hundred and sixty years. I am not lying. It all depends how you live.”

Meditation changes your life pattern completely.
This has still to be recognized by psychology. But the psychology of the enlightened ones knows perfectly well that consciousness can go on growing. It need not grow simultaneously with the body.

Adi Shankara, the founder of a systematic, philosophical system for the Hindus, died at the age of thirty-three. He became enlightened somewhere about the age of seven. His father had died when he was seven. He was the son of a poor father, a poor Brahmin. His mother was only living for him, the only son. At the age of seven, Adi Shankara asked his mother – he wanted to renounce the world. Can you conceive of a child of seven years old thinking of renouncing the world? He must be another Mozart, a Mozart of spirituality.
The mother said, “Your father has died and you want to renounce the world. Don’t you think of me?”
Adi Shankara said, “I can only promise you one thing: before you die I will be present so in your last moments you can die peacefully. But right now, allow me to renounce the world. I want to become a sannyasin and to go in search.” The mother refused. Not to hurt her, Shankara remained for a few days more.
One day he went to the river. He used to go for his bath every day, but that day he insisted that his mother should also come with him. The mother was a little concerned. Why was he so insistent? But then he became absolutely adamant: “If you don’t come, I will not go for the bath. Then I cannot worship and then I cannot eat either,” the mother had to go.
The mother was standing on the riverbank and the little child, seven years old, was caught by a crocodile. A crowd gathered, but there was nothing that could be done. Both the feet of the boy were inside the mouth of the crocodile, and Shankara shouted to the mother, “Now there are only two possibilities: either you give me permission to renounce the world and become a sannyasin or the crocodile is going to eat me. It is up to you to decide. Be quick!”

It is a strange story. How did the crocodile conspire in this? And the mother of course immediately shouted, “I allow you! You can become a sannyasin. Even this much will be a solace to me, that you are still alive.”
And the story goes that the crocodile immediately left him and disappeared. It must have been a very saintly crocodile! Whatever the case – perhaps it is only a parable – one thing is certain: at the age of seven Adi Shankara must have convinced his mother that either she had to allow him to be a sannyasin or she had to be ready for his death. How he managed this is a different matter. But one thing is certain: he gave her the clear-cut choice, either death or sannyas. Obviously the poor mother had no choice; she allowed him.
At the age of seven, Adi Shankara became a sannyasin. In the whole history of the world there is no other case parallel to Shankara. Somewhere between the age of seven and eleven – there is no historical record of it, but it seems just between seven and eleven – he must have become enlightened. At the age of eleven he started writing his great commentaries on the Upanishads, and on one of the greatest and most complicated scriptures that exists in India, Badarayana’s Brahma Sutras.
At the age of eleven it is almost impossible even to understand it – and Shankara wrote the greatest commentary. It has defeated all the great commentators of the past and all the great commentators that came after him. Nobody has been able to go beyond these flights of consciousness and bring such tremendous meaning to the almost dead scripture of Badarayana’s Brahma Sutras. The way he interprets is possible only after enlightenment. Each small word, the way he gives a turn to its meaning… Something that was looking very ordinary immediately becomes extraordinary. He has the touch that transforms everything into gold.
By the time he was thirty-three, he had written all the great commentaries on all the great scriptures, and he had traveled all over the country and defeated all the so-called great philosophers, theologians, and priests. At the age of thirty-three he died.

Consciousness is not limited to your physical age. Consciousness can go far ahead of you, your body.
So don’t be worried, Satyama. You are saying, “I never planned to drop sex, but now it feels like it has dropped me.” That’s the right way. You should never drop sex with conscious effort because that is only repression. You should not pay any attention to sex. Your whole focus should be toward meditation, and one day sex is going to drop just like an old leaf dropping from the tree; not making even any noise, silently falling into the earth and disappearing.
I have given you the name Satyama. I would like to explain to you that that name belonged to an ancient seeker. He was also in the same category as Adi Shankara.

When he was just nine years old, he asked his mother, “I would like to go to a forest monastery and learn all about myself, before it is too late.”
The mother said, “My son, you are creating a difficulty for me. But if you have decided, then I will not stand in your way. Just one thing you have to remember: in that forest monastery the first question that will be asked will be, ‘What is the name of your father?’ – and I don’t know the name of your father. When I was young, being poor I used to serve in many houses, and I have been sexually abused by so many rich people. I was so poor I could not fight back, neither was anybody ready to believe me. Those people were powerful, and my whole concern was you. I don’t know who your father was out of so many people who have made forced love to me against my will.
“So when you are asked in the university, you have to say the simple truth. Your name is Satyakama, and your mother’s name is Jawali. As far as your father is concerned, your mother has said that while young she has been abused, exploited by so many rich people, that she does not know who exactly your father is: ‘So please call me not by my father’s name, call me by my mother’s name. My name is Satyakama, my mother’s name is Jabali. You can call me Satyakama Jabali.’”
He went to the forest university. And the first thing the kalpati of the university, the head of the university asked him was, “What is your caste?”
He said, “I don’t know.”
“Who is your father?”
He said, “I don’t know. I asked my mother, and this is the story she has told me. You can call me Satyakama Jabali.”
The old man could not believe that a mother could be so truthful as to say this to her own son, and that the son also could be so truthful as to repeat it to a stranger without feeling any guilt or any humiliation – with utter dignity, with absolute acceptance: whatever is the case is the case. The old man must have been a man of immense understanding. He said, “You are accepted, Satyakama Jabali, because at the age of nine you are so truthful. And your mother is also great. Her respect for truth is immense. You don’t know your caste. I know your caste. You are a born brahmin” – the highest caste in India. “Because of your truth, I can deduce logically that you must belong to the highest caste. You are accepted.” One day this Satyakama became enlightened.

I have given you the name Dhyan Satyama – just another form of Satyakama. Remain truthful to yourself and to the world and the day of your illumination is not far away.