---
title: Sermons in Stones 01
series: Sermons in Stones 01-30
talk_number: 1
url: https://oshoworld.com/sermons-in-stones-01
language: English
duration: 01:59:09
author: THE WORLD TOUR
scraped_at: 2026-01-03T09:20:35.120482+00:00
---
Osho,
Many contemporaries and enlightened ones – Raman Maharshi, Meher Baba, George Gurdjieff and J. Krishnamurti – have worked with people, but people get more offended by you than by anybody else.
Osho, where does your technique differ from that of other enlightened ones?
The question is very fundamental.
It arises in many people’s minds, and it needs a very deep insight into the workings of different masters.
We will take each of the masters named in the question separately.
Raman Maharshi is a mystic of the highest quality, but a master of the lowest quality. And you have to understand that to be a mystic is one thing; to be a master is totally different.
Out of a thousand mystics, perhaps one is a master.
Nine hundred and ninety-nine decide to remain silent – seeing the difficulty, that whatever they have realized is impossible to convey in any possible way to others; seeing that not only is it difficult to convey, it is bound to be misunderstood too.
Naturally, one who has arrived to the ultimate peak of consciousness will most probably decide not to bother with the world anymore. He has suffered for hundreds of lives living with these miserable people, living with all kinds of misunderstandings, groping in the dark and finding nothing. And these blind people who have never seen the light all believe they know what light is.
From ancient days, a philosopher has been defined as a man who is blind, in a house that is completely dark, searching for a black cat which is not there.
And the search goes on….
After a long, long, tedious journey, someone has come to the sunlit peak of relaxation, for the first time is at ease with existence, and decides not to get involved with all kinds of blind people, prejudiced people, deaf people who are going to misunderstand you, who are going to misinterpret you, who are going to crucify you, who are going to poison you, who are going to do every nonsense that is possible against you. Why bother?
You cannot blame those nine hundred and ninety-nine mystics who decide to remain silent. It is not their responsibility, it is not their commitment. They owe nothing to the world; why should they get unnecessarily into the mess, into the madhouse the world is?
Raman Maharshi remained in his cave in the mountains of Arunachal his whole life, unconcerned with the world. He simply tired of it. Naturally, nobody is against him.
He never says anything against any superstition, against any belief that is based on lies. He never criticizes any religion, any politics. He is not a revolutionary. He is not interested in transforming human beings, creating a better society.
He is not even a little bit interested to share his experience. He is just like a well – if you are thirsty, you will have to find the way, you will have to find a bucket, you will have to find a rope, you will have to reach the water. The water is not interested in you or in your thirst.
Naturally there is nobody who will criticize Raman Maharshi. He lived silently, peacefully – not against any vested interest, not in any way proposing a new man, a new humanity. He is fulfilled and contented; he is finished with the world.
Meher Baba is not finished with the world in the same sense as Raman Maharshi. But he is interested only in your spiritual growth – as if spiritual growth is something separate from the whole structure of society, religion, education, past, all the traditions, conventions.
So he remains interested in your spiritual growth, but spiritual growth is a complex phenomenon – it is connected with many other things. Unless your conditionings are changed, unless your belief systems are changed, unless your mind is unburdened of the past – there are so many things to be cleaned – only then can the still small voice of your being be heard.
Meher Baba takes spiritual growth out of context. Naturally nobody is against it. In fact, all the vested interests are tremendously respectful of such people, because they are continuously giving – without any intention on their part – opium to the people. They are giving the idea – which is false – that your spiritual growth is possible without going through a deep psychological revolution.
Secondly, Meher Baba remained silent his whole life; he never spoke. All that is written in the name of Meher Baba is written by his secretary. Now, there is no way to know whether the secretary is writing from his own mind.
He had come to see me, and I looked directly into his eyes when I asked, “Are you certain that whatever you have written is not from your mind? Can you give me any evidence that these messages have been telepathically given to you by Meher Baba?”
He felt a little embarrassed and he said, “I cannot say it with absolute certainty, but this is how I felt – that these were messages given by Meher Baba.”
“But your feeling…. Have you ever tried in some way to get the consent of Meher Baba, his signature? He was not speaking, that is true, but he used to give his autograph. You could have taken your book…. He was not speaking, but he could hear. You could have asked him: ‘I have written this book in your name, and my feeling is that this is your message. Just give it your signature so that I can tell world that Meher Baba agrees with me.’ This would have been a simple method.”
Meher Baba used to have a small board with the whole alphabet on it just for small messages and things. You would ask for his blessings, and he would put his finger on the letters, “b-l-e-s-s-i-n-g” – blessings are given.
If he could give blessings on the board, he could have said yes or no on the same board, but he was never asked. In fact, the secretary may have been afraid he might say no.
Now, who will be against this man? – who has not spoken, who is not against anything, anybody. His whole business is to help you spiritually – and that too only in silence; you can sit with him in silence.
Now, there are very few people in the world who can understand silence. A master first needs to teach you how to be silent, and unless he is satisfied that now you are capable of listening in silence, listening to that which is not being said vocally, verbally, but only telepathically….
Meher Baba had never prepared anybody for telepathic transference of ideas. And to me it seems to be absurd. What is the need? – because even in telepathy you will have to use the same language. If I want to say something to you – whether I say it aloud so that you can hear or I say it silently so that you can hear only telepathically, it makes no difference. Unless I am trying to give messages which are secret, unless there is a certain conspiracy….
But around Meher Baba, nothing has happened.
The man himself was of great importance, but he remained silent for the same reason as Raman Maharshi.
But he could not stay in one place. He did not abandon the world completely. He was still thinking that some way could be found to approach seekers. He moved around the world in search of seekers, but I don’t think he found any. He found only worshippers who sang devotional songs to him, because they had their desires.
And in the East it is believed that if the person who is enlightened blesses you, any desire is bound to be fulfilled. Existence can never say no to the enlightened consciousness. For the enlightened man, existence is always “yes”; there is a deep synchronicity.
So the people who gathered around Meher Baba were not seekers, they were people who wanted position, power, money, prestige – all the wrong kinds of people. And because he was engaging people in wishful dreaming and not saying anything, he was not against the vested interests. Why should any government be against him? Why should any religion be against him?
There was no question – these people were harmless people.
The third man on your list is George Gurdjieff. He is the most unique master the world has ever seen, but his uniqueness created a distance between him and the normal humanity. All his methods were valid methods, but the journey was long and he made it even longer by the way he propounded it.
In fact, that was one of his devices to find the real seekers.
Are you ready to go to the very end of the world, or are you just a curiosity monger? – you will go a little way to know what this man is all about, waste his time, and then you will be back in the world. He would choose only those who are ready even to die if that is the only way to find the truth.
Naturally he was surrounded by only a very small group of people.
And he was also not interested in any social revolution.
His whole interest was to crystallize a few individuals who were courageous enough, to give them their original face, to help them to know the ultimate ecstasy that existence makes available. But it is only for the chosen few. Not that somebody chooses them – but because only very few people are courageous enough to risk everything to find themselves, they become the chosen few by their own courage and their own daring.
And Gurdjieff was not interested at all in the fast asleep humanity.
Raman Maharshi was not interested.
Gurdjieff was not only not interested, he had all the condemnation possible for those who have been sleeping for lives together. He is the only man in the whole of history who said, “These sleeping people don’t have souls, and unless a man becomes enlightened he cannot have a soul. A soul is a reward: you don’t come with a soul at birth, you achieve it by your effort.”
Naturally, no government was offended, no church was offended. If a man has collected two dozen people, the pope is not worried, the shankaracharya is not worried – he is not a competitor. And he worked personally with each individual – naturally he could not work with millions of people.
So these people were just in the margin; their names can appear only in the footnotes. They don’t belong to the vast humanity – just on the fringes. Having small groups, they were not a danger to anybody.
And the fourth man, J. Krishnamurti, could have been a danger, could have been crucified – he had a far higher intelligence than any Jesus Christ, and far more intellectual genius than any Socrates – but because of a certain obsession, he became very much against organization. He was against all organizations.
Naturally you would think that if he was against all organizations then all organizations would have been annoyed by him. But this was not the case, because he never created any organization of his own.
A single individual for ninety years continuously went around the world. Who cares?
Seven hundred million Catholics are going to bother about a single individual who is talking against organizations? And who is listening to him?
In India he used to speak in New Delhi, Bombay and Adyar Madras. This is not India. Nine hundred million people don’t live in these three cities. And how many people in Bombay were listening to him? – never more than three thousand. And these three thousand were almost always the same people who had been listening to him for forty years, fifty years. He was saying the same thing all through his life, and the same people were listening.
In fact, nobody was listening.
He became a sort of entertainment, and that’s what he said to one of my friends who went to see him just before his death: “The thing that hurts me most is that I became just an entertainment for a few people and nothing more. A few people enjoyed my logic, and that was all.”
And now that he is dead, ninety years’ effort has simply disappeared into the air.
Governments are against me because I am against them.
Religions are against me because I am against religions.
Political leaders are annoyed with me because I say they are mediocre, because I say only psychologically sick people become interested in power politics. People who suffer from an inferiority complex are the people who seek power, prime ministership, presidency.
These people need to be in psychiatric hospitals, and they are running the world.
I am against all religions because I am for religiousness, and religions are barriers to creating a humanity with a quality of religiousness.
A Christian is not needed, nor a Hindu, nor a Mohammedan. These are the barriers to religious progress.
What is needed is truthfulness, sincerity, silence, lovingness…a life of joy, playfulness…a life of deep search, inquiry into one’s consciousness. And these qualities have nothing to do with Christianity or Judaism or Jainism or Buddhism.
Meditation is needed, but meditation is nobody’s monopoly.
Naturally, all religions are against me, annoyed. Because I am the first man in the whole of history who is saying that religions are the barriers preventing humanity from becoming religious. They are not the vehicles of God, they are the enemies of God. Popes and Ayatollah Khomeinis and shankaracharyas – these are not the representatives of God; they may be representatives of the devil. Because these are the people who have divided humanity, and who for centuries have been continuously creating conflicts, bloodshed, wars, crusades, jihad, holy war, and all kinds of nonsense.
In the name of religion, these people are oppressing humanity.
I am against nations because I don’t see any need for there to be nations. Why can’t the whole planet earth be one single humanity? – which would be saner, more scientific, more easily controllable.
Right now things are such that you can only say we are living in an insane world.
Every three months the common market in Europe is dumping so much food in the ocean…mountains of butter! Last time they had to destroy so much food that the destruction cost was two hundred million dollars – it is not the cost of the food, it is the cost of destroying it. And just nearby in Ethiopia, one thousand people were dying every day.
What kind of humanity are we living in?
Half of humanity is dying in poverty.
Every six months, America goes on throwing billions of dollars worth of food into the ocean, but they will not give that food to Ethiopia or to India or to any other country where people are starving and dying.
Nobody cares about human beings; everybody cares about money.
These money-minded people cannot be called sane: that food has to be destroyed; otherwise the market prices will fall, and they don’t want their prices to fall. They want their prices to remain stable, so the food has to be destroyed.
If the whole world is one, things can be very simple.
At one time Russia was burning wheat in its trains instead of coal because coal in Russia is costlier, and they had an overproduction of wheat. In India, people were dying because wheat was not available. Coal we have enough of, but you cannot eat coal. If the world were one, then the coal from India could go to Russia and the wheat from Russia could move toward India.
There is no need to destroy mountains, exactly mountains of butter.
And why did they have to destroy it? Before, they had been selling it to Libya. In Libya, butter was available at half the price of butter in Europe. The butter was coming from Europe, but they were selling it at a throw-away price, just to get rid of it. Otherwise they would have to arrange dumping it and that takes money. Just to save that money, they were giving it to Libya.
But President Ronald Reagan started going insane against Libya for no reason at all, bombed the poor country, bombed Kadaffi’s three houses, killed one of his daughters – for no reason at all – and pressured Europe so that all the supplies that they were giving to Libya would be stopped. Mountains of butter collected in Europe.
Now you need space, cold storage…so the old butter had to be thrown into the ocean for the new butter to come in.
There is no need of nations.
These are the hang-ups of the past.
And if there are no nations, there is no need for armies. Right now, seventy percent of the budget of every country goes to the military; seventy percent to the military which does nothing except left, right, left, right, polishing their guns, their shoes, their buttons – that’s all they do. And all over the world, seventy percent of the budget goes to the military and whole countries have to live on thirty percent of their budget.
If the nations disappear, one hundred percent of the budget is available for the whole country – because the armies are useless. Right now there is no problem of there being any war with any planet. With whom are you going to fight? So what is the need to polish your guns every day? to polish your boots, and morning and evening, left and right? All these idiots who are doing this can be put into creative work.
I don’t want any nations in the world.
The world is one single humanity.
I don’t want religions in the world.
Religiousness is enough, more than enough. As religions disappear, millions of monks and nuns who are just parasites…. They do nothing.
That is another army that is sitting on the chest of humanity. They should disappear. They have renounced the world, but for their food, for their clothes, for their housing, the world has to work. It is a very strange thing: they will earn the virtue of having renounced the world; they will enter paradise. You will go to hell, because you provided food, clothes, shelter to these saints. And they have been simply condemning you!
Strange logic.
These people should go to hell – who have not been doing anything except condemning, calling everybody a sinner, creating guilt in everybody, destroying everybody’s integrity and self-respect. But these people will go to paradise.
With religions disappearing, all these people can be put into creative work. There is no need of monasteries, there is no need of churches, temples, mosques. All these houses of God – and there are millions of men who don’t have any houses, who live their whole life on the street. The houses of God are empty – there is no God. All these houses of God can be made available to the homeless. All these monks can be put into creative work, all the armies can be put into creative work.
And when there are no more nations, all dirty politics will have to disappear.
Different arrangements can be made for managing the whole world – a world government based on merit, not dependent on votes. In the whole world there are thousands of universities. The world government can be left in the hands of the universities, and all the universities should choose their best people for the world government. An education minister should be a man who really understands education and who can bring new forms of education into the world.
Many departments of government will have to disappear, there will be no need. For example, the defense ministry – defense against whom?
The universities could choose the most meritorious people – the Nobel Prize winners, the great vice-chancellors, the great artists, the painters, the poets. There could be a different kind of government which is not dependent on the vote of a sleepy humanity, of those who don’t know what they are doing.
And we can make this world really a Garden of Eden. Adam and Eve will not have to go back to the Garden of Eden. And one day you will hear a knock on the door – God wants to come in! Because you have managed to create a far better garden than his old one. But we can keep that garden too, as a museum piece.
Naturally, Raman Maharshi, Meher Baba, Gurdjieff, Krishnamurti belong to a different category.
I belong to my own category. There is no category to which I can belong; I have to create my category.
Naturally they are all against me because I am going to take away all their powers, all their conspiracies against humanity. Naturally, they are together against me.
And they are a little puzzled: what to do with a single man? It looks awkward to them also. All the governments of the world, all the religions of the world have to decide against a single individual. Certainly that single individual must have something significant; otherwise there would be no need of so much fear, paranoia.
I am for man’s spiritual growth, but I understand spiritual growth in its whole context. It is not something separate, one-dimensional; it is a multi-dimensional phenomenon. It needs a revolution in society. It needs a revolution in society’s economic, political structures; it needs a tremendous and radical change in everything that has been dominating us up to now.
We have to create a discontinuity with the past.
Only then a new man – a really spiritual man, a man of cosmic dimensions – can be born.
I am certainly blessed because I am the first who is opposed by all. This situation has never happened before, and will never happen again.
And you are also blessed because you are fellow travelers with a man who is not just an old dead saint, a goody-goody.
I want you to be the very salt of the earth.
Too many goody-goody saints have created so much diabetes.
We need a different kind of saintliness.
I have called that different kind of saint Zorba the Buddha.

Osho,
You have mentioned in the past that the witches burned by the Christians knew, among other skills, how to hypnotize. It seems that in ancient Egypt too, hypnosis was practiced. It has even been suggested that Jesus was a skilled hypnotist.
Was hypnosis once a respected form of healing? How did it evolve, and how did it fall into disrepute?
The science of hypnosis – and remember, I am calling it science of hypnosis, not art of hypnosis – is one of the most ancient sciences.
It was practiced in the lost continent of Atlantis. Its literature was saved in Alexandria in Egypt.
Pythagoras, a great seeker and searcher from Greece, visited the library in Alexandria and he refers to great literature on the science of hypnosis that has come from the lost continent of Atlantis, which sank into the Atlantic Ocean in some natural calamity.
The name “Atlantic” comes from “Atlantis”.
Perhaps Atlantis had the greatest and the most ancient civilization. And Egypt tried to learn as much from the teachers and the universities of Atlantis as was possible, because the pharaohs – the kings of Egypt – were tremendously interested in collecting all possible sources of knowledge.
The library of Alexandria was perhaps the greatest library that has ever existed. Even the library of the British Museum is just a small library in comparison to the library of Alexandria.
The library of the British Museum is a big library. If we put books on the ground just as we put them on the shelf, they would make three rounds of the earth – that many books are in the British Museum library. But the library of Alexandria was many, many times bigger than the British Museum library.
It was burned by Mohammedans, by Khalif Omar. It took six months to put the fire out. That can give you an idea of the bigness and the vastness of the collection.
And why did the Mohammedans burn it?
I am mentioning it knowingly because it refers to your question.
The library contained many things side by side with the science of hypnosis. If they had remained, Mohammedanism would not have survived.
Christianity burned living women in thousands, calling them witches.
The word witch is not a bad word; it simply means a wise woman. But Christianity converted the word, gave it a wrong connotation, created courts all over Europe, a great investigation to destroy witches, because witches are directly connected with the devil. This was the strategy to destroy those wise women.
The real fact was that if those women had remained alive, Christianity would have looked very poor as a religion. They knew far deeper truths than Christianity, far more refined religious flights, methods of hypnosis and meditation – which always go together.
By destroying the witches, Christianity was trying to destroy hypnosis and meditation both. It was a question of survival.
Mohammedans destroyed the library in Egypt which contained literature of immense value, and Christianity destroyed living human women. And the courts tortured those women, forced them to confess before the court that yes, they had a sexual relationship with the devil.
There is no devil anywhere. After those witches, the devil has not approached any woman. And strangely enough, it was only in Christian countries that the devil was having sexual relationships with women – in no other country.
And they tortured them so much that they had to confess – knowing perfectly well that once they had confessed then they would be burned. Before confession there was torture, and once they confessed before the court then the court would declare that this woman was a witch and she should be burned in the central place in the town so the whole village can see what happens if you are in a sexual relationship with the devil.
Thousands of women were burned. Their only fault was that they were still carrying the science of hypnosis and the science of meditation.
And they were teaching in small, hidden schools.
It was a great danger to Christianity, because Christianity has nothing comparable to hypnosis or to meditation. Christianity, Judaism, Mohammedanism – these three religions are very poor. They don’t deserve even the name of “religion”. They don’t have anything of what you will find in Lao Tzu, Chuang Tzu, Gautam Buddha, Bodhidharma, Nagarjuna, Shankara. You will not find anything of any fundamental value in them.
The science of hypnosis and the science of meditation are two sides of one coin.
Meditation you have to do alone – because there are two types of people, just as there are men and women. The science of meditation is more suitable for men, and the science of hypnosis is more suitable for women; hence the witches – they were all deeply into the science of hypnosis.
Hypnosis needs somebody else to take you into your inner center.
The meditator goes alone. He goes to the same center, but he goes alone. That is something…part of the man’s psychology.
Hypnosis also takes you to the same place, but it needs a hypnotizer. A woman going alone feels afraid. That is against the feminine nature. She needs someone she loves, trusts; she needs someone to be with her on the deepest journey to herself.
The hypnotist was a master or a great friend or a great lover, someone with whom the woman was able to relax without holding anything, with no fear, knowing that she is protected by someone better than she can protect herself.
This is a general division, but there are men who may have a more feminine nature, the qualities of a woman – for them hypnosis will be more helpful than meditation. And there may be a few women who have characteristics of men – like Joan of Arc or the queen of Jhansi, Laxmi Bai, women who can fight with a sword in a war – for them meditation will be easier than hypnosis.
But both are exactly the same processes.
In meditation, you simply relax yourself. It is autosuggestion.
In hypnosis, it is hetero-suggestion – it is suggestion by somebody else who is sitting by your side. And just his closeness – if you love, if you trust – is enough for you to relax.
And if meditation and hypnosis can both be joined together…. And that is my effort, that’s what I have been doing. If they both can be joined together…. Just as my effort is that men and women should not remain separate because they are halves of one whole, they should come closer and become one. Love should be nothing but a deep merger with your other part, so deep that there are two bodies but only one soul.
Meditation and hypnosis also can be together, one. In fact, they are halves of one whole.
And the moment you try the whole process – either beginning with hypnosis or beginning with meditation, that is simply your preference – you are moving into the same space from two doors toward one center.
That center is your being.
And all the religions have been trying to prevent you from reaching your center because that is the only way to keep you miserable and to keep you enslaved, to exploit you, and not to give you any chance of revolt.
This mystery school will try its best to bring all opposites together as complementaries. And if they can be made complementaries, the progress happens in leaps and bounds. Then you are not moving with only one leg, you are not flying with only one wing. You have both wings, you have both legs; you have a totality.

Osho,
Modern scientists like Karl Pribram, David Bohm and others, have been stumbling on religion. They have been stating that our brains may be holograms, interpreting a holographic universe; that certain circuits in the brain are the trigger of consciousness without a content, that it is the analytical, the thinking part of the mind, that creates separation and fragmentation while the intuitive part experiences reality in a holistic way; that energy is a limited term needing to be replaced by a wave concept.
They are proposing “resonance” and “synchronicity” as more appropriate terms.
Osho, when you are talking about the mind do you mostly mean the thinking part – the one which creates our belief systems and personalities?
Is it enough to totally disidentify with the thinking, or does the mind altogether – including the conscious and the superconscious – need to be transcended?
Is the universe, is existence made of mind stuff?
Are these scientists contributing to a science of enlightenment, and can one do so without being enlightened?
No, that’s impossible; nobody can create a science of enlightenment without being enlightened himself.
That would be just like blind people creating a science of light, or people who have never known love creating a science of love.
Enlightenment is absolutely necessary for any understanding of what it is.
Listening to your question…the scientists are trying something which is beyond their field.
Enlightenment is not of the mind.
Enlightenment is freedom from the mind; it is transcending mind, it is going beyond mind. And all these scientists you mention are talking about mind.
Enlightenment has nothing to do with mind; it has something to do with awareness of the mind. It does not go into the details of the mind, what it consists of, how it functions, all its mechanics.
Awareness is simply disidentification with the mind; mind is left behind as a mechanism. The moment the mind is completely left behind and there is only pure awareness, just a luminosity, it is enlightenment.
And existence is not made of the stuff mind is made of, no.
Existence is made of the stuff called God; to be more exact, of godliness, which is even beyond enlightenment.
Enlightenment is beyond mind.
Mind is beyond matter.
Godliness is beyond enlightenment, and godliness is simply beyondness. Then this beyondness goes on and on with no end to it.
Any scientist who is trying to understand enlightenment without becoming enlightened is proving himself a laughingstock. It is not an object that you can study from the outside. You can study a roseflower from the outside without becoming a roseflower. Of course, it is simple – if you yourself become the roseflower, who is going to study it?
The scientist studies objects, but enlightenment is not an object – it is your subjectivity, it is the scientist’s very soul. He cannot put it on the table and dissect it and try to find out what it consists of – who will do it?
Science has a limitation. The limitation is that the objective world is its world. Beyond it, any scientist trying to approach the subjective world is just being a Don Quixote. He needs his nuts and bolts tightened – or maybe loosened.
Science has no way beyond objects. Beyond objects is the world of religion, or more exactly – of religiousness.

Osho,
A constant comparison with you, with enlightenment, has made my life very difficult. Deep down, I have a nearly constant guilt feeling for not being enlightened.
My closest friends have pointed out to me that in a way I am always comparing myself to you. Then my intelligence doesn't look so intelligent, my happiness seems shallow and false, my love a pretension, and my understanding just a joke.
For years I have had this standpoint that I and everybody else is an idiot – except for you and perhaps a handful of others, the blessed ones.
Have I simply found a new way to torture myself? Is this comparison with you a strategy to suffer and remain unenlightened?
For tomorrow….

============================================================

Osho,
“You are the world.” This is one of the confusing statements of Krishnamurti.
We don't think there is anybody else present on the earth except you who could help us to understand it, so we request you to say something on it.
Yesterday, there was a question left, left for tomorrow; but just now I realized that tomorrow never comes. Unless tomorrow comes sometime, that question will have to wait.
J. Krishnamurti’s statement that “You are the world” is not confusing at all. It is very simple; just a little intelligence is needed to understand it.
We can try to approach the statement from a few different directions.
The world is only a name; the individual is the reality. You can go on trying to find the world all over the world, and you will not find it; you will always find the individual.
Words like the world, the society, the religion, the nation, are mere words with no content behind them – empty containers.
Except you, there is no world.
This is one way of understanding the statement: that the individual is the only reality. And the world is nothing but the collectivity of individuals, so whatever it is, it is a contribution of individuals. If it is ugly, you have contributed to its ugliness. If it is full of hate, jealousy, anger, greed, ambition, you have contributed to this whole hell in which we are living. You cannot throw the responsibility on somebody else; you have to accept the responsibility on your own shoulders.
That is another way of understanding the statement, “You are the world.”
We are continuously shifting the responsibility. If there is war, if there is an Adolf Hitler, a Ronald Reagan, it becomes easy for us to point to these people and say that they are responsible. But who creates them?
Adolf Hitler is our contribution. Without us, he is nobody.
Ronald Reagan is nothing but our opinion. It is our vote, it is our support.
So the moment you condemn anybody, remember: you are condemning yourself. However indirect your contribution may be, your contribution is there.
It is possible to live like a Jaina monk or a Buddhist monk or a Catholic monk in a monastery, completely closed as far as the world is concerned.
There are monasteries in Tibet…there used to be many in China before the communist revolution. There are a few in Europe with a strange and long history.
The monastery at Athos in Europe is one thousand years old. In one thousand years, whoever has entered the monastery has not come out living. You only enter: once a monk, forever a monk. And the monastery does not allow its inmates to come out into the world; they are brought out only when they are dead.
Do you think they are not responsible for Adolf Hitler? they are not responsible for world wars?
Apparently it looks…How can you make these people responsible? – who have left the world, who have never looked back, who have disconnected themselves with the world.
But still I say to you they are responsible. They are responsible by escaping – they escaped their responsibility. It does not make any difference.
The Buddhist monks, the Jaina monks, the Hindu monks are not participating in worldly activities. But you can contribute in a positive way or you can contribute in a negative way.
You can set fire to this house – that is the positive way, the active way. You can stand by the side of the road and not do anything to put the fire out – that is the negative way. But both are responsible.
The negative person does not look so responsible, but his responsibility is absolutely equal – because in life there is a balance.
You may be against war, you may be a pacifist, you may be a chronic Protestant – always with a flag protesting against war, against violence. Naturally you can say, “How can I be held responsible?” But life is a complex phenomenon.
Your protests, your pacifism, your fight against warmongers is still part of war; you are not a man of peace. And you can see it when people protest – their anger, their violence is so obvious that one wonders why these people are protesting against war. They should join some camp in the war – they are full of anger, rage. They have just chosen to have a third camp behind a beautiful name – “peace”. A good mask, but inside is the same anger, the same rage, the same violence, the same destructiveness against anybody who does not agree with them.
They are contributing as much violence to the atmosphere as anybody else.
They may be talking about love, but they are also saying that you have to fight for love.
Hazrat Mohammed had words written on his sword meaning “peace is my message.” He could find only a sword to write on, that “peace is my message”! And he gave birth to a religion he called Islam. Islam means peace, and Islam has done more violence in the world than any other religion has done. In the name of peace, at the point of a sword, Islam has been killing, converting millions of people.
You can choose beautiful words, but you cannot hide the reality.
J. Krishnamurti’s statement that “You are the world” simply emphasizes the fact that every individual, wherever he is, whatever he is, should accept the responsibility of creating this world that exists around us.
If it is insane, you have contributed to that insanity in your own way. If it is sick, you are also a partner in making it sick.
And the emphasis is important – because unless you understand that “I am also responsible for this miserable and insane world,” there is no possibility of change. Who is going to change? Everybody thinks somebody else is responsible.
One of India’s great emperors was Akbar. There is an incident in his life recorded in Akbar Mamaz – “the biography of Akbar.”
One day he was just chit-chatting with his friends…. And he had around him the very best, wisest, most creative people chosen from every part of the country.
His court jester was standing just by his side.
By the way, you should understand it: in all the courts of all great emperors there used to be a jester, whose whole function was to keep the court from becoming too serious, to keep the court light, playful – once in a while, an explosion of laughter.
It was a great insight to have a court jester, and he used to be one of the wisest men of those days – because it was not an easy phenomenon.
Birbal was Akbar’s court jester. And as they were discussing, Akbar slapped Birbal – for no reason at all.
Now you cannot slap the emperor back, but the slap has to go somewhere – so he slapped the person who was standing next to him.
Everybody thought, “This is strange!” There was no reason in the first place. Suddenly, as if a madness had got hold of Akbar, he slapped poor Birbal. And that man is also strange. Rather than asking, “Why have you slapped me?” he simply slapped the man who was standing by his side!
And that man, thinking perhaps this was the rule of the court, slapped the next person. In a chain, it went all over the court.
And you will be surprised: that night, Akbar’s wife slapped him! And he said, “Why are slapping me?”
She said, “That is not the question; a game is a game.”
He said, “Who told you that this is a game?”
She said, “We have been hearing the whole day long that a great game has started in the court. The only rule is you cannot hit the person back, you have to find somebody else to hit. And somebody has hit me – so your slap has come back to you, the game is complete!”
In this big world, thousands of insane games are going on, and you are all participants – of course in very small measures, according to your capacity. But remember, the slap is going to come back to you sooner or later. Where else will it go?
Whatever comes to you, remember, it is your doing.
Perhaps you have forgotten when you started it. The world is big, it takes time. But everything comes back to its source – that is one of the fundamental rules of life, not a rule of a game.
So if you are suffering, if you are miserable, if you are tense, full of anxieties, anguish, don’t just console yourself that this whole world is ugly, that everybody else is ugly, that you are a victim.
J. Krishnamurti is saying you are not a victim, you are a creator of this insane world; and naturally, you have to participate in the outcome of whatever you have contributed to it. You are participating in sowing the seeds, you will have to participate in reaping the crop too; you cannot escape.
To make the individual aware so that he stops throwing responsibilities on others – on the contrary, he starts looking inward to see in what way he is contributing to this whole madness – there is a possibility he may stop contributing. Because he has to suffer too. If he comes to know that the whole world is nothing but his projection on a wider scale….
Because millions of individuals have contributed the same anger, the same hatred, the same competitiveness, the same violence, it has become mountainous. You cannot conceive that you can be responsible for it: “I may have contributed just a small piece…” But an ocean is nothing except millions and millions of dewdrops. A dewdrop cannot think that it is responsible for the ocean – but the dewdrop is responsible. Without the dewdrop there is going to be no ocean at all. The ocean is only a name; the reality is in the dewdrop.
To accept your responsibility will change you, and your change is the beginning of the change of the world – because you are the world. However small, a miniature world, but you carry all the seeds.
If revolution comes to you, it heralds the revolution for the whole world.
And when J. Krishnamurti says “You are the world” he is not saying it only to you; he is saying it to everybody:
You are the world.
If you want to change the world, don’t start by changing the world – that is the wrong way humanity has followed up to now:
Change the society, change the economic structure.
Change this, change that.
But don’t change the individual.
That’s why all revolutions have failed. Only one revolution can succeed, which has not been tried up to now – and that is the revolution of the individual.
You change yourself.
Be alert not to contribute anything that makes the world a hell. And remember to contribute to the world something that makes it a paradise.
This is the whole secret of a religious man.
And if every individual starts doing it, there will be a revolution without any bloodshed.
In Akbar’s life there is another incident.
He had built a very beautiful marble pond. He was bringing swans from Mansarovar, from the Himalayas. And he decided that in the pond there should not be water. This is the emperor’s pond – instead of water, there should be milk. Everybody in the capital was to be informed that just one bucket of milk, not much, from every house had to reach the palace early the next morning, before sunrise.
Birbal told Akbar, “You don’t understand human mind at all. Your pond will be full of water.”
He said, “What nonsense…? It is my order!”
Birbal said, “Your order, or anybody’s order – I understand human mind.”
Akbar said, “Let us wait; tomorrow morning it will be decided who is right.”
And the next morning both went to the garden, and the pond was full of water.
Akbar said, “This is strange. How did it happen? Catch a few people from the street, whoever is available, and ask how it happened.” And the people were threatened: if they spoke any lie, their life would be at risk; if they said the truth, they would be set free.
They said, “The truth is, we thought the whole capital would bring buckets of milk. One bucket of water would be completely overlooked, nobody would ever know. But now I see that the pond is full of water; it seems that everybody had the same thought – the whole capital! Not a single man was different.”
The human mind functions exactly the same.
So if the world is such a tragedy, it is our human minds which are creating it; we are contributing our bucketful of misery.
No revolution can be successful unless the human mind is understood by human beings and they start behaving in a different way – not hoping that “My bucketful of water is not going to be noticed at all.” If everybody understands that this idea is what will come to every human mind, and decides, “At least I should bring a bucketful of milk. I should not behave in such an unconscious way as all human beings are behaving….”
It is possible to have the pond full of milk.
“You are the world” simply means: whatever it is, we cannot save ourselves from responsibility.
Our monks, our saints have tried only this. What they were trying to do, if you go deep into their psychology, was to say that, “We are no longer responsible for all this nonsense that is going on in the world.” But they depended on the same world. For their food they were dependent on the same people; for their clothes they were dependent on the same people. They were not in any way separate from the world; they had only stopped being active in the world. They were silent partners in the whole insanity that is going on.
And they should be condemned more, because they were more intelligent people, wiser people. Still they could not see the point that just standing aside is not enough; you have to do something against the normal human mind.
Escaping to the Himalayas is not going to help, because even in the Himalayas your mind will remain the same, just you will not have the opportunity to know it. And it is better to know the enemy than not to know it, because by knowing there is a possibility to change.
Not knowing is very dangerous.
When a disease is diagnosed, it is half cured. When a disease is not diagnosed, then comes the real problem. Medicine is not the problem; diagnosis is the problem.
One man lived for thirty years in the Himalayas. His problem was anger, and he wanted to get rid of it. In the Himalayas for thirty years he was not angry for a single moment – there was no reason. The wife was not there, the children were not there, the parents were not there, the society was not there – there was no provocation.
His name became famous by and by, and people started coming to worship him. Now it was even more difficult to be aware that the anger was still there. When people are worshipping you, there is no question of anger.
Then came the Kumbha Mela in Allahabad. People said, “You are such a great saint. Without you, the Kumbha Mela, the greatest gathering of people on the earth in one place, will be missing something. You have to go.”
And by now he was convinced that he had become a great saint. People were coming from far away to make the difficult, arduous journey through the mountains just to pay respects to him.
He went to Kumbha Mela, but there were millions of people – nobody knew him. Somebody stepped on his foot, and immediately he slapped the man, took hold of his neck and said, “What do you think you’re doing?”
Suddenly he remembered that he was a saint. He said, “My God, what am I doing? What happened to thirty years? The anger came in such a flash, so instantaneously, not even a single moment of thought.” He was going to kill the man.
That was the reason he had gone to the Himalayas – because he was afraid he would murder somebody and would be crucified or have to live for his whole life in jail.
Even his family had said, “It will be good if you go to the Himalayas because you will kill somebody, and that means you have killed yourself too. This way two lives are saved. You go.”
But thirty years…What happened?
It is simple fact: the people who have escaped from the world are not to think that they are not responsible for this world. By escaping, they have not changed the world. By escaping, they have not contributed anything to make it more beautiful, more human, more intelligent, more meditative. Neither have they changed the world nor have they gone through any inner change themselves.
Hence I am against renouncing the world.
Be in the world, however difficult it is – because it is only in the world that you will be reminded on every step what kind of mind you are carrying within.
And that mind is projected on the outside, and it becomes huge because so many minds are projecting in the same way.
“You are the world” is not a mathematical statement.
“You are the world” is a psychological insight.
And it can become the very key for the only revolution that can succeed.

Osho,
Have you anything to say about “channeling”? Supposedly a spirit being speaks through a willing human host. This is a growing phenomenon that is happening right now, particularly in California and New York.
There are famous ones – Seth, Ramtha and Lazarus. But now they are springing up everywhere – people claiming to channel Kwan Yin, beings from other galaxies, etc., etc. A common theme seems to be that they have come to help the planet evolve right now.
The word channeling is about as common as coca cola. Even some sannyasins are claiming to channel this one or that one. There is almost an attitude that if one is not channeling someone, one is not open to spiritual possibilities.
Is channeling a real phenomenon? Why is this springing up right now, and why are people so attracted to channeled beings and information? Is there anything for our spiritual growth in this?
California needs all kinds of idiotic ideas.
It seems all the idiots of the world are born in California.
It is the land of sex, drugs, and rock and roll. Everything is possible in California. But it remains only for a few years – three years, four years at the most; then the fashion changes.
In California everything is a fashion – and when something is in fashion everybody is involved in it, because not to be involved in it means you are out of date, lagging behind, not belonging to the contemporary world.
Channeling is simply a new name for an old disease.
In the past they used to call it “being possessed by a ghost”.
Channeling is the new name for being possessed. Then the ghost speaks – but that is a very old idea, not very appealing. In old countries, it still continues to happen. There are people in villages in India who become possessed, and when they are possessed you can ask questions and they answer – and they answer in such a way that you can make anything out of it. It is never a certain, meaningful statement.
Channeling is an American translation of the old idea of being possessed.
There are many people in America – particularly in California and New York – who become possessed and start talking to you, answering you. And certainly their language is different from the old; it is more scientific. The very word channeling has come from television – channel number one, channel number two…. Now, the poor old countries cannot think of channeling, that word is not yet meaningful to them.
And the idea of channeling has given a scope…you are channeling to a certain planet, a certain galaxy – and you can say any nonsense, there is no way to prove it right or wrong. Even scientists know nothing about galaxies.
There are at least fifty million galaxies. Scientists are still working with very refined instruments to count how many galaxies there are.
And one galaxy means…One sun and the planets that are attached to the sun is one solar system. A galaxy means millions of suns, millions of solar systems – which are moving around a certain unknown center of gravity. Each galaxy is so huge…. Science has not been able to find out all the facts about even one galaxy, the galaxy in which we live.
Now there are the cunning and there are the stupid, and there are idiots who are channeling to other galaxies and bringing messages to humanity. Books are printed with their messages.
But the whole thing is that a person goes into a deep hypnotic sleep – if it is authentic. Out of ten, nine are not authentic. If somebody is authentic, then all that happens in reality is that he relaxes, his conscious mind goes to sleep, and from his unconscious mind, collective unconscious mind, cosmic unconscious mind, things start coming up.
You can say they are coming from ghosts. You can talk about them in psychological terms and say they are coming from the unconscious. Or you can talk about them in Californian terms: they are coming from channel number one, channel number two. But they are all coming from your own unconscious mind. This is about the authentic cases.
And when so many people are channeling, it becomes a competition. If somebody else is channeling, why can’t you channel? No talent is needed, no intelligence is needed; all that is needed is insincerity, cunningness, fraud.
Every year in India, Mohammedans have their holy festival, Muharram. And during Muharram, holy spirits possess people. Those holy spirits – because Mohammedans, just like Christians and Jews, believe only in one life – those holy spirits will always be around until the last judgment day, which goes on being postponed, and I don’t think it is going to happen ever.
I had a center in Jabalpur near a Mohammedan graveyard. And they reported to the collector that because of our meditations, the spirits in their graves were very much disturbed.
The collector called me: “Why are you disturbing their spirits?”
I said, “This is strange. What report have you received? Who has come?”
He said, “Mohammedans – and it may create a riot unnecessarily.”
Jabalpur was one of the most vulnerable cities in India for Mohammedan and Hindu riots, any excuse….
And their excuse was that because when we were doing our meditation we would use the Sufi mantra “hoo.”
So the Mohammedans had said, “Because they say, ‘Hoo, hoo, hoo’ the Mohammedan souls lying in their graves wake up. These are dangerous people – because nobody has ever heard of such a meditation. And after one hour these people are gone, but those spirits roam about and torture Mohammedans, and many are becoming possessed.”
The collector said, “You stop. At least this ‘hoo’ mantra should be stopped because it can create trouble. And in your own book you have explained that ‘hoo’ is part of ‘allah-hoo’, it is a Sufi mantra. So they have certain grounds against you, that you are disturbing the souls. They are sleeping well, and you ‘hoo, hoo’ every morning, and they get so disturbed that they start torturing Mohammedans.”
So I had to close that center.
In my childhood, in the village, each time the Mohammedans celebrated the holidays of Muharram, some people were “possessed by the holy spirit.” The holy spirit is called wali. There are a few people who are thought to be very saintly – they are possessed by walis – and they dance and they shout, scream, and you can ask questions.
And so that they could not run away, their hands are tied with ropes, and two people kept them under control. There are many walis, and each wali has his own crowd, and people come with sweets and fruits – somebody has received a blessing the previous year and has got a boy, a child; somebody has got married, and somebody has come to get a blessing for the future.
Only Mohammedans participate in it, but I always enjoyed every kind of entertainment. My parents used to tell me, “Listen, that is the Mohammedans’ festival, and you are not supposed to be there.”
I said, “I am neither Hindu nor Mohammedan nor Jaina nor anybody. What do you mean – that I cannot enjoy anything? All festivals belong to some religion. In fact, I belong to no religion so I can participate in all festivals.” So I would go there.
Once I managed to hold the rope of one wali who was just an ordinary man and a fraud. I had told him before, “I will expose you if you don’t allow me to hold your rope.”
He said, “You can hold my rope, and you can share a few sweets also, but don’t say anything to anybody.”
We both used to go to the same gymnasium – that’s how we became friends, and he himself told me that it was all fake. So I said, “That means I am coming; if it is fake, you have to share it.”
I went there with a long needle, so I could make him jump. He became the most famous wali because no other wali was jumping so high.
He could not say anything about what was happening – because he was possessed by the wali and the wali cannot be afraid of a needle. So he could not say anything, and I went on sticking him with the needle. He managed to get almost four times more sweets, more fruit, more rupees. More people came to get his blessing.
He said, “That is great, but you tortured me so much!”
I was in such demand from that day – every wali wanted his rope to be given to me because whoever got me as his assistant would become the greatest wali – immediately, the very same day.
The function continued for ten days, but no wali wanted me again the next day.
They would say, “I will escape from town if you come again!”
I said, “There is no need. I am in so much demand by other fools who don’t know what is happening. Just give me half your share – because you will still have double.”
And I found that almost everybody was a fraud because I could make everybody jump with my needle. Not a single one in the whole town was an authentic person who was possessed or anything. They were just pretending – shouting, screaming, saying things that you couldn’t understand, but you had to make sense out of.
And the maulvis, the Mohammedan scholars, would explain to you what the meaning of it was: “You have been blessed, your desire will be fulfilled.” And who bothers about whose desire is fulfilled or not? If a hundred people come, at least fifty people’s desires are going to be fulfilled. These fifty will come back, and will spread the idea. The other fifty will also come back – not to the same wali, but to other walis who are there, because the first wali they went to doesn’t seem to work: “Perhaps he was not powerful enough.”
And my walis were the most powerful, and their power was decided by how high they jumped, how much they screamed, how much they shouted.
Everybody asked me why my walis were making such gestures toward me. I said, “That is a spiritual language – you will not understand.”
In California, you can start a new game. Don’t bother about this channeling – within two years it will be past.
California is good. It has money, it has the young generation, unemployed, and it has a tradition of changing everything – changing the job, changing the wife, changing the town, changing the house. In two or three years they become bored. So rather than being worried about their channeling…
It is absolute fraud.
And if there is someone sincere, that means he is relaxing to the point where the unconscious mind starts throwing up its repressed contents.
It has no spiritual value.
But it will be good to check. Go to any person who is channeling with the galaxies, but keep a good needle with you! With the needle, the person will start dancing, jumping, and his galaxies will start going higher – from one channel to nine channels. You can check: if your needle does not work, that means the person is at least not a fraud, but is simply falling into unconsciousness and allowing his unconscious to reveal its contents.
But they have no spiritual value.
But before you leave, try the needle – particularly on the famous ones!

Osho,
Do you really say yes to me totally just the way I am?
Yes, I say yes totally to you as you are because that is the only way I can transform you.
My acceptance does not mean that you have to remain what you are; my acceptance means that whatever you are I respect you, I love you.
But at the same time, my acceptance means that you can be much more, that this is not the end of your journey. In fact, you have not even begun yet, but I can see the potential.
For centuries, this has been the way to challenge you to seek and search: you have been condemned; whatever you are, you are wrong. The emphasis has been that if you are proved to be wrong, a sinner, then you will start changing. But that whole technique has failed. People have accepted that they are wrong, they are sinners, and it is beyond them to be saints. So relax and be sinners – of course not in a joyous way, but with sadness. Their whole life becomes unworthy in their own eyes: guilty, sinful, sad…a long, dark story…useless, futile.
The past has condemned you with the hope that it would change you, but their hope has proved wrong.
I am going to try a totally different method.
I accept you as you are, but that does not mean that I want you to remain as you are. I love you as you are, but I love you because you have so much potential in you, such a great possibility of growth, that with just a little effort you can become a light unto yourself.
Whatever you are, enjoy it. But there is much more, so don’t stop at it. You are on the first rung of the ladder – it is perfectly good, because without being on the first rung, how can you be on the second and how can you be on the final, the ultimate?
Nobody is a sinner.
Yes, there are people who commit mistakes, but nobody is a sinner. And everybody has a right to commit mistakes – because that is the only way to learn. And everybody has to stumble in the dark. That is nothing special to you; everybody falls once in a while, and it is good training.
To me, whatever existence makes available to you is for your good. Just use it, and keep your eyes on the faraway stars – they belong to you. However far they are, they are not beyond your reach.

Osho,
In recent years, science has been discovering more and more the element of subjectivity in experiments in physics. Also, in medicine today, we talk about the subjectivity of therapy; the same medicine has different results with different doctors.
Please can you comment about the subjectivity of a science that claims to be an objective one?
Anything that has to do with human beings can never be totally objective; it will have to allow a certain space for subjectivity.
It is not only true that the same medicine from different doctors has different effects; it is also true that the same medicine has different effects on different patients from the same doctor.
Man is not an object.
First you have to understand the word subject.
A piece of stone is just an object. There is no interiority, there is no innerness to it. You can cut it in two; then there are two objects. You can cut it in four, and there are four objects. But you will not find any interiority.
Subjectivity means that from the outside a man is just as objective as any other object – a statue, a dead body, a living body, what is the difference? The statue is simply an object, it has no subjectivity. The dead body has once been a house for a subjective phenomenon, but now it is empty. Now it is an empty house; the person who used to live in it has left it.
The living man has all the objectivity of the statue, the dead body, and something more – an interior dimension – which can change many things because it is the most powerful thing in existence.
For example, it has been noted that three persons can be suffering the same disease, but the same medicine will not work. On one person it is working; on another it is just fifty-fifty, working and not working; but on the third it is not working at all. The disease is the same, but the interiorities are different. And if you take the interiority into consideration, then perhaps the doctor will make a different impact on different people for different reasons.
One of my friends was a great surgeon in Nagpur – a great surgeon but not a good man. He never failed in his surgery, and he charged five times more than any other surgeon would charge.
I was staying with him and I told him, “This is too much. When other surgeons are charging a certain amount for the same disease, you charge five times as much.”
He said to me, “My success in many other things also has this basis: when a person gives me five times more, he is determined to survive. It is not only because of money that I am greedy. If he is willing to give me five times more – when he could get the operation at cheaper rates – he is determined to survive whatsoever the cost. And his determination is almost fifty percent of my success.”
There are people who don’t want to survive; they are not willing to cooperate with the doctor. They are taking the medicine, but there is no will to survive; on the contrary, they are hoping that the medicine does not work so they will not be blamed for suicide, yet they can get rid of life. Now, from the inside that person has withdrawn already. Medicine cannot help his interiority, and without his interior support, the doctor is almost helpless – the medicine is not enough.
I came to know from this surgeon…. He said, “You don’t know. Sometimes I do things which are absolutely immoral, but to help the patient I have to do them.”
I said, “What do you mean?”
He said, “I am condemned by my profession….”
And all the doctors of Nagpur condemned him – “We have never seen such a cheat.”
He would put the patient on the table in the operating theater – doctors are ready, nurses are ready, students are watching from the gallery above. And he would whisper in the patient’s ear, “We had agreed on a fee of ten thousand – that will not do. Your problem is more serious. If you are ready to give me twenty thousand, I am going to take the instruments in my hands; otherwise, you get up and get out. You can find cheaper people.”
Now, in such a situation…. And the person has money; otherwise, how can he say yes? And he accepts it: “I will give twenty thousand, but save me.”
And he told me, “Any surgeon could have saved him, but not with such certainty. Now that he is paying twenty thousand, he is absolutely with me; his whole interior being is supportive. People condemn me because they don’t understand me. Certainly it is immoral to agree on ten thousand and then put the person in the operating theater and whisper in his ear, ‘Twenty thousand, thirty thousand…Otherwise get up and get out – because I had not realized that the disease had gone so deep. I am taking a risk, and I am putting my whole reputation on the line. For ten thousand I will not do that. And I have never failed in my life; success is my rule. I operate only when I am absolutely certain to succeed. So you decide. And I don’t have much time, because there are other patients waiting. You just decide within two minutes: either agree, or get up and get lost.’”
“Naturally the person will say, ‘I will give you anything you want, but please do the operation.’ It is illegal, it is immoral, but I cannot say that it is unpsychological.”
Anything to do with man cannot be purely objective.
I used to have another friend, a doctor who is now in jail because he was not qualified at all. He had never been to any medical college; all the degrees that he had written on his sign were bogus.
But still I am of the opinion that an injustice has been done to the man – because it does not matter whether he had degrees or not. He helped thousands of people, and particularly those who were becoming hopeless, going from one doctor to another – who all had degrees – and getting tired. And this man was able to save them.
He had a certain charisma – no degree. And he made his hospital almost a magic land. The moment a patient would enter his office, immediately he would be surprised. He had been everywhere…because people used to go to him only as a last resort. Everybody knew that the man was bogus, it was not something hidden. It was an open secret.
But if you are going to die, what is the harm in trying?
And as you entered his garden – he had a beautiful garden – and then his office…He had beautiful women as his receptionists, and it was all part of his medical treatment – because even if a person is dying, looking at a beautiful woman his will to live takes a jump; he wants to live.
After the reception, the person would pass through his lab. It was absolutely unnecessary to take him through the lab, but he wanted the person to see that he was not an ordinary doctor. And the lab was a miracle – absolutely useless, there was nothing significant, but so many tubes, flasks, colored water moving from one tube into another tube, as if great experiments were going on.
Then you would reach the doctor. And he never used the ordinary methods of checking your pulse, no. You would have to lie down on an electric bed with a remote control. The bed would move far up into the air, and you are lying there looking up and hanging over you there are big tubes. And wires would be attached to your pulse and the pulse would make the water in the tubes jump.
The heart would be checked in the same way – not by ordinary stethoscope. He had made all his arrangements visual for the patient – so that he could see he had come to some genius, an expert.
And the man had no degrees, nothing at all. His pharmacist had all the degrees, and he used to prescribe the medicines because the man had no idea about medicine.
In fact, he never did any criminal thing. He never prescribed medicines, he never signed for them. This was done by a man who had degrees, who was absolutely qualified to do it. But because he arranged all this, and because he had written strange degrees on his sign…and since those degrees don’t exist I don’t think they can be illegal. He was not claiming any legal degrees, he was not claiming that they were from any university that exists. It was all fiction – but the fiction was helpful.
I have seen patients half cured just in the examination. Coming out, they said, “We feel almost cured, and we have not taken the medicine yet. The prescription is here – now we will go and purchase the medicine.”
But because he had done all this…. This is when I saw that the law is blind. He had not done anything illegal, he had not harmed anybody – but he is in jail because he was “cheating people.” He has not cheated anybody.
To help somebody to live longer, if that is cheating, then what is medical help?
Because of human beings, medicine can never become an absolutely solid, hundred-percent objective science. That’s why there are so many medical schools – ayurveda, homeopathy, naturopathy, acupuncture, and many more – and they all help.
Now homeopathy is simply sugar pills, but it helps.
The question is whether the person believes.
There are people who are fanatic naturopaths – nothing else can help them, only naturopathy can help them. And it has no connection with the disease.
One of my professors was madly into naturopathy. Any problem…and a mud pack on your stomach. I used to go to him to enjoy, because it was very relaxing, and he had a very good arrangement – a beautiful bath and showers…. And without any difficulty I used to go and say, “I have a very bad migraine.”
He said, “Don’t be worried. Just a mud pack on your stomach.”
Now a mud pack on the stomach is not going to help a migraine. But it used to help me, because I had no migraine! A mud bath, the full bathtub, and you are drowned in the mud, just your head is out – it is very comfortable and very cool.
Soon he realized that, “You come again and again with new diseases.”
I said, “That’s true. Because I have got a book on naturopathy – from the book I get the disease, and then I come to you. First I read it, to see what you will do. If I want it to be done to me, I bring that disease; otherwise, unnecessarily lying down in the mud for half an hour….”
He said, “So you have been cheating me?”
I said, “I am not cheating you. I am your most prominent patient. In the university everybody else laughs at you, I am the only one who supports you. And the others who come here, come here because of me – because I say that my migraine disappeared.”
He said, “My God, now I am suffering from migraine. Go!”
People used to become angry with me. They would tell me, “My migraine, instead of going, has become more intense – because a cold stomach does not help migraine!”
I would say, “Then your system must work differently. With my system, it helps me!”
There are homeopaths, fanatics who believe that homeopathy is the only right medicine and all other medicines are dangerous – particularly allopathy is poison. If you go to a homeopath, the first thing he will do is inquire about your whole history from your birth up to now. And you are suffering from a headache.
One of the homeopathic doctors used to live near me. Whenever my father came to see me, I would take him to the homeopath. The homeopath told me, “I pray you don’t bring your father because he starts back three generations, that his grandfather had a disease….”
I said, “He is also a homeopath. He goes deeper into the roots.”
He said, “But he wastes so much time, and I have to listen – and he just has a headache! About his grandfather and all his diseases, then his father and all his diseases…then himself. By the time he comes, almost the whole day is finished. My other patients are gone, and I am listening to him telling what kind of diseases he has suffered from his childhood, and finally it comes out that he has a headache.”
“I say, ‘My God, why didn’t you tell me before?’ and he says, ‘Just as you are a homeopath, I am also a homeopath. And I want to give you a complete picture.’”
The first thing they will ask is about all your diseases because they believe that all diseases are connected, your whole life is one single whole. It does not matter whether you had something in your leg or your head – they are part of one body, and for the doctor to understand, he has to know everything.
The homeopath will ask you what kind of allopathic medicines you have been taking – because that is the root cause of all your diseases; all allopathic medicines are poison.
That is the attitude of naturopathy too, that allopathy is poison. So first you have to do fasting, enemas…just to clean you of all allopathy. Once you are clean of allopathy….
One of my relatives was very much interested in naturopathy. His wife had a small problem and that was that her hands once in a while would get what you call “pins and needles.” It was not much of a problem, because for two, three minutes the sensation would remain, and then it would be gone. I told her many times, “Don’t make much fuss about it. Enjoy it when it happens – it is not a pain, you just feel pins and needles. So enjoy it!”
But the husband was a naturopath, so he brought a bigger naturopath and they started working on her. I tried hard to stop them: “There is no need, it is not much of a disease, and it happens only once in a while. She is almost fifty – twenty years more she will live. In twenty years it will happen maybe sixty times, not more than that – just drop the idea and enjoy it.”
But they were going to the very roots. They started putting her on a fast, enema, vomiting…they cleaned her completely. And when she was completely clean, she became mad.
And I told the husband, “I was afraid you would kill the woman! You cleaned her so much, she is just a skeleton. And because she is just a skeleton, all is cleaned, those pins and needles are now happening all over her body. You have succeeded!”
But they insisted that it was not naturopathy that was responsible for it; it was allopathy, she had been taking allopathic medicines for years.
Finally she became mad.
The last time I went to see her…. She used to love me very much. I had been chosen by my university to go with a delegation to Saudi Arabia. She was not in her senses, but when I told her that I had been chosen to go to Saudi Arabia with a cultural delegation, she heard it, she understood it, and she said, “Only two things you have to remember – don’t forget.”
I said, “I will not forget. You just tell me what those two things are.”
“First, don’t use wooden sandals” – because I used to wear wooden sandals in the university just to torture the whole university. I would be at one corner of the campus, and the whole university would know that I had entered, I was in the university. Wherever I was, I could be found just by the sound.
I said, “Why are you worried about my wooden sandals?”
She said, “It won’t look right in a foreign country. What will they think of wooden sandals? No, you don’t do that.”
I said, “Okay, I will not use wooden sandals. What is your second advice?”
She said, “Second advice: You are going to a Mohammedan country. Don’t speak against the Koran.”
And the same night she died.
And for perhaps three months those had been the only words of sanity from her.
My own explanation is that she loved me so much that even in this insane state her love took over her madness to give me suggestions – don’t speak against Mohammedans, against the Koran, and don’t use the wooden sandals.
Man is a subjective being. If the patient loves the doctor, then water can function as medicine. And if the patient hates the doctor, then no medicine can help. If the patient feels the doctor is indifferent – which is ordinarily the case with doctors, because they are also human beings, the whole day long seeing patients, the whole day long somebody is dying…they slowly, slowly become hard, they create a barrier to their emotions, sentiments, humanity. But this prevents their medicine from being effective. It is given almost in a robot-like way, as if a machine is giving you medicine.
With love, the patient is not only getting medicine; around the medicine something invisible is also coming to him.
Medicine will have to understand man’s subjectivity, his love, and will have to create some kind of synthesis in which love and medicine together are used to help people.
But one thing is absolutely certain: that medicine can never become entirely objective. That has been the effort of medical science up to now, to make it absolutely objective.

============================================================

Osho,
Something feels drastically wrong about the way society looks after – or fails to look after – the elderly.
You have spoken of the legalization of euthanasia for those who are so mentally or physically debilitated that they can hardly be said to be living at all. But what can be done for those who are not physically or mentally incapacitated, but are retired from their professions, and whose families have grown up?
In the past, families often felt obliged to have one or both parents live with them – often with disastrous results. Abuse of the elderly, called “granny-bashing” is an epidemic problem in America. Alternatively, the elderly are put into homes, where they are visited at weekends out of guilt and a sense of duty; or they are entirely neglected. The housing complexes provided for the elderly are often depressing and lonely, like a state of limbo between life and death.
It feels so ungracious and inhuman that society uses people and then casts them off into anonymity. Would you please comment?
The problem of the elderly has arisen because man is living longer than he used to live before.
All the old skeletons found in India, in China and other ancient countries prove one thing: that nobody used to live more than forty years, hence the problem of the elderly never arose in those societies.
It is because of this fact that the scriptures go on saying that in our country people never became old. It was not something great, it was simply that before old age they were dead. Death came before old age; now it comes after.
And as a country is more advanced, people are living longer – ninety years, a hundred years. In a few countries, there are thousands of people who have crossed the boundary line of one hundred and fifty. And in a few special places, because of their food, their climate and their genetics, a few people have reached the age of one hundred and eighty. And they are still young, they are working just like anybody else.
But the problem for the society is that employment is limited. The population growth is tremendous. New people are coming in such great numbers that we have to vacate places for them, we have to retire people. And as time passes, we will have to retire people even earlier than we are retiring them now. Now in a few countries it is sixty years, in a few countries fifty-five years, but soon this will not be possible. People will have to retire by the age of around forty-five – because the pressure of the new people coming will be so great that if you don’t give them opportunities they will create chaos.
But to retire somebody at the age of forty-five is dangerous, it creates many psychological problems.
First, a person needs some work, some creativity, to feel that he is needed. This is one of the most essential psychological needs of man – to be needed. The moment you feel you are no more needed, suddenly something starts dying within you, shrinking within you – as if the will to live has lost all its power, energy, hope. Tomorrow is nothing but darkness.
And the person who has become useless to the society – that’s what retirement is…. We make it as beautiful as we can by giving a beautiful pocket watch, celebrating it – it is just a cover-up. The reality is, we are throwing the person in the junkyard: “You are no longer needed, your work is finished. Now younger people, more educated, better educated, who know the latest scientific developments, are going to replace you. You are out of date.”
Suddenly, you have become a posthumous person.
You will go on living, breathing, eating, but it will be just like an appendix to a book – the book is finished, and nobody reads the appendix. One starts losing dignity, self-respect; one starts feeling out of place everywhere – one is no longer connected with the society, with who is now in power; a great gap has arisen.
These people are going through a tremendous inner turmoil and crisis.
To keep them in the family, as has always been done in the past, is to create a nuisance for the new ones – because these people have nothing to do except criticize. They are ready to get angry, easily annoyed, irritated, ready to fight.
In fact, these are their ways of making the society and the family feel that they are alive, that you cannot just ignore them. They are doing it in a wrong way, but whatever they are doing should be understood with great compassion: they are simply asking for a little attention. For their whole life they have been paid attention to – in the offices, in the shops, in the government, wherever they were they were somebody. And now they are nobody – not even to their own children.
And the problem becomes more complex because the children have no obligation to be bothered with these old people. They have a small life span of their own; soon they will be retired. Before retirement they want to enjoy life – to eat, drink and be merry.
And these old people are sitting there, continuously watching what you are doing; they suddenly become very spiritual, moralistic disciplinarians; they start finding loopholes in everybody’s life – and nobody likes it. Nobody wants to be interfered with. Their independence to live their life in their own way is their birthright.
And these old people, to the younger generation, look like idiots for the simple reason that the younger generation knows more, it is better educated. Science is progressing in leaps and bounds. Every generation comes with the latest developments, canceling all old knowledge as false, as mistaken.
It was not so in the past. Things have changed so dramatically that unless we take the whole into account, we will not be able to solve the problem.
In the past the situation was totally different, diametrically different. There was no gap between the younger and the older generation.
The gap has only been created in this century. In the past, by the time he was six or seven the young child would start following his father – if the father was a carpenter, he would start carrying his wood, his instruments. If the father was a woodcutter, he would go with him to the forest – whatever small help he could give, and whatever small amount he could learn…because profession came by birth. You were going to do the same thing your father did and your forefathers had been doing for centuries, there was no mobility.
It was not that a shoemaker’s son would become a carpenter, or a carpenter’s son would become a goldsmith – the profession came by birth. So from the very beginning the child knew what he was going to become: he was going to become exactly a replica of his father.
The question of a gap did not arise. And the father always knew more, and the child always knew less – because the only way of knowing was by experience. A carpenter’s son had to learn by doing carpentry. Naturally the father was much more knowledgeable about the art, the craftsmanship, and at no time could the son say, “You are out of date.”
This is why all the old civilizations respect old people, because the old people always knew more than the young people. Old people expect the same today also, but it is not possible – they have forgotten that the basic root was that the older knew more than the younger. Now the situation is just the reverse: the younger know more than the older.
Your father may have come out of the university thirty years ago. In thirty years, everything has changed. And when you come out of the university, the father cannot expect – should not expect the same respect that was always given to him in the past. The situation is completely reversed. Now the son knows more; the father has to ask the son for his advice because he is coming fresh from the university, bringing the latest research on any subject.
Now, experience is not the only way of learning.
We have created schools, colleges, universities – an alternative way of learning, far quicker.
The way of experience is slower. Now, how quickly you can learn depends on your intelligence. Libraries are available, books are available, teachers are available. If you are just ready to learn, you can learn so much by the time you come out of the university that it is natural at many points to think: “My father is behaving stupidly, my father is doing things which are out of date – they should not be done.”
Your father may be a doctor – he is giving medicines which you know, because you have come from the university, have been abandoned; they are not to be given, they are dangerous. And he is still prescribing them because in his time he learned that those were the right medicines. Such drastic changes have happened.
The younger generation has come for the first time to a higher knowledge level than the older.
If he is considerate, a young person may respect old age – but it is going to be just formal, not real. In the past it was a real phenomenon, not formal – he really felt it. Now he cannot feel it.
I know from my own experience.
My teachers in the university had passed their examinations, their post graduation, their PhD’s twenty years before. In those twenty years everything had changed.
It does not change for the mediocre – because they never go to the university, they are not bothered. But what has happened in the world of knowledge is that people still go on listening to a man who is teaching everything wrong.
Because I have been interested in books from my very childhood, it was a constant problem and conflict in every class. I could not pay them respect; I said to my teachers, “Formally, I can pay respect to you, but don’t expect it in a realistic way – because what you are saying is no longer true. And to give real respect to you means to accept what you are saying as true.”
“I respect truth – that’s why I cannot respect you. For twenty years you have not been in contact with the developing knowledge. Once you came out of the university, you never read anything about what has happened in your subject.”
And the rate of research in all subjects is such that now big books – particularly in physics, in chemistry, in biochemistry – are not written, because by the time you write a big book of a thousand pages most of it will have been proved wrong. So only periodicals, papers are published. And in that too you have to be very quick because you are not working on the subject alone.
Albert Einstein was asked once, “If you had not discovered the theory of relativity, do you think it would have ever been discovered?”
He said, “Within three weeks – at the most.” It was very shocking because people thought that you had to be an Albert Einstein.
He said, “That is true, but there are many Albert Einsteins around the world who are working along the same lines. It is only a question of who comes first, it is a race.”
And it was found that another German physicist had already discovered everything about the theory of relativity, but he was late in publishing his paper; otherwise, Albert Einstein would not have been the first man to bring light to the whole subject. This man had discovered everything, he was just a little lazy about writing his paper – but his discovery was earlier than Albert Einstein’s.
People are researching small details – not big subjects, because big subjects take a longer time. People are taking very small pieces of subjects so that they can finish them quickly before anybody else does, and then they can give the paper to the university, or to whoever publishes the paper.
Now there are thousands of universities around the world working on the same subjects, thousands of scholars.
And I found that my teachers, without exception, were twenty or thirty years behind the times. And because I said so, it became a constant trouble. Colleges, universities would not accept me, would not give me admission, and they would not give the reasons. Somehow I had to convince a principal.
I still remember the scene….
This principal was a little crazy. He was a devotee of the mother goddess Kali of Calcutta, and every morning from four o’clock he would start….
He was a very big man. He was a wrestler in his youth, and the rumor was that in the early days the famous wrestler Gama was defeated by him – but by that time Gama was no longer famous. And this principal had the body of a great wrestler; he was black, looked dangerous. And from four o’clock the whole neighborhood was tortured by him – “Jai Kali.” And he had a real loud voice, no loudspeakers needed.
When I was refused from a few places, I thought perhaps this crazy person could be persuaded. So I went early in the morning, five o’clock. He was in his temple – in his beautiful bungalow, he had a small temple, and the whole area was sounding, resounding, “Jai Kali” – victory to Kali.
I went into the temple. He was alone. I also started shouting, “Victory to Kali.”
He looked at me. He said, “You are a believer in Kali?”
I said, “Anybody who has any intelligence has to be a believer in Kali. And you are the greatest man I have come across.”
He said, “Everybody thinks I am crazy.”
I said, “They are all crazy.”
He invited me for breakfast. And he said, “What are you doing?”
I said I was studying in a certain college, although I had been expelled from that college.
He said, “You leave all those colleges and come to my college. I will give you all the scholarships, every kind of help, because you are the first person who has recognized me.”
In that way I got entry into his college. But once I was in, he was in trouble – professors started coming to him…. He called me, and he said, “This is not good. It seems you bluffed me.”
I said, “This is true, I bluffed you – because there was no other way.”
He said, “Then you will have to do one thing: you should not come to the college at all; just come to take your examinations.”
I said, “What about my percentage for being present in the lectures?”
He said, “I will take care of it. You will get ninety percent for attendance, but don’t come to the college! Because every professor is complaining – it is not a question of one professor; you are torturing everybody. They all say, ‘Now we cannot compete with this young man. He has read the latest – and we can see that we are twenty years behind, but we cannot manage to read all that has happened in twenty years. We have to take care of the children and the wife and the whole family. And he makes us so embarrassed. He brings facts and we know that he is right, but we cannot tolerate this constant embarrassment. And because of him, other students are losing respect. They are all thinking that we know nothing. He has created the atmosphere in the college that all the professors are idiots.’”
I said, “It is true, you have got first-class idiots.”
He said, “Listen, I am giving you all the facilities for not coming to the college.”
I said, “That’s a perfectly good arrangement, but once in a while can I come to your temple just to participate in the worship?”
He said, “Now there is no need to bluff me. I was also surprised that nobody in my whole life had said that I was a great man. Only this young man has recognized my spirituality. You bluffed me once, that’s enough.”
For two years I did not go to the college, but I was going to the university library, getting ready for my post graduation so I could torture the post-graduate professors.
Today, every young person coming from the university is ahead of the older generation. His lifestyle has changed, his thinking about the world has changed, his values have changed – and the old people are constantly poking their noses into it. So the only way that has been found is to put these old people in houses for the old.
Out of duty, out of guilt, the children go to meet their parents there, but not for love, not for joy. And most often they are neglected; nobody ever goes there.
Their lives are certainly very miserable.
They have lost their jobs, and with their jobs their respect, with their jobs their worth, with their jobs the feeling that they are somebody. Their ego is punctured. They have lost their family.
Their children are grown up and don’t want to live with them – because they would like their children to listen to the music of Mozart, and the children are interested in the Beatles. The old people think, “Beatles? – this is not music. This is simply madness, this is not dance!”
The gap is so big that it is unbridgeable.
The solution is sad.
The children are gone, the family is gone.
These old people’s houses look sad; they seem to be waiting rooms for the graveyard – dull, depressed, dark.
Certainly there is a great problem, and this problem is going to become bigger every day.
My suggestion is: first, the moment old people retire and their families send them to the houses for the old, their marriages should also be canceled – because love can bring a new spring again. It doesn’t matter whether you are fifty or sixty.
They have produced children, they have lived together; now it is time. They are departing from the family, they have departed from the job; they should depart from the marriage also – because their sadness has much to do with the situation of the husband and wife left alone. No friends, no children, no job – and they are tired of each other, they don’t seem to take any interest in each other.
It should be optional: if some couple wants to live together, that is up to them, but if couples want to separate they should be respectfully separated so they can start their lives anew – and for the first time without worries. They have their pensions, money is no longer a problem; they can find new partners, new lovers.
And it has been psychologically established that if even an old man falls in love with a woman, his life is lengthened at least by ten years – because love gives juice to your roots, you again become young, you again start looking at flowers, thinking of poetry, thinking of painting, writing love letters.
So the first thing is that love should be given another chance.
And what is the harm? – if you can have two springs in your life….
And now you are more experienced. You will not reproduce children again – that phase is over, you have tortured yourself enough. You will take every care that children are not produced.
And it is a strange phenomenon: the moment somebody falls in love, many things change – his face has a different glow, his eyes become more shiny, he smiles more. He may go and dye his hair – life is taking a new beginning – get a beautiful set of teeth. He has to become a little younger.
To me, love is a kind of chemistry – it is chemistry. Your body starts functioning in a different way.
He will start thinking, if he is a man, to go for morning walks, jogging, swimming, to keep his body fit because now there is a woman. For himself he was not caring about his body, but the woman….
And the woman is going to care about her body at least twenty times more. It will be a beautiful place because then in those old people’s houses, people will paint their rooms in lighter colors, not dark and sad, gloomy. They will bring flowers, they will start gardening, may go for a world tour, may go for a long trip in a boat.
Life can be joy.
They can meditate, they can study. Much that they always wanted to do and had no time to do…now they have time, they have money. They can paint, they can sculpt.
My own idea is that special classes should be opened in every university for these old people who want to learn painting, who want to learn sculpture, who want to learn music, who want to learn dancing. They should enter the university again, a second phase of education.
I have always had the idea that the first phase of education is the preparation for life and the second phase of education should be the preparation for death.
You don’t have any preparation for death, no education for death. This is a lopsided situation. A person has lived half his life, and you trained him, educated him. Now the other half should not be left barren like a desert. He should begin again, with the second part of his education. He meditates, he learns creative arts, he dances. He writes poetry, novels.
Whatever he wanted to do in life…now life has respectfully given him time to do everything that has been just a desire in his mind, just a dream. Now it can be turned into a reality.
And he should be freed from all old bondage – marriage, or any other kind of bondages – so he can start new adventures in every direction.
We can make the second part so beautiful that people who are still in the first part will feel jealous, will feel, “How long will it take for me to be retired? – because those old guys are really enjoying it. We are working, earning; they are simply relaxing, taking sunbaths on different beaches around the world, with different women.”
The old people have to defeat the young – there is no need to be defeated. Right now they have taken a very defeatist attitude. They should take it as a challenge: “Now we will prove that old age is not a misery, that it can become a tremendously beautiful experience.”
In fact, it has to be more beautiful than the first phase, because the first phase was only a preparation for the second.
And the second is the preparation for the eternal.

Osho,
When you talk about the “art” of something, and the “science” of something else, what is the essential difference? Is it that an art can only be approached and appreciated intuitively, subjectively, while a science is approached and appreciated with the help of the mind and objectively?
The scientific approach and the approach of art certainly have that difference.
Art is intuitive, more of the heart, more subjective, more intimate.
Science is objective, not intimate at all; it has nothing to do with your intuition or your feeling, nothing to do with your heart. In fact, it has nothing to do with you at all.
If you heat water, it will evaporate at one hundred degrees. Who heats the water does not matter – whether it is a man or a woman, whether it is a boy or an old man, a Tibetan lama or a Catholic monk. Water simply follows an objective rule; it is not concerned with the person who is boiling it. There may not be any person at all; it can be boiled just by pressing a button, a machine can do it.
So that is certainly one of the differences.
Art is a totally different matter.
First, it is not objective; it is something that is born within you. Then you project it onto something outside – it may be a painting.
Vincent Van Gogh painted a single painting for one year continuously. He rejected it hundreds of times. He was painting the sun, and every day he would reject it. And his friends were tired; they said, “Nobody has painted the sun so much – and you have painted so many paintings so beautifully but you go on rejecting them.”
I am bringing him in because I want to tell you that he had a certain inner criterion, he had a certain inner painting of the sun. And it was not being projected exactly as he had it in him – that was the rejection; otherwise, there was no question.
That is the difference between a painting and photograph.
A photograph is part of science, a painting is not.
One very rich woman asked Picasso how much he would take to make a portrait of her.
He said, “What do you want – a photograph or a painting?”
She said, “I don’t understand the difference. What do you mean?”
He said, “A photograph is a simple thing. You will be sitting there, and I will make a drawing of your face, of your body, on the canvas. I will be simply functioning like a camera. It will be a photograph – although everybody will say it is a painting.”
“But if you want a painting then you have to be ready, because in the painting I will not be a camera; in the painting I will be subjectively involved. So the outcome will not be just your picture; it will be a picture processed through my subjectivity. It may not even look similar to you.”
The woman said, “I would like a painting because photographs can be done by cameras very easily and cheaply. You are asking one million dollars, so let it be a painting.”
It was a painting.
And when the woman looked at it she could not believe what it was…. She said, “Just one thing I want to ask: just tell me where my nose is?”
Picasso said, “I don’t know anything about it. Do you ever ask a camera? You just look at the picture and find out. I have processed you through my subjectivity and this is what happens. I will try to find out where your nose has gone, where other things are – they must be somewhere. But I refuse to sell it.”
The woman was shocked. She said, “Why?”
He said, “You cannot appreciate a painting. Your question was so stupid. And I have worked so hard on your painting, I have put my whole soul into it, and you are worried about your nose! I am not going to sell it. You need only a photograph, which you can recognize.”
A photograph is prose.
A painting is poetry. It becomes mysterious because it passes through man’s innermost feelings. It takes a new birth. It is not a reproduction. Another incident….
A man purchased a Picasso painting, and paid a million dollars. But when you pay a million dollars, you want to be certain that it is an authentic Picasso.
One critic said, “Don’t be worried, it is an authentic Picasso because I was staying with him when he painted this. I am a witness. You can purchase it without any fear.”
He purchased it, but he said, “You will have to come with me to see Picasso because I want to hear it from him that it is an original, authentic.”
The critic said, “There is no problem.” They went.
The critic was a friend of Picasso, and he said, “You must remember, I was staying with you when you did this painting.”
He said, “I remember it perfectly well, but this is not authentic, this is not original. I have done it.”
The critic said, “Are you going mad? On one hand you say you have done it, and on the other hand you say it is not authentic, not original. What do you mean?”
Picasso said, “I have painted the same painting before, and it is hanging in a museum. You can go and see – that was authentic, that was original. This painting…I was not getting any new ideas, and there was a customer who wanted a painting. So I simply copied my own painting – but it is a copy. It does not matter who copies it, whether Picasso copies it or somebody else does, it is a copy. It is not authentic, it is not original. I am not involved in it at all, it is not part of my subjectivity. The first painting is. They are exactly alike, you cannot find any difference – but I made the difference, and the difference is significant.”
The scientific approach is about objects, which are common.
Because art is personal, subjective, it can never be common. You may not agree on one painting – two persons may not agree at all that it is beautiful. To somebody it may be ugly, to somebody else it may be beautiful. It is a personal phenomenon.
But I was talking about more fundamental differences.
When I say the science of hypnosis is not the art of hypnosis, my meaning is that the art is always invented, it has no reality in existence. It is invented by the artist.
You can find statues of horses with flying wings. Nowhere in reality are there horses with flying wings – there are wings and there are horses, you can combine them. But that is your invention, not a discovery.
Art is invention. Science is discovery.
Science only discovers that which is already there, and art creates.
Science is never creative; it only finds out whatever is the case. Art creates out of nothing.
Hypnosis is not an art. It is a science; you can discover the principles – they are exactly the same anywhere on the earth. In any age, at any time, in any culture, in any society; those principles are there to be discovered. They are already there; you only have to discover them.
A painting by Picasso or the poetry of Rabindranath or a musical composition by Yehudi Menuhin are not already there. It is Yehudi Menuhin who creates it, it is Rabindranath who composes it – because it is subjective, personal and invented.
You can have different opinions about art, but you cannot have different opinions about science. Opinions don’t matter; science is factual.
Art is fictional. Art has beauty, and tremendous genius is needed to create it. The artist is almost like a god creating the world.
If the story is true that God created the world, then it is an art, then God is an artist, not a scientist – because to be a scientist he will have to discover the world…the world is already there, and then he discovers it.
I want hypnosis to be understood as a science and not as an art for this basic reason: discovery and invention.

Osho,
This is an excerpt from a conversation with Gurdjieff; these are his words: With ordinary love goes hate: I love this, I hate that. Today I love you; next week, or next hour, or next minute, I hate you. He who can really love, can be; he who can be, can do; he who can do, is. To know about real love, one must forget all about love and must look for direction. As we are, we cannot love. We love something because something in ourselves combines with another's emanations. We allow ourselves to be influenced. We project our feelings upon others. Anger begets anger. We receive what we give. Everything attracts or repels. There is the love of sex, which is ordinarily known as “love” between man and woman – when sex disappears a man and a woman no longer “love” each other. There is love of feeling, which evokes the opposite, and makes people suffer. Later we will talk about conscious love. Osho, can you please talk about conscious love, both in a man-woman relationship and in the master-disciple relationship?
The question is not only about conscious love.
The basic thing is consciousness.
A conscious person does everything consciously – love or painting or dancing or making a cup of tea; it does not matter what. Consciousness prevails over all your actions, just as unconsciousness prevails over all your actions. You love unconsciously, you hate unconsciously, you do everything unconsciously.
So the whole problem has to be reduced to these two words: consciousness and unconsciousness.
Love can be a good example.
People say they love, but they don’t know what they are saying, they don’t know what they mean – because they love a car, they love a woman, they love a certain brand of cigarette, they love the football matches. It is difficult to figure out what they mean by love.
Unconscious love is simply a magnetic pull toward something, irresistible. But you are not going toward the object of love, you are being pulled. You are fast asleep. In your whole life, you are behaving like a somnambulist. There are many people who wake up in the night without waking up; they get up, not wake up. And they will do things, and they will go back to sleep and in the morning they will not remember what they have done.
Many times when people think that their houses are haunted by ghosts, it is just that somebody in the house is a somnambulist who does things in sleep – sets fire to things, throws things away, and goes to his bed and sleeps well. And in the morning he is as puzzled as everybody else – not that he is deceiving anybody, just he has no remembrance.
Your life – which one minute is full of love, the next minute all the love disappears…. Not only that, it can turn into hate; you were ready to die for the person and the next moment you can kill the person.
According to Gurdjieff, and according to those who have awakened, the whole of humanity is asleep, sleepwalkers. Things are happening but you are not the doers because you are not conscious enough to do something.
You fall in love. You cannot say that it is a conscious decision on your part. Perhaps the woman’s hair is just like your mother’s hair. Every male child loves his mother, that is his first love object. The baby girl loves her father, that is her first love object. And slowly, slowly the father and mother become imprints – the mother becomes imprinted on the boy, the father becomes imprinted on the girl.
And when the boy falls in love with a woman, his unconscious mind signals him, “Here comes your mother.” You don’t hear it. And nobody can be exactly like your mother, so there can only be some similarity – the way the woman walks, the face of the woman, the eyes of the woman, the way she talks. Anything can trigger in you the old figure waiting in your unconscious, deep in the well inside you.
The same happens to the girl – the way the man walks, just the sound of his boots, may remind her of her father. Any small thing can trigger it, and suddenly you feel a great love arising in you. But because it is only fragmentary, it cannot be very lasting. It can be lasting if you don’t ever meet – then you will never come to know about the other fragments. So the most successful lovers in the world are those who never meet. They make the most romantic, beautiful stories – no quarrel, no nagging, no fighting. And they never come to find out that “This is not the woman made for me and I am not the man made for this woman” – they never come close enough to know this.
But unfortunately, most lovers get married.
That is the most unfortunate accident in life.
That destroys the whole beauty; otherwise they would have been Laila and Majnu, Shiri and Farhad, Soni and Mahival – great lovers of history. But all those great lovers never met, never lived in a one-room apartment in Bombay.
Once two persons are together, then other fragments of their lives are bound to surface. You have to become acquainted with the whole woman you have got; the woman has to become acquainted with the whole man she has got – and there is the trouble, because then slowly you find that the fragment you love is very small in comparison to the fragments you hate. Now just the color of the hair does not help, nor the face nor the eyes nor the nose – nothing helps.
In the West, women have been asking me – -because their love lives are not going well…. Nobody’s love life is going well, it simply does not happen. So those poor women were asking if they should get their nose fixed by a plastic surgeon – because the husband is continuously talking about her nose, that it looks Jewish. And he is so much against Jews – the moment he sees the nose, all love disappears. The poor woman is ready to fix her nose.
I said, “Don’t unnecessarily torture your nose. He will find something else, this is just an excuse. Right now he may become accustomed to this nose, but if you fix it then every time he sees you he will see that this woman has a fixed nose, she is really a Jew behind the nose. It will be very difficult for him to forget this. And the money is going from his pocket to fix your nose. You just leave it as it is.”
In fact, for centuries a wrong concept has been prevalent: that lovers should like each other in every possible way. That is absurd. Lovers should make it clear – “These are the things I don’t like.” Both should make it clear, that “These are the things I don’t like, and these are the things I love.” And there is no need to quarrel about it every day because that quarrel is not going to change anything. They have to learn to accept that which they don’t like – a kind of co-existence, a tolerance. This is for the lovers who are not awake.
A conscious love is a totally different thing. It has nothing to do with love as such, it has something to do with meditation, which makes you conscious. And as you become more and more conscious, you become aware of many things. One: that it is not the object of love that is important. It is your loving quality, your lovingness that is important, because you are so full of love you would like to share it. And the sharing has to be unconditional. You cannot say, “I will not share if your nose is Jewish” – what has sharing to do with noses?
Conscious love changes the whole situation.
Unconscious love is centered on the object of love.
Conscious love is centered in oneself, it is your lovingness.
Unconscious love is always addressed to one person; hence there is always jealousy – because the other person also knows that unconscious love is always centered on one person, that it cannot be shared. If you start loving somebody else, that means you have stopped loving the first person. That’s the jealousy, the continuous fear that your lover may start loving somebody else – as if love is a quantity.
Conscious love is a quality, not quantity.
It is more like friendliness – deeper, higher, with more fragrance, but similar to friendliness. You can be friendly to many people, there is no question of jealousy. It does not matter that you are friendly to five persons or ten persons or ten thousand persons; nobody will feel deprived because you love so many people and his share is going to be less and less. On the contrary, as you are able to love more people, your quality of love becomes mountainous. So whoever you love gets more love if your love is shared by many people. It dies if it is narrowed. It becomes livelier if it is spread over a vast area – the bigger the area, the deeper are its roots.
Consciousness gives everything a transformation. Your love is no more addressed to anybody in particular. It does not mean that you stop loving. It simply means you become love, you are love, your very being is love, your breathing is love, your heartbeats are love. Awake you are love, asleep you are love.
And the same is true about everything else – your understanding, your intelligence, everything goes through the same change. You become the center of the whole existence, the center of the cyclone, and everything radiates from you and reaches anybody who is able to receive it.
It is not a question of loving someone for certain reasons; it is love simply out of abundance – you have so much that you have to share it, you have to radiate it. And whoever receives it, you are grateful to the person.
Conscious love makes you a doer, a being, a soul.
In unconscious love, you are just an emptiness – dark and dismal, hungry and thirsty. In unconscious love, you are a beggar. You are begging for love, because love is nourishment.
And this is hilarious: You are begging for love, the other person, whom you are in love with is also begging for love – two beggars holding their begging bowls before each other, and both begging bowls are empty.
Conscious love makes you an emperor. You don’t beg; you simply give. And you give because now you see that the more you give the more you have. So whoever accepts your love, you are grateful to the person.
The whole earth can become full of love, an ocean of love, but only with conscious people.
With unconscious people, it is just a disgusting place, nauseating… everybody pretending to be loving, and nobody is loving. Everybody is trying to exploit the other, and the other is doing the same to him. And because both are empty, sooner or later they are going to start quarreling: that “You deceived me,” that “You cheated me,” that “You betrayed me,” that “You are not the woman you pretended to be,” that “You are not the man you were showing yourself to be.” But with beggars this is going to be the problem.
I have heard about a beggar who used to sit by the side of a bridge. One day he asked, “Give something to a blind, helpless old man.”
So they gave him one rupee. He looked at the rupee and he said, “This is not real, this is false.”
They said, “But you are blind!”
He said, “I am not blind. The man who usually sits here is blind. Today he has gone to see a film. He is my friend, I am just sitting in his place.”
But everybody in this whole world of unconsciousness is a beggar, trying in every possible way to snatch some love, some attention, some sympathy – because love is a necessary nourishment. Without love, you cannot live; just as food is necessary for the body, love is necessary for the soul. And everybody is suffering without love, because without love your souls are dying.
But what we are doing is not right.
The right way is to bring consciousness to yourself.
And from consciousness there will be many revolutions in many dimensions. Love will be one of the most important dimensions, and you will find the golden key of how to get love from the whole existence.
The secret is: whatever you have, give it, share it.
Once the universe knows that you have become a sharer, then all the sources of the universe become available to you. They are inexhaustible.

============================================================

Osho,
Some time ago, in answer to my question as to whether enlightenment is the only way a disciple can express gratitude to her master, I heard you say that nothing could express the gratitude. I realized then that gratitude is something that we usually feel almost burdened with, and so we seek to find an outlet for it so that we are relieved of a debt. As the disciple can't express her gratitude – and what would the master do with it anyway? – it seems to me that it could become a kind of quality in someone that could transform them. Would you please comment?
Maneesha, the path of the mystic is the path of growing qualities, of transforming the quantitative into the qualitative. For example, love can be a quantity – and as love is understood in the world of sleeping people, it is a quantity; hence, it is followed by jealousy.
If I love you, you are in continuous fear that I may start loving somebody else too.
And with the love divided, you will not be getting the same quantity you were getting before.
Jealousy is nothing but an expression that love is still a quantity in your mind: shared, it becomes less; shared with many people, you are getting less and less. Hence a monopoly is needed, so that you can have the whole lot of it.
And both of the lovers – because of this stupid idea – are suspicious, are always spying on each other. If your husband sees you laughing with somebody else, even that is enough to create a quarrel, a conflict, a fight. Your laughter is his monopoly. You cannot smile anywhere else, you cannot be joyful with somebody else; you are confined to an imprisonment. And the same way you are confined, you are jailed, in return you are creating a jail for your jailer. All lovers are functioning as jailers to each other.
Hence, love promises so many roses but brings only thorns, promises stars but brings only wounds.
The awakened person, the person who is conscious of his acts, of himself, transforms every quantity into quality. His love becomes lovingness. He is a loving person.
Now, lovingness is not a quantity, it is a quality. It is not confined to somebody, it has nothing to do with the other, it has something to do with yourself. Your heart is overflowing with a loving energy; everybody is invited…whoever is receptive.
The same is true about other ingredients of your
consciousness.
Gratitude is also one of the most important things in the interior world of man. But always remember the distinction: if gratitude is a quantity, then you are going to become burdened with it because quantity is material, and matter has weight; you need to be unburdened.
And when I said there is no way to show your gratitude to the master, naturally a problem arises: what you are going to do with this burden? You will be crushed under it. It may turn sour.
But gratitude can be transformed into gratefulness. Gratefulness has nothing to do with quantity; it is a quality. You are simply grateful – not only to the master, because the idea of being grateful only to the master is again a hangover of your old ideas of monopoly. The master is to free you; the master is to destroy all limits that confine you, imprison you.
If you are grateful, you are grateful to the earth, you are grateful to the sky, you are grateful to the stars, you are grateful to the ocean, you are grateful to the whole of existence.
This is the only way not to feel burdened.
Gratitude is transformed from matter into energy. Matter is like stone – heavy and hard. The moment it is transformed into quality, it becomes just an energy, a radiant energy. And energy can never be kept confined – its life is in the flow from one end of eternity to the other end; this whole universe is its space.
A single man can fill the whole universe with his gratefulness, with his lovingness, with his friendliness, and there will be no burden on him. In fact, the greater the transformation from quantity to quality, the lighter you will feel. A moment comes when you have transformed all that is material in you. In the immaterial you are freed of weight – then gravitation does not work on you.
Then you have wings and the whole sky is yours. And there are skies beyond skies, and they are all yours.
Love for the master, gratitude to the master should bring freedom to you.
And that is possible only if you start changing nouns into verbs. Existence really consists of verbs.
Nouns are fictions created by man.
In existence, there is nothing which is a noun. You say this is a tree, but have you ever thought? – while you are saying this is a tree, the tree is bringing new leaves, old leaves are falling; new flowers are blossoming, old flowers are disappearing. It is not a dead thing; hence, it cannot be a noun. It is a living entity, it is changing constantly.
The word tree gives a false idea, as if there is something unchanging. It will be better to call it a treeing – because the tree is continuously moving. The river is rivering – it is a movement, it is not stale, it is not dead. In other words, the existence does not consist of dead matter, it consists of living energy.
There is nothing permanent except change. If you can, with awareness, change your burdens into wings, your treasures into fragrances, you will be unburdened and the whole of existence will be more beautiful, will be more graceful, will be more blissful and a benediction to you. It will go on showering flowers on you. You have fulfilled your destiny – the whole existence rejoices.
There are beautiful stories…I will call them stories because there is no way to prove that they are facts. I would love to think of them as facts.
It is said that wherever Gautam Buddha moved, even if trees were out of season they suddenly became green, full of flowers, foliage. People used to know that Buddha had passed this way just by looking at the trees on the side of the road – because the whole forest would be naked, barren, no leaves, no flowers; it was not the season.
It looks like a fiction. But in a deeper sense, it is a reality. Perhaps visibly the trees had not become green with flowers and foliage, but invisibly the trees felt as if the spring had come. When a man has reached the highest peak of consciousness, it is not an individual achievement. In him, the whole universe has achieved its deepest longing. It is natural that the whole existence should rejoice and dance and sing.
Just remember: even things which are beautiful and good can become a burden, and the moment they become a burden you can even start taking revenge on the person.
Great masters have been betrayed, and they have been betrayed by their great disciples – not by their ordinary disciples, but by those who were very close to them.
It is tremendously interesting to go into the psychology of it. What happened to Judas? He was very close to Jesus. He was the most intelligent of Jesus’ disciples, he was the only one who was educated, and the only one with a very sharp intellect. What happened to him?
On the surface, the facts are very simple: He betrayed; he betrayed because Jesus’ enemies offered him thirty pieces of silver.
This is sheer nonsense. A man with the qualities of Judas cannot betray a master of the quality of Jesus just for thirty pieces of silver. There must be much more to it. Perhaps Jesus was becoming a burden.
Jesus was giving him so much love, and there was no way to return it. Jesus was giving him so much insight into existence, and there was no way to show his gratitude. Jesus was doing everything that a master should do for his spiritual growth.
But one should always remember that the person who is being benefited is also an individual. He cannot go on taking because deep down it is humiliating, it is a spiritual insult. And there is only so much one can tolerate. The same thing which was so sweet and so beautiful can turn into its very opposite, can become a poison.
It was just to unburden himself that Judas betrayed Jesus.
And I say it with certain authority: When he saw what he had done to a man who has always been nothing but love, nothing but compassion, who was always ready to give everything; when he saw the crucifixion and the torture and he realized what he had done, within twenty-four hours he hanged himself from a tree and killed himself.
Christians don’t talk about the suicide of Judas. But the whole secret is in the suicide of Judas – not in the crucifixion of Jesus.
Judas crucifying himself – and all those thirty silver pieces, he had thrown on the ground – indicates something deeper than historical fact, something concerned more with the inner world. At a certain point, he became so burdened that he became angry at Jesus.
He was a disciple: he had loved Jesus his whole life and he was grateful to Jesus.
But neither did Jesus tell him nor did he inquire how to transform love when it becomes a burden, gratefulness when it becomes a burden, how to avoid the danger of all those beautiful feelings turning into poison. But when he saw Jesus being crucified, suddenly all anger disappeared. Instead of anger there was only repentance – and not ordinary repentance; he threw down those thirty silver pieces and committed suicide.
His suicide is so significant.
And the Christians’ silence about his suicide is also significant: they don’t want to bring it in because to bring it in they will have to go deeper than the superficial facts of history. History consists only of daily newspapers, collected, just superficial. It does not give insight. And if it was only the case with Jesus one could think that it may have been an exception. It is not so. It has been happening with almost every great master. Seeing that it happened with Mahavira, it happened with Gautam Buddha, I started thinking that there seems to be something much more than the mere fact that some important disciple betrays the master – but why?
My understanding is that it is because the science of the relationship between the master and the disciple has not yet been completely discovered. This is one of the basic contributions that I would like to make to the science: that a master has to be aware not to burden the disciple to such an extent that what was beautiful starts becoming humiliating, insulting.
I am reminded….
I had a friend who was a great politician. He was the education minister, with great longings to one day go even higher, to the highest post in the country.
He was also a very rich man. Once in a while, whenever I was not traveling, he would come to me to ask about peace, silence, relaxation. And I told him, “Unless you drop your ambitions, you cannot be at peace and you cannot be silent and you cannot relax – because in a competitive world where you are not the only one who is trying to become the prime minister of the country, if you are relaxing and others are not relaxing, you have lost the game. Those who are able to remain tense and go on rushing, speeding, who are almost mad, will not even stop to rest unless they have reached to the very peak.” He said, “This is very difficult. I cannot drop the ambition, I have come so far – now the goal is only two steps away. Once I have reached the goal, I will renounce politics and I will sit with you and meditate, and do whatsoever you say. But before that, if I can have a little peace of mind, a little silence in the heart, a little relaxation, I can compete more efficiently.” I said, “That is a contradiction.”
Again and again it was the same thing. I told him, “I will never change my position, and I think you are not going to change your position – why waste time? Don’t you have any other problem?” He said, “I have so many problems. One problem particularly I came today to ask you about…” And his problem was that he was a very generous man, but very proud. He was not born into the family which he had become the head of – he was adopted. He was born a poor man, and suddenly he became one of the richest men in the country. All his relatives were poor. He made all those relatives rich – gave them factories, gave them shops, gave them as much money as possible because he had so much.
He said to me, “The problem is nobody loves me. I have been giving to everybody – my friends, my family, even strangers have come to me and I have never said no to anything. But nobody loves me. I don’t see in their eyes any respect toward me and I am puzzled. I have done everything – nobody would have done what I have done.”
I said, “I want to ask you one question: Have you allowed those people to do something for you?”
He said, “I am a very proud man. I would rather die, but I will not beg. And in fact there is no need; I have everything. They cannot do anything for me, I don’t need it.”
I said, “The problem is very clear: they are disrespectful, they are unloving, unfriendly, because you have burdened them; you have in a very subtle way humiliated them. You are the man who can help, who can give millions of rupees to people and who does not need anything in return.”
I said, “That is hurting their pride. I know your friends, I know the relatives you have supported and you have made rich. And I know that they are full of anger, rage and hatred for you. You have done everything good for them, but you don’t understand human psychology. You do a few small things…you need not ask them for big things, but you can ask them for something: ‘I love your roses. One day can you send a few roses to me?’ And all their anger will disappear. You have many cars. Those people have cars because you have given them money. There is no need for you, but once in a while you can just phone them and say, ‘I need your car; can you send the car?’ You have your own guest houses, you don’t need any help from anybody, but once in while you can ask a friend: ‘If your guest house is available, one of my friends is coming and I would like you to take care of him – just do this much kindness for me.’”
And you can change the whole atmosphere around you; then they are equal to you. Right now you have reduced them to such a state – you are so high, so beyond their reach – they are just like insects crawling on the earth.”
He said, “I never thought about it in this way.” And after ten years, he met me in a train and he told me, “You were right. I started asking for small things, which don’t mean anything, and they have all changed. Now there is no anger, no hatred, no humiliation; they feel equal to me because they know they have also done something for me. It is not only me who is always doing things for them; they have also been doing things for me. It may be just bringing me a few roses from their garden.”
The relationship between the master and the disciple is a very subtle one. And in the past, it has not been understood why great masters have been betrayed. If this understanding becomes part of the relationship in the future, no master will be betrayed; there will be no reason. But the master has to understand that the disciple is also a human being – and this game should not be a one-way traffic where the master goes on giving and the disciple has just to receive it. The master should be capable – whether he needs it or not; perhaps he does not need it – just to give the disciple an idea that he can do something for the master.
If Judas could have done something for Jesus, there would have been no crucifixion.
So your question is significant. Transform your gratitude in gratefulness – and not toward the master only; the master is only a door. Beyond the door is the whole existence.
Don’t cling to the master – because the master is only the frame of the door; he allows you an opening into existence, he is not a wall. But remember that you are not to become attached to the frame; you have to go beyond the frame. There is no need to betray.
Just go beyond.
And let every experience in you become an expanding energy phenomenon, a resonance – not like a stone, solid and heavy, but with no weight…just spreading all over space, with no limits.

Osho,
The strange thing is that all discoveries come out of the blue; the scientific explanation is always made afterward, and then in the lecture the scientist usually presents his discovery, which is not his, as if it followed from his theory – which was invented afterward; hence, the lie.
This drive to frame everything, being trained as a scientist, is pretty strong in me. But still, the miracle can never be explained away. It happened – what more proof? How to allow to be more and more in the miraculous, to be in the miracle all the time?
It is true that all scientific discoveries come to the scientist out of the blue. It is not his effort, but on the contrary his no-effort, allowing existence to reveal its secrets to him.
This is not new.
The East has known it for at least five thousand years.
Lao Tzu has even given it a name: “effortless effort”, “action without action”. And he was trying to explain that whatever man has come to know is not through effort, although there is much effort involved; hence there is great misunderstanding.
I will give you an example that will help.
For six years Gautam Buddha continuously did everything that was supposed to make him enlightened, and he was such a sincere seeker….
He lived with many masters. With ordinary people – insincere seekers, halfhearted seekers – even the bogus masters can go on pretending that they are authentic.
But it was not possible with Gautam Buddha.
The masters themselves confessed to him, “Forgive me, you are such a sincere seeker. I can always say to others that, ‘You are not doing it wholeheartedly,’ but you are doing it so wholeheartedly that it simply proves that I don’t know how one achieves enlightenment – I am not enlightened. With others it is okay, because they never do anything wholeheartedly, and I can always tell them that it is because they are not working that they are not achieving – and the question of my enlightenment does not arise, I remain enlightened. But with you it is impossible. To lie to you is inhuman. You simply go to some other master.”
He went to all the known famous masters, and the result was the same.
The last master said to him, “You have worked enough, you have done everything that is possible for human beings, nothing more can be done. Now you just retire into the forest. You have renounced the world, now renounce this spiritual effort. Forget all about enlightenment. And I know you are capable – if you can forget all about your kingdom, you can forget all about this enlightenment. Just relax, deep in the forest.”
He moved to the forest.
And the first night, relaxing under a bodhi tree near Bodhgaya by the side of a small river, Niranjana, on a full-moon night, he became enlightened. He was not doing anything for enlightenment. The enlightenment came out of the blue.
But don’t think that you can go and catch the train to Bodhgaya, on a full-moon night lie down by the side of the tree near the Niranjana river and wait for enlightenment. Nothing will happen. Those six years of tremendous effort did not produce enlightenment, but those six years produced so much relaxation that enlightenment became possible.
Enlightenment is not caused by effort. By effort, relaxation is caused. You have done so much that you simply give up. But without doing it you cannot give up. So in the Buddhist religion there is a problem. There are sects who think that Buddha’s enlightened happened because of six years of effort: those six years preceded, enlightenment followed. To the ordinary logic it seems so.
Only one school, Zen, has been very extraordinary in its insight. It says it was not caused by six years of effort; but six years of effort have caused relaxation – and relaxation simply opens you up to the unknown, to the unknowable.
Enlightenment is not an effect of six years’ effort, but without those six years’ effort there would have been no enlightenment either.
You have to understand the subtlety of it.
The whole day you work, and then you have a good sleep in the night.
Emperors cannot sleep. And it is very illogical, because the whole day long they are resting – it is logical that the person who is practicing rest the whole day long should rest deeper in the night than you, who have been working the whole day, tiring yourself…your practice is not for relaxation, your practice is against it.
But life is not logic, fortunately. Otherwise the person who has been working hard the whole day will have to work hard the whole night too. In his whole life he will not get any rest, because his training and his discipline will become more and more mature and more and more ripened.
It is good that life has a dynamic, a dialectics.
All day you have been making great effort – you have earned relaxation. You need relaxation, you have worked hard.
Nature is compassionate.
The emperor has been resting the whole day, he does not need any sleep at night. Nature does not care whether he is an emperor or a beggar.
The dialectics of life is that the people who make great effort for enlightenment will not achieve by their effort. One day they will have to give it all up, and in that moment of relaxation something opens up – you are not the doer, something happens to you.
And the same is true about scientific discoveries – the law is the same. A scientist works for years on a certain project, and then one day he has done everything that he could possibly think of; he drops the whole idea. And suddenly a window opens, and what he was searching for with such great effort is made available to him without any effort at all.
In fact, there are deep reasons in it: whenever you are making effort you become tense; when you are tense, your mind becomes narrow. And you are so ambitious, so desirous, so much in a hurry to get something, that you are almost a chaos.
And to know anything – either scientific or religious – you need to be a silent, peaceful awareness, not doing anything, not even desiring anything, not even looking for anything.
But all the time before, when you have been looking and not finding, has created a certain seed in you. In this relaxed moment, that seed starts becoming a sprout. It happened in Madame Curie’s case – which is the most famous example. She was the first woman to achieve the Nobel prize.
She had been working for three years on a particular mathematical problem. She tried from every direction, from every angle, but nothing happened – the problem seemed to be insoluble.
And one night she was working late, up to two o’clock, and finally gave up the whole thing, thinking “I have wasted three years, I could have discovered many other things. This idiotic problem is stubborn – just like me. I am stubborn too, but now I drop out of this fight.” She closed the notebook in which she was working, went to sleep, and in the morning…She was alone in the room, and the room was locked from inside. And anyway, even if it was not locked, nobody could have done it…if Madame Curie was not able to do it in three years. She went to her table and she found a piece of paper just on top of her notebook, under the paperweight, with the solution to the problem.
She could not believe it.
Her husband was not at home; he had gone for a weekend with his friends. No servant would have been capable of doing it. Moreover, the room was locked from inside.
Then she looked more minutely; the handwriting was her own.
Then slowly she remembered that she had had a dream that she was working on the problem and she had solved it. Perhaps in sleep she got up and wrote down the answer which had come in her dream – not to forget it in the morning.
This has been happening to almost all great scientists.
So you are right that the scientist has no right to say, “This is my discovery.” In a way, it is not his discovery; in a way, it is existence that has chosen him to be a vehicle. Existence has not chosen anybody else to be a vehicle; he has been chosen because he has been working so hard that he had come to the point where relaxation is possible – complete and total relaxation. In that total relaxation, existence opens its secrets. Understanding this, you can see many implications: that in this way science and religion are exactly the same.
Their objects may be different – science may be looking outward, religion may be looking inward – but the discovery either of science or of religion happens in the same kind of state, the totally relaxed mind. Or to use the mystic word, a state of no-mind – because when the mind is completely relaxed there is no mind, the window opens.
Mind is the block. And once the mind is no more, you start seeing things that were always there in front of you but your eyes were covered with thick layers of thought. You were not able to see. You are asking how one can live in this miraculous, in this unknowable continuously.
The moment you ask how, you are asking for a technique, and no technique is possible – all techniques are efforts. So any technique will do, just do it so wholeheartedly that you come to a point where you drop it – because the real thing is to drop it. There are one hundred and twelve methods of meditation.
But the real thing is not the meditation; the real thing is that after all those one hundred and twelve methods the same thing happens. You have done it exhaustively. You have staked everything and now – seeing that you don’t have any more energy, any more desire – you relax. All efforts are dropped, all techniques forgotten.
In this innocence, the miraculous is yours.
You are part of it; you have been always part of it. The unknowable is not something separate from you, it is your heartbeat. Your heartbeat has a synchronicity with the heartbeat of the whole universe.
But let me remind you again: first you have to do everything that is possible for you – not holding anything back, not thinking that anyway finally you are going to drop it so why put so much energy into it? No, you have to be madly in it, as if effort is going to give you the truth. Only then one day – tired, exhausted, finished with effort – you relax.
You don’t know…that depth of relaxation will depend on the depth of your effort. If the effort was a hundred percent total, then the relaxation will be a hundred percent total; and with the total relaxation you have moved into the miraculous, into the unknowable.
Then it is your world.
Then you breathe in it, you live in it.
This is what we have called the ultimate realization – enlightenment.

Osho,
When I came to you years ago, you told me to tell you when I felt something – I wasn't sure what – in my energy, because you had work for me to do. You said I would know it when it was right.
Now I feel so full of you.
These past months working in the world, nothing has meant anything to me except the times I've been able to tell people about you. And in those times I was so full and clear I didn't know it was me.
Now I'm just here for two weeks – but I feel like the only thing I can do with my life is your work.
I just don't know what it is.
Can you give me some idea before I go?
The way things are happening to you is so beautiful and natural that it is better you should not interfere in it.
If I give you any idea, you will start interfering in it.
It is happening on its own.
Just go with it, with the stream – never against the stream.
The watercourse way is my whole philosophy. Just go with the stream in a deep let-go, with all my blessings.
I will not give you any idea.
Existence will take care of it.

Osho,
According to George Gurdjieff, nearly all human beings are number one, number two, or number three. Very few can be called man number four, and only a Gautam Buddha, man number seven.
I somehow have the suspicion that you don't fit in these categories, but because of the law of seven, more than number seven is not possible.
Osho, what is your number?
My number is zero. So whenever you want to channel with me, remember zero!

Osho,
I have heard meditation sometimes described as a science, and other times as an art; on occasion you have even called it a knack. Please explain.
Meditation is such a mystery that it can be called a science, an art, a knack, without any contradiction.
From one point of view it is a science because there is a clear-cut technique that has to be done. There are no exceptions to it, it is almost like a scientific law.
But from a different point of view it can also be said to be an art.
Science is an extension of the mind – it is mathematics, it is logic, it is rational.
Meditation belongs to the heart, not to the mind – it is not logic; it is closer to love.
It is not like other scientific activities, but more like music, poetry, painting, dancing; hence, it can be called an art.
But meditation is such a great mystery that calling it “science” and “art” does not exhaust it.
It is a knack – either you get it or you don’t get it. A knack is not a science, it cannot be taught. A knack is not an art. A knack is the most mysterious thing in human understanding.
For example, you may have come across people…. Somebody has the knack of becoming a friend immediately; just meeting him in the bus for a few moments and you suddenly feel as if you have known each other forever, perhaps for many lives. And you cannot pinpoint what is going on, because you have just seen the man for the first time.
I have a friend. He is a doctor in philosophy. He has never earned a single cent in his life, but he lives like a king. He has a certain knack that anybody becomes his friend; he just has to look at you and you are his friend – and you feel as if you have been his friend forever. He has lived on borrowed money – which he never returns because he cannot, there is no way to return it, but nobody feels hurt about it. Even though he has borrowed money from you and he has never returned it, he has the nerve to ask you again – and you will give it! The man is so lovely, so beautiful, that to ask money from him simply doesn’t seem right. And he never feels embarrassed, he never avoids people he owes money to.
I have asked him many times, “How long will you continue in this way?”
He said, “How long? The population goes on growing – even if I live a million years, I will always have people to give me money.”
And the beauty is that you give him money and you feel honored that he asked you, not anybody else. Now what will you call it? – art? science? It is simply a knack.
He travels without a ticket, he has never purchased a ticket. I have been traveling with him many times. And he will say, “Why are you wasting money on tickets? Let the ticket checker come; after all, he is a human being.” And once the ticket checker comes, he is caught into this man’s net. He offers him a cigarette, and they are chit-chatting, and they start playing cards, and the ticket checker completely forgets why he has come. And now it is too late to ask for the ticket – they have become so friendly to each other that the ticket checker asks him, “Can I help you in any way?”
He says, “You have to – because I have lost my ticket!”
He said, “Don’t be worried. I will be there at the gate.”
He lives in friends’ houses. He has no house of his own. He moves from one city to another city, but he knows all kinds of tricks with playing cards, chess, tennis, all kinds of nonsense things in which people are interested. And he is a genius. In chess you cannot win against him, in cards you cannot win.
And he is such a happy person that people like for him to come to them even if he is going to take their money, even if he is going to take their car and never return – still people like him, because he is simply likable. It is not on any conditions that he is liked, it is just his whole personality.
Once he was staying with me. And just next door used to live another professor who was Indian, married to an American woman. The American woman was also a professor at the university. I spent the day at the university, so he started making friendships in the neighborhood. The American woman got into his net, and her husband also became very friendly.
Things came to such point that the professor’s wife wanted to leave with my friend. But he said, “It will be very difficult. I have no house, no shelter anywhere. I don’t know where I will be tomorrow morning. You will be in difficulty with me, and I love you so much that I will not create such a difficulty for you. And I love your husband too; I cannot disturb his life.”
But the professor was so enchanted by him that he said, “If you want, you can take my wife.”
I told him, “Don’t be stupid. You can take cars, that is okay; you can take people’s tape recorders, that is okay; you can take their cameras, that is okay. But if you start taking people’s wives, you will be in great trouble. So make it a point this is the limit. Don’t go beyond this limit.”
He said, “You are right. Rationally I also think that this is right. But isn’t it worth trying once? When the husband is ready….”
I said, “Any husband will be ready! You are an idiot. It is not because of your charm, every husband will be ready. How many wives can you manage? You don’t have any money. And remember, you cannot bring any woman into my house.”
He said, “That’s not right, because that’s what I was thinking – I will leave this woman here. Another woman…I will get caught and I will leave her here. You can have disciples!”
I said, “I – these kinds of disciples are of no use to me.”
A knack is something mysterious, just a few people can do it.
I know a man who can make his ear lobes move. I have not found another who can move his ear lobes. Now what do you call it? – science or what? Because I have asked doctors, “What do you say about ear lobes?”
They say, “It is impossible.”
But I brought my friend to one doctor and, I told him, “Show this doctor….”
And the doctor said, “My God! He moves his ear lobes very easily, without any trouble.”
In fact, ear lobes have no biological possibility of movement, you have no control over them – you try. You don’t have any control. They are your ear lobes, but you don’t have any control. But I know one man who manages. And I have asked him, “How do you manage?” He said, “I don’t know. Just from the very beginning I have been doing it.”
It is absolutely impossible, physically impossible – because to move those lobes you need a certain nervous system to control them, and the nerve system is not there. The lobe is just flesh. Meditation, in the last resort, is a knack too.
That’s why for thousands of years people have been meditating, teaching, but very few people have achieved heights in meditation, and very few people have even tried.
And the vast majority of humanity has not even bothered to think about it. It is something…a seed you are born with.
If you don’t have the seed, a master can go on showering all his bliss on you, still nothing will happen in you.
And if the seed is there, just the presence of the master, just the way he looks into your eyes, and something of tremendous importance happens in you – a revolution that you cannot explain to anybody.
It is one of the difficulties for all meditators that they cannot explain to their friends, their families, what they are doing. Because the majority of humanity is not interested in it at all. And those who are not interested in it at all simply think about people who are interested, that something is loose in their heads, something is wrong.
Sitting silently, doing nothing, the spring comes and the grass grows by itself – but in the first place, why should you bother about the grass? Basho’s beautiful haiku will look absurd to them. Grass is going to grow by itself whether you sit silently or not, why waste your time? – grass is going to grow by itself. Let the spring come – spring comes by itself, grass grows by itself. Why are you wasting your time? – do something else meanwhile.
If a man has not something in his heart already – a small seed – then it is impossible for him.
He can learn the technique, he can learn the art.
But if the knack is missing he is not going to succeed.
So thousands of people start meditation, but very few – so few that they can be counted on ten fingers – ever achieve to enlightenment. And unless meditation becomes enlightenment, you have simply wasted your time.

============================================================

Osho,
I am very angry with women. I don't like woman. Why is woman selfish? Why has woman no intelligence? Why is a woman like a cat?
Osho, why do you put woman on the way of Tao?
Woman is what man has made of her. It is a vicious circle. Man has deprived woman of education and other social institutions, of economic freedom. And then you ask why women are unintelligent? You are the cause.
Women have as much intelligence as any man – because intelligence has no concern with sexual hormones. Do you think if you changed Albert Einstein into a woman with plastic surgery, he would lose his intelligence? He would still remain Albert Einstein, but in a woman’s body. The difference is only of bodies; the difference is not of consciousness, not of intelligence.
But unfortunately man decided to repress woman.
For centuries it has not been clear to historians why it had to happen in such a way. But the latest psychological research makes it very clear why it happened: it happened because man feels a deep inferiority complex in comparison to woman.
And the basic root of that feeling comes from the woman’s capacity to become a mother. She is the source of life, she creates life. Man is incapable of it. This became the reason to cut the wings of all women – of freedom, of education – and confine her to a prison-like home and reduce her to just a factory of reproduction so that he can forget that he is inferior.
The woman had to be made inferior so that man could feel at ease, so that his ego could feel that now there is no competition with women at all.
The woman is not the cause of all her bitchiness.
You have been torturing her for thousands of years.
No society in the world has accepted her as equal to man. No culture of the past has given the woman the same respect as it gives to the man. On the contrary, they have all tried to force her into a subhuman existence.
And the reason why the woman did not revolt against such things is simple: again, the same motherhood. For nine months when she is pregnant, she becomes absolutely dependent – particularly in a society which lived by hunting.
And by the way, I would like you to remember that the society in which you are living now – where houses exist, cities exist – is a contribution of women, not of men. The house is the woman’s contribution.
Man was hunting. The woman was confined to a small space; naturally she started decorating it, cleaning it, making it beautiful, liveable – and she became attached. In a hunting society, the nomads had to go on changing…because when hunting was not giving them enough food, they had to move to where the animals were. They could not have permanent cities; they could have only tents, not houses.
And you can see it: when a man lives alone, his house is almost like a tent, it is not like a house. Without a woman, it remains a tent, a temporary place – just a shelter with nothing sacred about it. As the woman enters, the tent starts transforming into a house and finally into a home.
In hunting societies, the woman’s function was nothing but reproduction. She was continuously pregnant. This became her failure: she could not fight, she could not rebel, she had to submit, she had to surrender – of course unwillingly. Nobody becomes a slave willingly.
When somebody becomes a slave willingly, there is no problem.
But millions of women have been forced to become slaves unwillingly. Naturally they try to take revenge in indirect ways. All those ways combined make them cats, their behavior becomes bitchy.
But remember: a woman can be bitchy only with a dog, and a woman can be a cat only with a mouse – and that’s why you are angry. Seeing a woman, you are reminded that you are a dog, you are a mouse.
Your male chauvinist attitude hurts.
It is simply an unconscious reaction, and you have to be watchful of the reaction so that it can disappear.
It is undignified of you. It shows something about you – not about the woman. It is your anger, it is your hate.
If you will look at the history….
In many villages, the women cannot enter the temples. In some religions she can enter, but she has a separate section – not the same as the men. In all religions, the woman is not accepted as a candidate for the ultimate growth of consciousness. She is unworthy, not for any other reason – just because she is a woman; her crime is that she is a woman. And she can evolve but she will have to fulfill a condition: first she will have to be born as a man.
So in religions like Jainism, there are methods, rituals, religious disciplines for women, specifically intended for them to enter a man’s body in their next life.
Now the whole Jaina attitude and philosophy can be disturbed because with plastic surgery a woman can become a man with no difficulty. There is no need for all those disciplines and rituals and arduous hostilities. Just a very small amount of plastic surgery and you are capable of entering the ultimate state of consciousness. Strange, that plastic surgery is needed for spiritual growth!
But this has been one way to condemn the woman.
Another reason why man has condemned the woman is the power of the woman over the man. You can never forgive someone who has so much power over you. The woman is beautiful, attractive…her beauty, her body, her attraction and you become just a beggar – and you are going to take revenge for that too.
But everything is going on in an unconscious state. You are not aware of what you are doing and why.
Man is almost magnetically pulled by the woman. He can see that he is just a puppet. How can he forgive the woman who has forced him to be just a puppet? – whatever he can do, he tries to do.
Women everywhere are not allowed to read the holy scriptures. In many countries the woman is not even allowed to show her face in the society. It used to be so in India; it is still so in all the Mohammedan countries.
I have heard, when Mulla Nasruddin got married according to the tradition, his wife asked him, “To whom am I allowed to show my face?”
Mulla Nasruddin said, “First let me have a look, only then can I say anything.” So he looked at her face, closed his eyes and said, “Enough! Except for me, you are allowed to show your face to everybody.”
These are subtle ways of humiliation, of cutting women off from the world of power, from the world where everything is happening. The woman is not part of it. She is not part of your wars, she is not part of your businesses, she is not part of your religions.
And there are countries like China – not a small country….
A woman was reading in the newspaper that of every four men, one is Chinese. She came very much worried and concerned. She said to her husband, “This paper says that every fourth person is Chinese. Now you have to be careful; we already have three boys, and I don’t want any Chinese in this house.”
In this vast one-fourth of humanity, for ten thousand years it was believed that the woman had no soul, she was as soulless as your furniture. Hence, if a husband killed his wife, there was no crime, he had simply destroyed his property. It was nobody else’s concern to come into it. Thousands of women were killed by their husbands, but the court, the law, did not accept it as killing, because how can you kill somebody who has no soul?
In India millions of women have been burned alive simply because of the male ego: “My wife is beautiful, young. If I am dead, she may get married again.” This jealousy was the reason for deciding that every woman should jump into the burning funeral pyre with her husband. The husband is dead; the living woman has to jump into the fire. And we have practiced this for ten thousand years. It still happens once in a while, although now there is a law against it.
One feels as if we don’t give any attention to our social mores, our behavior mores. In the whole of Indian literature I have not come across a single statement saying that if women are required to die with their husbands to show their faith, their love, then why are men not required to do the same? What kind of game is this in which the rule applies only to the woman, not the man?
The society is made by men. Women are living in a society which is not made for them, not made by them; it has not considered them at all.
Your anger toward women is worth understanding. Perhaps it is really your anger against yourself, your anger against men – what men have done to women.
Women have been victims. You cannot be angry at them.
In the home, the husband is the victim; and it can be said without any doubt that every husband is henpecked. In fact, every intelligent husband has to be – only some idiot may not be. But this is the price that every man has to pay for what mankind has been doing to womankind for thousands of years.
If you want to get free from your anger against women, you will have to go through a very deep inner spring cleaning and see that the woman is the victim. And because she is the victim and has no positive way to resist, to fight, she finds indirect ways: of nagging, of screaming, of throwing tantrums. These are simply hopeless efforts. And naturally her rage against the whole of humanity becomes focused on one man, the husband.
The freedom of women is going to be the freedom of men too. The day the woman is accepted as equal, given equal opportunity to grow, man will find himself suddenly free from the bitchiness that he used to feel from the women. And he will be surprised that neither is she a cat nor is he a dog – both are human beings.
It is time.
Man has come to a certain maturity. We can create a world together, with men and women sharing their insight, their visions, their dreams. Because they are different, their dreams are different, their contributions to the society will be different. And if a society can be created in which men and women have participated equally, that will be for the first time the richest society in the world – and without all this bitchiness and nagging and fighting.
This is a strange and stupid way of living. But just because your father used to live this way it is accepted almost as if it is something religious. Your forefathers did it, you have to do it, your children will learn it from you.
Every generation goes on giving its diseases to the coming generation.
My people have to be aware and alert not to pass on any sickness which they may have received from the past generation. Let this be the dead end. Don’t pass it to the new generation. Let the new people grow – the new earth, the new man.
The old has failed so badly that there is no point in renovating it. It is all ruins. It simply needs to be written in the history books, pieces of it preserved in the museums – but from life it has to disappear.

Osho,
I, like many of your disciples, tried many ways to change myself, to give to others and serve the planet.
I was a missionary in Africa, a psychotherapist in Beverly Hills, marched against Vietnam, did groups and yoga, joined various save-the-world efforts, and it was all like pissing in the ocean. I had a good time, but it was fairly insignificant compared to the rapidly accelerating dangers of nuclear weapons, over-population and warring nations.
One day it occurred to me that you were the only one who was outrageous and radical enough to perhaps make a difference. I hitched my wagon to a star – you – and that was the smartest and most loving thing I ever did.
But Osho, am I – are we – so much more brilliant than other people? Why are people so threatened by what I see is your love and compassion? Why are people willing to remain dinosaurs, risk extinction, prefer dying and destroying each other? Why do they cling to outdated nations, religions and armies even though it's obviously not working?
If Ronald Reagan had really paid attention and really cared about peace, he would have invited you to be his special advisor – not conspired to have you ousted from America.
Why are most people afraid to drop the past and come to something or someone who could help peel away conditioning, so that unleashed energy can really change us and the world? And why don't more people who spout, “one planet, one people!” drop their ineffectual efforts and align with you. In my opinion, if we were to rally around something that could make a difference, it would not be an idea, but you, who has the vastness to create real transformation. Is this right?
And are you also working through us, your disciples?
Kahlil Gibran has a small story.
One full moon night, a few people came to his small pub and drank and drank. He was very happy, earning great. And when they were leaving, he asked the man who was paying: “Will you be coming again? We will do everything better.”
The man said, “We are happy as things are, you have done them as beautifully as possible. Just pray for my business to run well and we will be coming every night.”
He said, “There is no problem in it. I will pray for you every morning, every evening, every night. But just out of curiosity, I want to ask, what is your business?”
He said, “It is better if you don’t ask. But I can understand, it will be difficult for you to resist the temptation. My business is to sell wood for funeral pyres. So when more people die, my business goes well; when less people die, of course it is unfortunate and I have to suffer it. So if you want your business to go well, you have to pray for my business to go well – our interests are the same.”

In this whole society, as an intelligent and alert person, you are bound to be surprised: Why do things go on happening the way they should not? Wars are not needed, riots are not needed, bloodshed is not needed, nuclear weapons are not needed. Half of the earth is dying from starvation and you are preparing more destructive weapons. It is simply insane.
But the trouble is that all these insane people have the same interest. The presidents and the prime ministers of all the nations, all the countries have the same interest. If nations disappear, they will disappear – what about their power trip?
The head priests of all religions are worried that if all religions disappear and there is only a religiousness, priests will not be needed, churches will not be needed. They have the same interest, that this society should remain as it is – miserable, in anxiety, in continuous fear, in deep anguish…a meaningless existence, carrying one’s own dead bodies on one’s shoulders from cradle to grave. And it is all desert – flowers appear only in dreams; in reality it is burning sun and hot sand, nothing green grows.
If we see this, why don’t we change? Why do we go on and on in the same rut for thousands of years? The same misery, the same anguish, the same war – nothing seems to change. It seems as if we are caught in a wheel and the wheel goes on moving, fast – again and again the same thing.
Yes, history repeats. And that it repeats in such detail is possible only because man functions like a machine.
These people are not going to support any change because every change means a disappearance of the old structure in which they are important.
With a silent, sincere, loving, compassionate, human being appearing on the world stage – with joy, these few moments of being alive…. And you cannot purchase life; the gift is invaluable.
Alexander the Great threatened one Hindu sannyasin, “My master, Aristotle, wants to see a sannyasin. If you don’t come with me to Athens I will kill you.”
The sannyasin said, “There is no problem in it. You simply cut off my head. You will see it falling on the ground and I will see it falling on the ground, because I am not the body. And I am no longer interested in carrying this body to my grave. If you are ready to do it, I would be thankful to you.”
“In fact,” the sannyasin said, “if you understand, you should not only cut off my head, you should cut yours too – because it is just a meaningless existence. As far as I am concerned, it is meaningless because I have achieved that which is significant, which is a higher quality than meaning. I have known, seen, felt. I have been in that wonderland, nothing more can be added to it. So going on living in the body is meaningless for me. It is also meaningless to you, but for different reasons: to you it is meaningless because you have not found anything, and time is running out of your hands.”
And just after thirteen days, Alexander died – and he was only thirty-three years of age.
And that old saint who had offered his head with such grace, with such joy…with so much fearlessness that Alexander for the first time felt it would be difficult to cut off the head of this man. He had cut off millions of heads and had never bothered about it, but with this man he hesitated, he pushed his sword back into the sheath.
And in thirteen days, he was dead.
He wanted, after conquering the world, to rest, relax, and to know what this life is all about.
But the condition that he had put on it was very idiotic – “after conquering the world.”

We have a small time. The world is big, and its problems are such that all the powerful people would not like any kind of change.
That’s the reason why they are annoyed with me – not that I am wrong and they are right. They know perfectly well they are wrong.
Because my whole life I have been challenging them on every single point of significance. No answer – because they don’t have the answer.
But your misery and their power are interdependent.
If you want to get out of the misery, you will have to drop these vested interests and the people who are powerful because of them. And certainly because they have power, they will do everything to prevent any revolution from happening. And if it happens, then too they will try in every possible way to sabotage it.
Up to now they have been successful. Either they don’t let it happen, or if it happens in spite of them, they sabotage it so beautifully and they are again in power – only the names change.
In Russia, those people who were in power before the revolution were the capitalists – just a word. There are still people in power – more in power than the previous ones. They are not called capitalists, they are called communists. They are more dangerous, they have more power and they are more aware how revolutions can throw out people who are in power – because they have come by throwing out the powerful people. So they are protecting their power number with every scientific, psychological, para-psychological device.
Russia is certainly in a strange position in this. It is the only country where revolution cannot happen. All the possibilities of revolution have been destroyed by the revolutionaries who have come into power. They know perfectly well how they have come into power. So they have broken all the bridges, all the ladders have been burned. In Russia, the powerful group and the masses are absolutely without any bridge between them.
It is true that every sannyasin of mine is working in different ways – not as a missionary but as a living mission, not trying to convert people by teaching them but challenging people for transformation by presenting their own life, by presenting their own joy, their love, their song, their dance.
This is no ordinary conversion – like a Hindu becoming a Christian.
It is true conversion: a fast asleep person becomes fully awake, and goes from darkness to light, from untruth to truth, from death to immortality.
But I don’t want you to deliberately become my missions.
I want you to be absolutely selfish so that you can blossom in your full glory. Your blossoming will trigger blossomings in others; your flame will bring light, life and fire to many.
But this has not to be done directly, it is not your business. It is simply the impact of your transformed life.

Osho,
In the West, the portrayal of woman's body is used in films, books and magazines. This art form is known as “eroticism”.
Through the sculptures of Khajuraho and Ajanta I have seen that a similar art form was there in the East.
Can you talk about the difference between these two cultures in regard to the female body?
Sarjano, superficially there is no difference.
Khajuraho, Konarak, Puri, Ajanta, Ellora, Elephanta – they are full of erotic art, just like the contemporary erotic culture where the repressed sexuality of thousands of years has become such a burden that it has to be dropped. And suddenly a great erotic revolution is taking place.
Pornography is nothing but erotic and obscene – in paintings, in films, in dances. They don’t create in you a longing for the beyond; they simply create in you more sensuality, more sexuality. But on the surface they look alike.
And in India and in the outside world, they are being misunderstood.
After the country became independent, Mahatma Gandhi proposed that all these sculptures, all these temples should be sunk into mud. They would not be destroyed, so if Ronald Reagan comes to see, then you can clean it and show him – just for special people….
But for ordinary people they would be closed. Because Mahatma Gandhi thought, in the same way as it is thought all over the world, that they are erotic, they are obscene.
But I want to declare emphatically that there is a vast difference between the Eastern art in Ajanta, Ellora, Puri, Konarak, Khajuraho, and the modern Western erotic, pornographic photography, painting, music. The difference is that all these temples….
For example, there are thirty temples in Khajuraho. There were one hundred temples originally – Mohammedans have destroyed seventy temples, which are now ruins. The city was a city only of temples; people just used to come to see the art. One hundred temples must have been built in thousands of years by thousands of artists continuously working on stone – generation after generation may have died working on it.
And they have created the most beautiful bodies in stone. In Khajuraho stone speaks, sings, dances; it is not dead. You can see that the artist has succeeded in transforming the dead stone into a living form. It looks so alive that any moment the statue may walk toward you and say, “Hello.” And hundreds of statues….
These statues were not to satisfy your repressed sexuality. On the contrary, they were used as a tantrika method to release the repressed sexuality just by meditating on these naked statues. The method was simply to sit there in silence – only a dim light reaches there, and hundreds of statues surround you.
Just watching them, you will be surprised to find that many of those dreams have occurred to you, many are such that they have been condemned in every society – sexual orgies, but they have happened in your dreams; they are part of your unconscious. And these places like Khajuraho were kinds of universities where people were coming to release, to cathart repressed sexuality.
And all these statutes are outside the temple. Inside the temple there is no erotic sculpture. In fact, inside most of the temples there is nothing – just silence, a cool peaceful milieu, with the vibes of thousands of years of people meditating there.
The rule was when you feel, or your master feels, that now the erotic sculpture outside the temple no longer affects you, it does not create any sexuality in you, any sensuality in you, that it has cleaned your whole repressed sex….
It is the greatest psychological method invented by the East. Nobody is told what is happening, and for years there is no need. Once the master sees, and once you see that you are sitting there and nothing happens, it is as if the walls are empty – when you are absolutely certain that they don’t affect you – that is a signal: “Now it is time, you can go inside. Now the door for the inner, for the interior is open.” All that was rubbish has been dropped – a cleanliness, a weightlessness, and a silence which is full of beauty and song….
Khajuraho or Konarak…these are not pornographic. They are devices for meditation.
What is happening in the West is simply pornography, obscene. It does not help man to get rid of it, but simply gives him a temporary relief. The pornographic literature, photography, are all helping you to stay normal; otherwise, you will go mad.
So I don’t think there is any harm when somebody reads Playboy hiding it inside the Bible. What he is seeing in a pornographic magazine brings up his own unconscious.
This was used as a meditation technique in Khajuraho. In the West it is used to create more thirst for the same sexuality which has been aroused by the pornographic magazine, by blue films, by naked dances and striptease.
The same method was used to transform your energy into spirituality.
In the West it is used to provoke more sexuality, more sensuality.
And then there is a kind of insatiability – almost all painting has gone pornographic, all the movies repeating almost the same stories, the same plot, the same triangle: two women, one man; or two men, one woman, a simple structure – the same story. What attracts people to it? It is not great appreciation for literature!
What attracts is that in the story – needed for the story or not needed – they go on putting your suppressed needs, desires. It is a kind of relief. But tomorrow you will be repressing again, and again you will need the same kind of photography, the same dance.
This way you will never be able to enter into the temple. In fact, pornography in the West has no idea that it is the outer wall of the temple.
The East has used every fragment of human nature for a greater change, a mutation, to bring something higher in you of which you are capable but unconscious.

Osho,
One side of me is receptive and vulnerable. The other side is strong and powerful.
When I leave my room, I put out my strong and powerful side to protect myself. But my receptive side likes to dance and enjoy existence. I'm in a mess.
Please comment.
There is no problem.
Everybody has these two sides; that is the man and the woman syndrome – half of you is man, and the other half is woman. And it has to be that way because one half has come from your father and the other half has come from your mother.
So you are the contribution of two different kinds of persons, two different psychologies. Naturally they create two sides in you: the vulnerable, loving, trusting – that is your woman. And the strong, competitive, efficient – that is your man.
And naturally when you go out of your home, you have to change your personality. You have to hide your vulnerable part, and you have to put on a harder, steel mask. You are going into a world of competition.
It becomes a problem when you start thinking that this dialectics should not be in you; that is the time when it becomes a problem. If you understand that this dialectics is very necessary…they are complementaries. They are both needed, just like day and night, life and death – they are both needed.
So one need not be worried that there are two sides.
They are your two doors, and you have to start witnessing yourself as the third. You are not this, you are not that – because you can change them, they are clothes. You put on the clothes of a woman, you put on the clothes of a warrior – they are clothes. Certainly they are not you.
Those two parts in you are really two parts of your mind, two hemispheres of your mind, and they are as absolutely necessary as two wings or two hands.
The bird cannot rise into the sky with one wing. Those two wings are absolutely necessary; they are not against each other. Even though their movements are against each other, they are supporting each other, they are helping each other. And more fundamentally, they are helping the bird, which is the third.
It is perfectly good: outside be a Don Quixote, always keep a sword. Even if it is a false sword, no harm, because a real one could be dangerous – how to hold it? – and you may harm yourself. Have a big mustache and find some good German glue to make the mustache stand out like Ranak Pratap’s.
But when you come back home, put this whole makeup aside – with care, because tomorrow you will need it again. And this has to be done without any seriousness. It is simply the ordinary business of life – different things are needed at different places.
There is a story that in Rajasthan…Rajasthan is the province of the warriors. The Rana of the town, the head of the town, the chief of the warriors…there was something crazy about him: he would not allow anybody to have his mustache grow upward, it should grow downward – that was the rule.
He was a very dangerous man. He would cut your head off immediately if you didn’t appear with your mustache growing downward.
So the whole town by and by had started growing their mustaches downward, because it was dangerous – you might forget and come across that man and your life would be at risk, because he was just crazy, he simply cut people’s heads. Only his mustache could be turned upward – of course he was the chief.
A young businessman came to settle in the town. He also had a big mustache turning upward. People said, “You are settling in this town? Then remember, either cut your mustache or turn it downward; otherwise, you will soon be in unnecessary danger.”
The young man said, “Don’t be worried. I will see about that….”
And the next day he went with his mustache turned up to see the warrior.
But as he was coming out of his house, the warrior was there. Somebody had told him that one person in the city had his mustache turned upward. So he came to see who the man was: “Finish him, because there is no need to make unnecessary long stories when a shortcut is possible.”
Seeing him, he immediately took out his sword.
The young man said, “Wait! I cannot turn down my mustache. And it is not easy to cut off my head because I challenge you to a fight. But before that, I would like you to go and tell your friends – meet with your friends, your family, your children – because although I do the work of a businessman, I am up to now an unconquered warrior. Bring your sword and I will be waiting for you here.”
“And while you are gone, I will go and cut off my wife’s head and my children’s heads, because after I am gone who will take care of them? – unnecessary trouble. After you are gone, who will take care of your children? – unnecessary trouble. Finish them! So we go from the world without any burden.”
The warrior said, “It sounds logical.” He went back, he finished off his wife, his children.
Everybody said, “What are you doing? Have you gone really mad? Just about the mustache was okay, we have accepted it – it is not much, just eccentric. But you have killed your wife, your children – what are you doing?”
He said, “Not only have I killed mine, another man has also killed his. It is a question of prestige; in this town only one man can live with his mustache turned upward, not everybody. So this was the condition: that I can meet with my people, he can meet with his people, and he will be coming and I am going. We will face each other on the crossroad. The rumor is that he is a great warrior, but that is not a problem – being a warrior is in our blood.”
He arrived at the crossroads and could not believe what he saw: the young man had turned his mustache downward, just glued it down. You just need good glue – don’t use Indian glue; otherwise, somebody may cut off your head unnecessarily. The warrior said, “What have you done?”
The young man said, “I just thought…why kill your wife, your children? Those poor people have not done anything to me, and I should become a cause of their death? Of course my wife and children are mine, I can kill them, but not yours. So I thought, just because of the mustache…? And it is not a big job; in two minutes I just turned it downward.”
The warrior said, “This is dangerous! What did you do with your wife, your children?”
The young man said, “There was no need to do anything, because when I’d turned my mustache down, why should I cut off my wife and children’s heads?”
The warrior said, “You are dangerous. I have finished off my whole family!”

There are these people with different names, in different cultures, whose function is to fight and to destroy.
And naturally when you come out of your house, you are coming into a battlefield, where everybody is competing with others – a thousand and one types of fight are going on which you cannot see. They are all invisibly joined in fighting each other; over small things these fights are going on.
One couple were just signing in the registrar’s office – they were getting married. And as the man signed, the woman said to the registrar, “I want a divorce immediately, right now!”
He said, “Are you mad? You are just signing for marriage, and immediately you want a divorce?”
She said, “Seeing my signature, he has signed his signature three times – in big letters. It is better to have this fight here and now and say good-bye to this fellow. Everything three times for our whole life?”
Over small things, people are continuously fighting.
Naturally you come with no love, no trust, a defense, hardness, doubt, suspicion, skepticism, taking everybody as your competitor, everybody as your enemy.
But it is the game.
Don’t become too much attached to this part of the play. When you go home, just put it aside completely and be the other part which has been denied.
And once you start moving from one part to another easily, the more and more clearly it starts coming to you that you are separate, you are just a witness, a watcher; this is your mind, but this is not your being.
The one who is aware of this whole game is the being.
And to realize the being is to realize all that is worth realizing.

Osho,
In a world ridden with hate and hostility, sadness and sorrow, you seem to be the lonely bard of love and laughter.
Is this not hilarious?
It is.
It is hilarious but somebody has to begin it.
We want the world to be less serious and more sensitive. Sincere of course, but serious never.
We want the world to learn that the sense of humor is one of the most fundamental qualities of a religious man.
If you cannot laugh, you will miss many things in life, you will miss many mysteries.
Your laughter makes you a small innocent child, your laughter joins you with existence – with the roaring ocean, with the stars and their silence.
Your laughter makes you the lonely part of the world which has become intelligent, because only intelligent people can laugh. That’s why animals cannot afford to laugh – they don’t have that much intelligence.
You can try – you can tell a joke to your buffalo and see what happens.
And because seriousness has always been taught to be almost necessary for respectability, it has made everybody serious. It is not that they are serious for any reason, but it has now become their second nature; they have forgotten completely that seriousness is a sickness, it means the sense of humor is dead in you.
Otherwise the whole of life all around is so full of hilarious things.
If you have a sense of humor, you will be surprised that there is no time to be sad – every moment something or other is happening everywhere.
My mission certainly is to bring laughter to the whole of humanity – which has forgotten it. And when you forget laughter, you always forget songs, you forget love, you forget dance – it is not that you only forget laughter. Laughter has its own combination of qualities, just as seriousness has its own combination of qualities.
Forget laughter and you will forget love.
With a sad face, how to say to a woman “I love you”? You will have to smile a little bit.
With a serious face you cannot say even the smallest thing.
People are taking everything so seriously that it becomes a burden on them.
Learn to laugh more.
To me, laughter is as sacred as prayer.

============================================================

Osho,
I left my mother twenty years, and my wife over four years ago. Why can't I let them go?
One of the mysteries of life is the law of reverse returns. There are things which you cannot do. Although people have done them, although it is possible they may happen to you too, they are always happenings, they are never doings.
In fact the doer, the ego, is the barrier to the happening. Happening needs the innocent mind of a child who can still dream of fairies, who can still find treasures in colored stones, whose eyes are still not covered with the dust that we call knowledge. His ignorance is far more beautiful than the knowledge of a great scholar. Because ignorance is at least natural. At least it is yours; it does not make you a hypocrite, it is never insincere.
I have been wondering and looking in thousands of scriptures and commentaries on scriptures but I have not found a single statement in five thousand years’ literature which shows some understanding about ignorance. In fact, they are all interested in knowledgeability; ignorance they want to destroy. They want to gain knowledge because knowledge will give them power – knowledge is power. Knowledge will give you prestige, money, respectability. Knowledge will fulfill many of your ambitions and desires.
Ignorance cannot do anything for you, but it can allow something which is far more precious than knowledge can ever give to you. But its whole secret is in allowing, in patiently waiting – with a question mark in the heart, with a quest all over your being, a quest which is not partial, a total inquiry.
Ignorance is the beginning of wisdom. Rightly understood, it is not something negative. It is simply a tabula rasa – a clean slate. Nothing is written on it. You have to write your own holy Bible, holy Koran, holy Gita; you have to give birth.
Ignorance is a womb.
It contains the quest for truth – and if you don’t fall victim to knowledgeability, ignorance is the right beginning.
To know absolutely that “I do not know,” is the first step of wisdom. You have known something of tremendous value: you have known your innocence, and in this innocence, the ego dies. The ego can live only with the false – it is the accumulation of the false. The ego is interested in knowledge – borrowed, third-hand, rotten…but knowledge is cheap.
To know by experience is a risk. You may burn your fingers in the experiment.
In the experiment, you are dropping out of the crowd and moving alone in this vast universe and you don’t have any guide, any maps, any instructions. All that you have is a thirst.
But in the desert people say, and it is derived from thousands of years of experience, that when a man becomes so thirsty that he forgets everything…. The fiery sun on his head, the fire in the sand, and he is all thirst; now it is not even a verbal thing in him. It is not that he is thinking, “I am feeling thirsty.”
He is thirst. Not that he is thinking about it, he is it.
The desert people all over the world have experienced a very strange phenomenon. Whenever somebody comes to such a state of thirst – and many times it happens in the desert – he suddenly becomes intuitive. He starts moving toward the place where he will find water. He has no map, he has no instructions. He has no way to move logically in any direction because in the desert all directions are the same, and there is no reason to choose one direction and not another.
But now there is no question of choice. There is no question of thinking, he is just thirst. And that thirst moves existentially toward the place where it can be quenched.
When I came to know about this, I was surprised that no other mystic has taken note of the fact that the same is the situation of the seeker. Of course his desert is bigger, and his thirst is bigger too. The ordinary thirst is momentary; his thirst is eternal – but the basic principle is the same.
When a man becomes so aflame, he starts moving…I will not say he starts going in that direction; he finds himself going toward a certain direction, having no other alternative. There is no reason to stop. And that’s how those who have reached, have reached.
Remember one thing: that to get rid of the doer is the most essential thing if you want to taste another world – the world of happenings, where you are just a witness.
The law of reverse effect is: there are things which you can have but because you are trying to get them, you will not be able to get them. It is like when you want to fall asleep in the night. You try all kinds of tricks but you find that you cannot befool yourself – sleep is not coming. On the contrary, because of your tricks and because of all the things people have told you to do if you do not find sleep coming to you naturally – all those things keep you awake. Because to do them you have to be awake!
Somebody is repeating a mantra – but to repeat a mantra, you have to be awake. Somebody is doing some breathing exercises from Yoga – but breath is so deeply involved in life that if you are using breathing in a certain way, with a certain rhythm, it will keep you alert, awake, fresh.
Sleep needs totally different things. If you want sleep to come, forget all about sleep; that is the first rule. Do something else. Get involved in something so deeply that you are not at all concerned with sleep and it will start coming. You will hear small footsteps, you will feel it is coming, but don’t pay any attention.
Sleep is a feminine energy. If you look at it – and here you come to a very significant point – the feminine energy functions in a totally different way than the male energy. The woman wants you to chase her. She does not want you simply to sit and wait for her to come. Even though the woman wants you, loves you, wants to be yours, first she will run away. She will not run very fast. She will run in such a way that you can catch her; she will give you every chance to catch hold of her.
Every feminine energy has the same quality. Sleep is feminine, you cannot catch hold of her. You have just to close your eyes and lie down and wait. She will come…she is just in the other room.
In the same category are all great values: friendship, love, peace, silence, and ultimately the realization of your godliness – they all happen. You are not the doer.
So first, let this be settled in you: that there is a world of doings that is the outside world, the worldly world; and there is a world of happenings – the inner world, the otherworldly world. Certainly their principles are going to be diametrically opposite.
I have seen people trying to relax. I have seen a book with the title, You Must Relax! “Must” will not allow you to relax! Relaxation is not something that you do, it is simply the absence of all your doings. In that absence is the greatest experience of life, and all great values will grow on their own accord.
Of course, your ego will not be fulfilled. In fact, it will be dead by the time you have experienced a few things which only happen.
You have to choose between the ego and the world of happenings.
The ego can give you many things: misery, anger, sadness, despair, anguish…and the line is long. It has its own treasures, if you are interested.
The absence of ego has also its own treasures. And the world of the ego and the world of egolessness are not very far away. They are neighbors.
Just a very thin fence of thoughts divides them.
It is simply a question of understanding that there are things which cannot be done – so don’t do them, let them happen.
You just be a watcher. And once you have learned the knack of watching you will start growing up higher every moment toward the ultimate experience – of knowing oneself, realizing the nature of your consciousness…because that opens the door of immortality.
A meditator slowly slips from the world of mortality into the world of immortality. On this side, the world of doings, there is death. On the other side, in the dimension of happenings, there is no death.
And unless you experience a clear vision of deathlessness, you will remain miserable, you will remain in despair. And because you live in the world of doings, that is the only art you know – and that art is preventing you from entering into a different dimension.
So you have to learn sometimes just to be a child, playing, jumping, dancing, singing, for no purpose at all. Once in a while just lying down on the lawn, or on the beach – doing nothing, lying down in such a way…as if you are in your mother’s womb.
In fact, the scientists say that people feel good near the ocean because the child in the mother’s womb floats in a liquid which has the same proportion of chemicals, salts, as the ocean. And we are made eighty percent of water. It is a miracle! You just think once again…you are eighty percent water – walking, running, going home! Just twenty percent, the skin, is functioning like a bag.
You feel fresh near the ocean – the same salty air, some forgotten memory….
Scientists are now coming closer to the Eastern insight about human evolution. Now the latest researchers say that Charles Darwin is not right, man has not come as a growth from the monkeys. They are proposing that man was born as a fish, not as a monkey; in the very beginning he was born in the ocean. And because life needed all that the ocean contains, the mother’s womb has to contain everything just like the ocean. A pregnant woman becomes very much interested in salty things, because the child is asking for more and more salt. Salt is a necessity….
But for nine months floating in the mother’s womb the child knows the eternity of relaxation – no tension, no business, no worries, no taxation.
The child simply is, just a pure isness – that is relaxation.
By the side of the ocean, lying in the sand, just move as if you are back in your mother’s womb. You are not to do anything. Just lie down and enjoy the wind, the roaring ocean…and you will be surprised that the meditation that you have been trying to do for years and has not happened, is happening.
Once you know that there are things which need your support – not as a doer but just as a loving gardener looking at his rosebushes, waiting and trusting in existence…the spring always comes and it will bring flowers.
The spring of your consciousness will also come, but you have to learn a simple secret – that of let-go.
And the learning simply comes by trying to understand the nature of doing and the nature of non-doing.
I was taken to a theological college to talk about Jesus, and after I had talked with the students, the vice-chancellor took me around…it is the biggest Christian college in the whole of Asia which prepares missionaries. He took me around, and I could not believe what I saw. If Jesus had seen it the Jews would have been saved from crucifying him – he would have committed suicide himself!
The missionaries are being prepared…on what sentence what kind of emphasis has to be given, what sentence has to be spoken loudly and what sentence has to be almost whispered, at what point you should beat the table….
I told the vice-chancellor, “You are destroying these people. Jesus never went to any theological college; he was not trained in the art of oratory. He is certainly one of the greatest orators the world has produced, and he does not know any art; he is uneducated. His power and the fire that his words carry are not coming out of a training, they are coming from his heart. In fact, he is not doing them, they are happening.”
The difference is very delicate and very difficult…whether the person is making a gesture or the gesture has blossomed just like a flower. If you have to say something your hands will follow, because your hands are extensions of your mind. When the mind is trying to express something and finding it difficult, the hands add whatever they can contribute. And sometimes what words cannot say, the movement of the hand, the grace of the hand may say. The word may not reach its target but the heart may touch the hand extended toward you. Your eyes may catch the depth of the master.
I told that vice-chancellor, “You are spoiling three thousand students every year – and you think you are preparing missionaries who are going to convert others into religion. You are not even able to convert these people! Because if their hearts are with you, then their gestures will automatically follow, then their emphasis on certain words, phrases or sometimes just silence…”
A moment, a gap, one never knows…what the moment is going to bring is absolutely unknown.
Whatever you want to do, remember:
Doing is material, worldly, mundane. There is nothing which can be called “spiritual doing”.
Spirituality is a happening, it is bigger than you, you cannot do it. You can make a shelter of your house, but you cannot make the sky with all the stars.
All great values are like the sky – so vast and with so many stars and with so many mysteries. You can enter into this world of the miraculous if you drop yourself, leave yourself out of the temple.
I am reminded of a very ancient story….
There was a great sculptor in Rome. His statues were so highly praised that for the first time unanimously the critics said, “There is no more possibility of improvement.” He has said the last word; his statues look almost alive, as if just any moment the statue will come out of its place to greet you, to shake hands with you or give you a hug” – although I don’t think you will be ready! The hug may prove dangerous. But that was the appraisal from all over the world, that the man had come to the peak, and now there was nothing that could be added to the art.
Then the man became old, as everybody has to become old, and he became afraid of death. As oldness started settling he started thinking what to do about death. Being a sculptor this idea came to his mind easily: “I can make a statue of myself.” And he had a beautiful round hall where hundreds of statues were standing and sitting. So he thought, “When death comes I will be standing somewhere inside the crowd of my statues; only I have to keep my breathing as slow as possible.” And that was possible, because people used to say that his statues seemed as if they were breathing. They were so alive that they would do something, they could not remain standing forever in that way.
Death came and was puzzled. The sculptor had made a few statues of himself and placed them among other statues. Death could not believe that…she went around watching, looking, trying to find some sign but she failed. She said, “My God! He has done only one thing wrong…”
And the artist forgot completely the situation and the scene and said, “What?”
Death said, “You cannot forget yourself. And that I could see even by your nose, but I did not disturb you. I simply went on looking around. I wanted to see whether you could remain silent. That would have been really going beyond death – but you could not forget your ego and you were feeling more and more satisfied. The more I was going ahead, looking like a failure…I was seeing from the corner of my eye that you were looking more and more successful, certain that you had defeated death. I can be defeated but not by the ego.”
The egoless has no death to encounter. You are born – have you done anything? can you take any credit for being born? for having two eyes and not three? for having eyes at all? Otherwise the world would be dark – no colors, no light, no beauty. But all these things have happened to you. Birth happens to you, youth happens to you, love happens to you, old age happens to you, death happens to you – whatever is essential happens to you and whatever is non-essential is left for you to do.
So don’t waste your whole life in the non-essential.
That non-essential is also needed but remember that the essential has not to be forgotten.
And you have not to do anything for it. You have just to be receptive, open, vulnerable, available…so that if the call comes from the beyond you will be ready to say with your full heart, “Yes. I am coming.”

Osho,
I listened to the tender sound of a cool well, bubbling water just flowing without any effort and yet busy…Sunrays dancing to the melody, eternally fresh. But the I forgot. All that remains is the thirst to come back and be the well, sometimes recognized, sometimes not. Osho, is there anything to be done? Is the thirst enough?
The thirst is enough.
So the question is not whether the thirst is enough or not, the question is whether the thirst is there or not. Because there can be a false thirst – and you know about the false thirst: you are not feeling thirsty and suddenly you see a bottle of Coca-Cola. Strangely enough you start feeling thirsty, and just a moment before you were not thinking of thirst at all.
I used to live in one place…just next door was the richest man’s house; it was a beautiful palace. And in India nobody bothers about it; it is taken for granted that people will urinate anywhere. The whole of mother earth is a toilet. So by the side of this man’s house there was a small street, very lonely and once in a while somebody would urinate there and he was very mad about it. In the morning he would be in the garden and if he saw somebody urinating there was going to be murder! So much trouble he would create for the man, and the police will come and….
One day I was by the side of his fence and I said, “Why don’t you put small signboards around the house saying that urinating is prohibited?”
He said, “That’s good idea.”
So he made beautiful wooden signs – beautiful because they have to go with the beautiful marble – all around the house. And by the evening he came….
I said, “You must have come about those signboards that you have put up.”
He said, “Yes, I have come about those. Where is your father?”
“But,” I said, “my father has nothing to do with them. It was my suggestion, the whole credit goes to me.”
He said, “You keep quiet, just call your father.”
So I called my father.
He said, “This boy is dangerous. He tricked me! Now my whole house is stinking of urine; all around the house you can find nothing but urine.”
Just the human mind…when you see a board: “You cannot urinate here” such a great desire arises! One can risk anything, but one cannot leave that place, it is hypnotic.
The functioning of the mind is such that no prohibition can ever be successful. Prohibition becomes provocation, it becomes a challenge and suddenly…you were going on your way, thinking your thoughts, and suddenly this board makes you aware that you too have a bladder. And somebody telling you not to do something makes it attractive. It can become an obsession.
Don’t create obsessions in your life.
Live more playfully, less seriously.
Don’t be rigid; these are the qualities of the dead. Be flexible. Grow a sense of humor so that you can remain protected from all kinds of dark nights, dark holes. Your sense of humor will protect you.
And if once in a while you can have a deep laughter, from your very roots, it will give you a freshness, a new vitality, a new energy to move mountains.
Ten thousand years we have lived without understanding the subtle workings of the mind. Hence every religion says, “Don’t do this,” and creates the world that you see. This is the world created by people who have been telling you, “Don’t do this, don’t do that.” And those are the things which are being done!
And the more emphasis there is on denial…. Life reacts with a tremendous force against any denial, and you are caught in a very difficult crisis. If you follow life you cannot follow your holy scriptures, and that will create guilt in you – and to go on collecting guilt is like growing a spiritual cancer within yourself. If you follow these commandments in the scriptures you are going against your nature, against life itself. So there is not going to be any fulfillment, there is not going to be any joy; there is going to be only darkness, misery.
Slowly, slowly you start feeling a kind of death happening to you, because life is not being allowed to live in its totality. Death is bound to fill the gaps where life has not been allowed to blossom.
And every man is carrying within himself so many poisonous, life-negative ideas that everybody is in a limbo, just hanging in between. Neither can he do what life wants him to do – fully, completely, not holding anything back – nor he can repress. Because you are nature; and who is going to repress? You will have to divide yourself into two parts. You will have to create classes within yourself.
There are people who are thinking of creating a classless society – without knowing at all that inside, man as an individual is divided into classes.
In India, the brahmin is synonymous with the head and the sudra, the shoemakers and the poor manual laborers, are symbolized by the feet; the warriors are symbolized by the arms. And they have a hierarchy – the feet cannot become the head. So whatever you are, you cannot change, you cannot transform yourself. You have to accept your fate – this has been the teaching for thousands of years.
And the result is this miserable humanity. This is the conclusion of all your religions and all your prophets and all your saviors. This is what they have done, this is how they have saved you.
They don’t seem around too much nowadays – perhaps they have saved you completely! They may have gone to save somebody else on some other planet, some other star.
These saviors existed because we wanted somebody else to do this work of spiritual growth for us: “Somebody else should do it.”
Nobody else can do it.
It is your freedom to be miserable or to be blissful, to remain in darkness or to live a life of light. This is the prerogative of human beings.
The saviors are cheating you. To say to somebody, “I am going to save you,” means that the person stops his search and becomes only a shadow. He follows you. And remember, existence does not accept carbon copies; it needs the original. You have to take the whole responsibility for your life.
And it is not a burden. In fact, freedom can never be a burden. The moment you accept total responsibility, you become free to be whatever your nature demands, to be whatever your nature deserves. And only when you fulfill your destiny – alone – finding your path, risking everything for the search, then life is no more just vegetating. Then life is a song, a dance, a deep ecstasy.
But you have to drop the idea that anybody else can do it for you. You have to drop the idea that knowledge gathered from scriptures can do it. You have to be mature, you have to accept that “This is my life and only I can do something for it.”
In this way you become an individual.
In this way you become free from organizational religions, in this way you become free from any political, philosophical ideologies.
In this way you become innocent again.
Your eyes are clean, have depth; your heart is ready to dance.
And if you can forget yourself and start the dancing, start the singing…. And when I say forget yourself, don’t misunderstand me. Don’t start emphasizing the fact of forgetting yourself – that will spoil the whole thing. When I say forget yourself, I simply mean that when you are dancing, let the dance be there and the dancer dissolved into it. When you are singing then what is the need of the singer? Let the singer melt into the song, and each moment of life starts taking on the qualities of truth, of beauty, of blissfulness. You don’t have to go anywhere. And you don’t have to be anybody else, either. Wherever you are, whatever you are, exactly there – in silence, in peace – you can discover the very center of the universe.
That center exists in everyone. We are different only on the periphery; at the center we are one.
That’s why a person who has reached to his innermost core becomes a magnetic force – because he is now at the center and you are at the periphery. He has all the gravitation. If you just relax a little bit…because you are clinging with the periphery. A little relaxation and you will be pulled in.
And while you are slipping into the presence of the master, you will find that a dark shadow of your own, which we call the ego, is leaving you. As you are coming closer to the master, the ego is leaving you. The moment you have come and there is no barrier between you and the master, you will be surprised: for the first time you don’t have any weight. It is as if that ego was a mountain on you, and suddenly everything looks bright, fragrant, rosier.
Life is simple.
We make it complex by doing things against nature.
There is only one religion, and that is nature. Allow nature to take you completely; allow yourself to be one with nature.
Anything that goes against nature is against religion, is against spirituality, is against your ultimate welfare. So just listen to your nature – and your nature goes on telling you, but we are deaf.
I have heard…. In Tibet, two Buddhist monks were passing through the marketplace. One monk was very greedy. In fact, because of his greed it was suggested he renounce the world and become a monk; otherwise, “Your future is going to be nothing but hell.”
He listened to many saints, tried many times, but again and again he thought about all the possessions he had collected, and he went on postponing. One day the master called him and said, “It is enough, because now I cannot wait; I am going to die tomorrow. Now you decide.”
Under such compulsion – it was almost blackmail – he got initiated, renounced the world. But that does not make any difference.
The greed is inside you, not in the things.
So now it became attached to new things. He started collecting other things, with new names. He started collecting ancient scriptures….
Both monks were passing through the market where there was so much crowd and so much bargaining and so much noise…and somebody’s coin fell and he heard the sound.
He said to the other monk, “Did you hear it? I just heard the sound of a coin falling on the road.”
The other monk said, “You are a miracle! In such a maddening crowd…just the sound of a coin? You managed to hear it? You have to forgive me, I don’t have that much sensitivity.”
They both went to the master and told him about the incident. The master said, “It is not insensitivity on your part – he is too sensitive toward coins! Even in a market, the sound of a coin…he knows no other music.”
Don’t go against nature.
Listen silently – and whatever you have to do and whatever you have to be, all directions are within you.
Once in a while you may go wrong, you may commit a mistake. But they’re all part of natural life, and you will learn from them. Each learning is based on mistakes.
But one thing has to be certain: you have to be strong enough to take the whole responsibility of your life, for good or for bad. Act out of freedom, out of awareness; not out of dead principles and religions and books.
To me, fearlessness, courageousness is the foundational quality of a religious man. He will risk all, but he cannot go against his own insight. Whatever the consequences, he will follow his own insight. This is how he becomes stronger and stronger, more and more like steel, so that even fire cannot destroy him.

Osho,
Enlightenment seems to me always to be an end, a death, a kind of suicide where a comeback is never possible – no more adventures, no lovers, no sunsets, no dramas, no candlelight dinners. What can be more beautiful than the senseless dramas and joys of all my searchings? How is it after death for an enlightened man? Is it not boring for the next ten thousand years? I feel simply a death-fear.
Enlightenment can be a very scary thing.
It can create a great paranoia in you. And your question is significant, because millions of people in the world never think about enlightenment, and the reason may be this deep-rooted fear. They have known a certain kind of life and they think this is the only life possible – that’s where they go wrong.
This is the lowest form of life that we are living. In fact, to call it life is not right, it is only birth. It is only a possibility. You can make a life out of it – life has to be created. And the misunderstanding is so old…and people don’t want to drop it because it is so consoling to think that you are alive and you are enjoying everything and it is a beautiful drama.
But you have been through this drama many times.
It is the same drama. Small details change…A is married to B instead of to C. One lives in this country, is born into another…but goes through the same routine. The same misery will come, the same jealousy will come; all the games of ambition that people go on playing will be there – but you are not bored. You are not bored because each time you die your memory closes a door; otherwise you will go mad. Nature has an autonomous system: the moment a person dies his whole memory system of that life goes with him into the new life, but the door is closed.
One of Mahavira’s contributions to the world is his method of jati smaran. Jati smaran means the science of remembering your past lives. It was his absolute emphasis that nobody should become a sannyasin unless he goes through the remembrance of a few past lives. He was asked many times, “Why this insistence?” because nobody else insists on it.
He said, “Unless you look into your past lives, and you see that you have been doing the same thing again and again and again, and your hands are still empty, and you are again doing those same things….”
You will become bored and you will start feeling that “I must be utterly unintelligent” – but because each life is completely closed to you, you don’t know anything about your past. You don’t have any insight into your future.
All that you know is this small life, and in this small life you know two things: the misery and the pain of life, and ways and methods of forgetting that misery and pain. That you call your amusement, entertainment – going to a movie, to a circus. These are your ways to forget your life. There you became engaged for two or three hours in a different world.
The enlightened person is certainly difficult for you to conceive of.
It is just like if you smoke, you cannot conceive how millions of people go on without smoking. They must be missing! And the person who does not smoke is not missing anything except some nicotine, some poison that will kill you earlier than him. Otherwise, he is not missing anything. The person who is an alcoholic cannot believe that the whole world goes on without the bottle. He cannot live even a single day without the bottle. He feels pity for you: “Poor fellows, they don’t know that there is a way, through alcohol, to forget all the burdens of life.” But he cannot conceive of a life which has no burdens at all to forget.
And that is your position. When you think about enlightenment, the problem is that you don’t understand that the man who is enlightened is no more an ego. You can insult him but you cannot hurt him; you can abuse him, you can condemn him, and there will be no change in his being. Even if you kill him he will remain the same.
It is difficult for you to understand how an enlightened man can remain without going to circuses, movies…and all kinds of stupidities are there. But so few enlightened people have existed that not much is known about them. And much is such that unless you experience it, you cannot understand it.
For the enlightened person, everything that is going on around him is a circus. There is no need for him to purchase a ticket – his problem is how to get out of the circus! He does not want to go to the movie, he wants to get out!
But wherever he goes….
Just think of Gautam Buddha in Bombay….
It is not difficult to infer why these people have declined to happen. Why no more Gautam Buddhas, Mahaviras, Bodhidharmas, Zarathustras? Where have all these tremendously beautiful people disappeared to? Why are they not more available to us? Because humanity has grown so much – just in the proportion…. In India there were only two million people in the time of Buddha. Now there are nine hundred million people in India. Just looking at the proportion, at least a dozen Buddhas are absolutely needed!
But that kind of person has disappeared – and he has disappeared because what you call life he has found to be nothing but slow death.
And he has found the real life. Once a person finds the real life, why he should come back into a miserable world?
But your question is relevant. You feel afraid that sitting silently for thousands of years is going to be difficult.
But you don’t know that if you are silent, time stops. There are no more ten thousand years, ten million years, nothing. Just a simple now.
When mind is silent, time disappears because mind is time.
Now you are worried that in life there is so much drama, and the enlightened man…what is he going to do for eternity?
What drama you are talking about? One idiot slipping on a banana peel? And everybody starts laughing…this is not compassionate. Even if that man is a banana, he has every right to slip on a banana peel. He is not harming anybody, just doing some special kind of yoga.
But why are you laughing?
Your life is full of sadness and you are in search…wherever there is a possibility to laugh, some sadness is thrown away, some burden is thrown away. Certainly, an enlightened person will not be laughing. There is no need. The laughter is needed because of your sadness, it is an antidote to sadness. The enlightened man is so blissful…and remember, blissfulness is not happiness. That’s where things always become confused.
Happiness is momentary: on both sides of happiness there is unhappiness.
Blissfulness has no opposite to it, there is no such thing as “unblissfulness.” There is only blissfulness, and that blissfulness is not dependent on anybody else or anything outside the enlightened being himself.
His source of bliss is within his own being.
He is shining, radiating what he has experienced. And the more he shares it, the more it goes on growing.
Time has no existence for him any more.
He lives in the moment. And he lives so totally and so intensely that there is no space for any sadness or any misery to enter.
But don’t decide anything before experiencing at least a little sample. Experience a little meditation and it will be the answer to your question. Because one day you will find that you are sitting silently and so joyful, for no reason at all.
The moment one becomes enlightened, one becomes blissfulness, one becomes benediction. Time and space both disappear. He becomes one with the whole.
Then stars are within him, flowers are within him, skies upon skies are within him. Then birds on the wing are within him.
Right now everything is outside you.
Enlightenment brings everything inside you.
It spreads you far and wide, to infinities. Many such questions will arise, but don’t just intellectually think about them. Otherwise, you will be missing the real juice of life.
Experiment.
Your questions should come out of your experiments; then they will be existential and they will be of immense help for your growth.

============================================================

Osho,
Is it possible for a woman to be in love and still centered?
The question has many implications.
First, you do not understand what being centered means.
Second, you also have no experience of the phenomenon of love. I can say this with absolute authority, because your question supplies all the evidence for what I am saying.
Love and centering are one phenomenon, they are not two. If you have known love, you cannot be anything but centered.
Love means coming to be at ease with existence. It may be through a lover, it may be through a master, it may be through a friend. Or it may be simply direct and immediate – to the sunrise, to the sunset. The very experience of love will make you centered. This has been the whole philosophy of devotees down the ages. Love is their science; centering is the result.
But there are people – and there are only two kinds of people – who have a dominant reasoning, logic. Their heart is undeveloped. And there are people whose heart is blossoming and now reason, rationality, only function as servants to the heart. Man’s misery is that he is trying to do the impossible: he is trying to force the heart to serve the mind, which is impossible. This is your chaos, this is your mess.
The question has arisen out of the ordinary experience called love. It is not love, it is only called love – just a glimpse, just a small taste, which is not going to be a nourishment. On the contrary it is going to become a pathological state, because one moment you are high and everything is just far out and the next moment all is dark, you cannot believe that there has been anything significant in your life. All those moments of love appear to have happened in dreams, or perhaps you have imagined them. And these dark moments are absolutely joined with the beautiful moments.
This is the dialectics of human mind. It functions through opposites. You will love a man and you will love the man for absolutely wrong reasons. You will love the man or the woman because you are carrying within you an image of the other. The boy has got it from the mother and the girl has got it from the father. All lovers are searching for their mothers, their fathers – and in the final analysis they are all searching for the womb and its beautiful, relaxed state.
Psychologically, the eternal quest for moksha, ultimate liberation, enlightenment, can be reduced to the basic psychological fact that man has already known the most beautiful, the most peaceful state before he was born. Now if something greater does not happen in his life, some exposure to the divine, to the universal, he is going to remain miserable. Because unconsciously, every moment, there is judgment.
He knows he has lived for nine months…and remember, for a child in the mother’s womb, nine months are almost eternity because he does not know how to count, he does not have any clock. Each moment is enough unto itself. He does not know there is going to be another moment afterward, so each moment is a surprise. And with no worry, with no tension about food, about clothes, about shelter, he is absolutely at ease, relaxed, centered. There is nothing to distract him from the center.
There is nobody there even to say hello.
This experience of nine months of being centered, of immense joy, peace, aloneness…the other is no more there; you are the world, you are the whole. Nothing is missing, everything is supplied by nature without any effort on your part. But life confronts you in a totally different way – antagonistically, competitively. Everybody is your enemy, because everybody is in the same market; everybody is your enemy because everybody has the same desires, the same ambition. You are bound to come into conflict with millions of people.
It is because of this inner antagonism that all the cultures of the world have created a certain system of etiquette, familiarity, formality, and they have emphasized it continuously to the child: “You have to respect your father.”
All the cultures all over the world throughout the whole of history – why are they all insisting to the child, “You should respect your father”? There is some suspicion that if he is left alone, the child is not going to respect the father – that much is certain, simple logic. In fact, the child is going to hate. Every girl hates her mother. To hide it – because it will be very difficult to live in a society where all your wounds are uncovered and everybody is walking around with uncovered wounds – a certain ethos, a morality, a certain style of life has to cover it and to show just the opposite – that you love your mother, that you love and respect your father.
Deep down just the opposite is the case. You have been divided into two parts by the society. The false part has been given all respect, because the false is created by the society. The real is denied any respectability, because the real comes from nature – which is beyond the control of any society, culture or civilization. Each child has to be trained in lies, has to be programmed in such a way that he will be subservient to the society, a docile slave.
All societies are breaking the very spine of every child so he becomes spineless. He cannot raise his voice, he cannot question anything. His life is just not his own. He loves, but his love is false. From the very beginning he was told to love his mother “because she is your mother” – as if being a mother has some intrinsic quality or some obligation that you should love her. But it has been accepted that the mother should be loved.
My emphasis is that the mother should be loving, and no child should ever be told to love somebody unless it happens on its own. Yes, the mother, the father, the family can create a milieu without saying anything; the whole energy can generate, can trigger your own forces of love.
But never say to anybody that love is a duty. It is not. Duty is a false substitute for love. When you cannot love, society goes on supplying duties. They may appear to be love, but inside there is nothing loving in it; on the contrary, it is only social formality. And you become so accustomed to social formalities that you forget completely that there are things which are waiting to happen in your life but you are so occupied that you don’t give space, you don’t allow love to blossom in you.
Hence you don’t know that centering and love are one thing.
Centering is more appealing to the intellectual. Nothing has to be believed; there is nobody else to whom you have to surrender.
It is because of the other that every love affair becomes a tragedy.
In Indian literature there are no tragedies. In my student days I was asking my professors, “Why are tragedies missing in Indian literature?” And not a single teacher or professor was able to say something significant about it.
They simply shrugged their shoulders and they said, “You are strange; you find such questions…I have been in this university for thirty years and nobody has asked.”
I said, “To me it seems very obvious that the question has deep roots in the culture. In all other countries except India there are tragedies – beautiful stories, novels, fiction – but in India they are missing. And the reason is…India is a more ancient land than any other land. It has learned many things from experience, and one of them is: that which should not be, should not be talked about; hence there should be no tragedy.”
Their logic can be understood. If man feels that life is everywhere a comedy, then there is a possibility he might continue deceiving himself. He might never tell anybody his problems – because he thinks nobody has problems; why become a laughingstock? Something is wrong with you – just keep quiet. There is no point in exposing yourself to a cruel society which will simply laugh at you and prove that you are an idiot and you don’t know how to live.
But it is not so simple. It is not a question just of knowing how to live. It is a question first of dropping all that is false in you. The false comes from the outside. And when all that is false is dropped and you are utterly naked before existence, the real will start growing in you. This is the situation which has to be fulfilled for the real to grow, to blossom, and to bring you to the ultimate meaning and truth of life.
It has to be remembered: You can start either from centering – and the moment you are centered you will suddenly find immense love overflowing – or you can start from love. And the moment your love is without any jealousy, without any conditionings, but just a sharing of the dance of the heart, you will experience centering.
They are two sides of the same coin. Centering is a more intellectual, scientific method. Love has a different source in you – your heart. It is more poetic, it is more aesthetic, it is more sensitive, it is more feminine, it is more beautiful. And it is easier than centering.
My suggestion is, first drop all false ideas about love. Let something real grow in you, and centering will be coming, enlightenment will be coming.
But if you find it very difficult to start with love, then don’t feel in despair. You can move directly through centering.
You can call it meditation, you can call it awareness. But in each case, the ultimate result is the same: You are centered and overflowing with love.

Osho,
You usually say that women help men to become enlightened. How is it vice-versa?
Latifa, I usually say that women help men in attaining enlightenment, and you must have been wondering what the situation is vice versa.
To help somebody toward enlightenment needs immense patience, needs great love. The woman has a few higher qualities.
In the first place, the man more or less becomes interested in enlightenment because his wife is interested. Not to be interested in something in which the wife is interested is to keep a cold war going twenty-four hours a day in the house; it is wiser to go with the woman. The vice-versa will be very difficult. The vice-versa means the man pushing the woman toward enlightenment.
In the first place, who is going to look after the house? And a dozen nasty children…just your great contributions to the world. Afraid that one day you will have to die, you are leaving so many examples that whether your name is mentioned in history books or not, it does not matter – the real history will be made by your children. They will rape and they will murder and they will commit suicide and they will do all kinds of great things.
The husband is continuously worried about the financial situation; his whole life is devoted to earning money. He cannot persuade the wife because that will be the end of the family. Then both will have gone toward enlightenment, leaving those nasty children to destroy the neighborhood – just making places for more meditators.
Man is more ambitious. His ambition is mundane. The woman is not ambitious – and to move toward enlightenment you have to drop all your ambitions, all your desires.
Man is more in his head. He goes on continuously thinking, arguing. And there are things – and those are the only significant things – which first you have to experience and only then you can think about. Otherwise, what can you think about? You have heard only an empty word – love. You have no experience; your word love is only a container, empty, with no content inside it.
Man has not been helpful. He would like his children to fulfill all the desires that he has not been able to fulfill. He wants his children to become prime ministers, presidents, the richest people in the world. Those were his desires, those were his father’s desires, those were his grandfather’s desires and in heritage he will give those desires – which are maddening – to his children. He cannot talk about enlightenment.
Latifa is German. Even a German husband cannot manage to force a woman to become enlightened – what to say of other races? – because even the German husband is as henpecked as any husband. In that, there is no difference between the German and the Chinese and the Indian and the Japanese; it does not matter. There is only one kind of husband: henpecked. Whatever you do, you cannot change the situation. And it will be hilarious: a henpecked husband leading a wife toward enlightenment, and that too, in Germany!
No Latifa, don’t wait for a husband. You will have to do it yourself. Yes, once you have done it for yourself, you can drive one or many husbands toward enlightenment, like cattle!
People have been asking me, “Why, in the long history of man, have so very few people become enlightened?”
I said, “What to do? There was nobody to chase them!”
If women decide, you will see husbands in every house standing on their heads meditating, crying, that the time is wasted and the customers must be there and the shop…. But in enlightenment you are not supposed to think about such things as shops and customers.
Women can help, but that much understanding has not come to men yet.
Even the smallest girl has qualities of a grown-up mother; a kind of motherliness surrounds her. That is not true about a boy. You will not find any vibe of fatherliness around him. To be a father is a social institution and to be a mother is a natural phenomenon. Husband and wife are faraway categories.
In India, although we have participated in the crime, the universal crime against women…. There have been people in the East – few, but at least there have been a few people – of great insight, and their insight can be seen in many ways.
In India, you can go and see temples of Sita and Rama, or Radha and Krishna – but have you observed that you always put the name of the woman first and the man second? It is always Sita first, Radha first…and the companion is no ordinary human being; it is a Krishna, it is a Rama. But still the woman is placed first because to her, enlightenment is far easier than a pregnancy. It is also a kind of pregnancy.
The woman knows the language. The man cannot understand it – pregnancy? He can make a woman pregnant but he remains an outsider. His work in giving birth to children is negligible; any syringe can do it. And nature has no preference for men over syringes – they are better used once and disposed of. With man, the difficulty is that once you get caught, it is very difficult to get rid of him. Then the syringe goes on hanging around you for your whole life and the syringe thinks itself very important.
Enlightenment is life’s ultimate fulfillment. The woman is closer, her love is more sincere, her readiness to risk is great. You may be thinking otherwise, but because man thinks, he cannot take a risk. First, he will think and be sure that “success is going to be mine.” Only then will he enter into any challenge.
The woman jumps first and then there is the whole of eternity to think about it.
Latifa, whatever I have said is the best part of the story. It has rarely happened.
It has happened, women have helped their husbands, sacrificed their whole lives, never thought about themselves. Their surrender, their devotion to their lovers has been total. In this totality, they have achieved before their lover has.
Man is fragmented; his mind is going in all the ways, in every direction. Nothing is complete because you have only a certain amount of energy and you are running in so many directions that you will end up just like a mad dog. You will not reach anywhere.
Hearing about enlightenment, man becomes interested in becoming enlightened too, but that is only one of the items on his laundry list – and this is the last item. When everything is dry-cleaned, then finally he will come to me. And here we just do dry-cleaning of your brain, of your mind.
A man goes on thinking about enlightenment, nirvana, truth, but they never seem to become life and death problems. They remain questions – philosophical, theological – and you can go on living the way you are living and you can go on thinking and reading and writing but the world of truth has nothing to do with reading and writing.
When a woman becomes interested in enlightenment, her interest has a totally different quality. It becomes her whole life – not just one item on the laundry list but the only item.
The woman is naturally capable of being one-pointed. That is not true about the man. Both are necessary, both help each other to create a rich life. But they can be great friends about the beyond also. They can help, discuss, meditate together, start changing their loving toward more and more a meditative state.
Men have been helped by women in another way also. The woman has been such a nuisance that because of her, the man started thinking of enlightenment. It is an escape – from the woman! He calls it the world but the woman is the world. And for thousands of years, man has been escaping from the woman, from the children, from the world – but these escapists have not attained anything worthwhile. Through escape, through fear, you cannot attain truth or love.
So in this ugly manner also women have helped men – forced them, rather – toward enlightenment. Men cannot do even this to women.
In a small school, a teacher was asking the students – small boys and girls, “Can any one of you describe a strange animal that nobody else has seen?”
One small boy raised his hand. Even the teacher was surprised – “Where has he found a strange animal?” The whole class could not believe it, because this was the first time…. That small guy was a very silent boy. He used to stay at the back of the class, never creating any nuisance, never asking anything. And he was so certain of his answer that he was raising his hand.
Finally the teacher said, “What is your answer?”
He said, “The animal lives with me.”
The woman said, “What? You are a strange fellow! First, you shocked everybody that you have seen a strange animal that nobody has seen and now you say the animal lives with you?”
He said, “Yes. It is nobody else but my daddy.”
The woman said, “Your daddy? But I am talking about animals!”
And the boy said, “You yourself have said that anima means life, and animals mean ‘those who are living.’ And certainly my father is living. And I call him a strange animal because when he goes from the house, he goes like a lion and when he comes back to the house, he enters like a mouse. He is…outside you should see him! And you would not believe it if will saw him inside the house.”
Man cannot help in that way. He cannot create so much trouble for the woman that she starts thinking of renouncing the world. The man has certainly been helped, rightly or wrongly – rightly, very few times; wrongly, most of the time, he is driven toward enlightenment.
But the ugliest thing man has done is that he has not shown any gratefulness toward women. Whether their means were right or wrong, he has reached enlightenment; at least the woman deserves to be thanked for it. But perhaps they never thought about it in this way. They thought it was because of their understanding of the life of the world that they were going to the Himalayas. It was not understanding, it was really weakness in facing and encountering situations which are on every step in life and remaining silent, peaceful, blissful.
So man has chosen to drop the world and move to the mountains. It has not helped anybody. Those who have moved to the mountains have fallen into a kind of retardedness. Mind is a mechanism, it needs use. It needs situations where either it has to react or to respond or just to remain neutral, a witness, not bothering about it at all. But in the mountains where life is not around you, with just the rocks and with the trees, you will not come to a fight. They will not provoke your anger, your hatred; they will not provoke your ambition, because nobody is trying to be the president there.
A great emperor came to see a Zen master. He brought a beautiful robe, studded with diamonds. He wanted to be initiated into meditation and this was just a small gift.
The Zen master took the gift with great respect, but he said, “You are putting me in an embarrassing situation. It will be very kind of you, if you don’t feel hurt, to please take this robe. It is perfectly suitable in your court. If I use it here, monkeys will giggle, wolves will laugh and the whole mountain will whisper wherever I will go: ‘Look at this idiot! We used to think he was a saint.’ Don’t put me in this embarrassing situation. You take the robe away, it is enough that you brought it.”
Men and women have to live together on the earth but they have not learned yet how to be together and yet not lose their individuality, how to be together so much so that they are almost one, without disturbing this oneness in mundane affairs.
Man and woman both can help – and if the right kind of help is available, there will be no need for man to escape to the mountains, to the caves, to the monasteries. There is no need, because you cannot find a better place than your home. A loving atmosphere, people who understand you, people who understand your silence and your meditation, will go hand-in-hand with your love. Even if you get into meditation in the mountains, you will have only one wing. You will not be able to fly to the sun. The other wing you have left in the world, which could have been a tremendous help to you, and you could have been a great help in return.
If a couple gets initiated into meditation together, they are really getting married for the first time. As for your other registration certificates for marriage – they are not valid for me.
To me, there is only one certificate that existence gives you – where love and meditation have been helping each other, supporting each other and opening the doors of the sky for your flight, the flight of the alone to the alone.

Osho,
The German psychologist, Wilhelm Reich, stumbled upon some inner secrets of bio-energy. He also started practicing these on his patients but he was declared anti-social, was imprisoned and pronounced mad. Osho, what is it that Reich was working on and where did he go wrong. What was he missing?
Wilhelm Reich is one of the most important names in the world of psychology. Perhaps he was second only to Sigmund Freud – but he was the youngest disciple of Sigmund Freud and before I answer your question, I have remembered something which is the only incident in the long life of Sigmund Freud which shows something of Zen. It is something which was always present around the great masters but you can’t expect it in Sigmund Freud’s life. I want to tell you about it for the important reason that even a man like Sigmund Freud has the potential of being a mystic. If he missed it, that is another thing.
Wilhelm Reich was continually writing letters to Sigmund Freud. He was young – perhaps thirty-five, half the age of Sigmund Freud – and Sigmund Freud was not interested in such a young person. His work was long and he had old colleagues with whom he was working and his movement had become almost international. Now he was unable to go on taking new students and new responsibilities, so he refused. And he refused his best student.
But Wilhelm Reich was a German, stubborn; you could not just reject him and then things are finished. He went anyway to an appointment that had been canceled. He knocked on the door and Sigmund Freud himself opened the door. They looked at each other. There was a moment of silence.
Sigmund Freud said, “But I have canceled the meeting.”
Wilhelm Reich said, “But I have not – and certainly a meeting means a meeting of two persons, so it is only you who has canceled it. From my side, I am still available and I thought that I should present myself because I have not canceled it.”
Sigmund Freud again looked at Wilhelm Reich as if hesitating or weighing…”What to do with this man?” He said to him, “I am old. You are too young; I will not be able to finish my teaching. And you may not agree with me because there is a generation gap. So why waste your time? Start on your own, you have my blessings.”
With tears in his eyes, Wilhelm Reich thanked Sigmund Freud and returned home. He learned about human energies, about the functioning of the mind, about levels of consciousness – and it was good that he was refused, because he opened a totally new door and he went on thanking Sigmund Freud his whole life; “If he had not refused me, I would have been just a Freudian. At that moment I was hurt but I am immensely obliged to him that he left me alone. I had to start from scratch but I went in a totally different direction and now I can see that all of Sigmund Freud’s work is dream analysis and has nothing to do with reality.”
Dreams are only shadows. At the most, psychoanalysis can give you normal dreams, can help you to avoid nightmares. But more than that has not happened.
Wilhelm Reich started working on human energy. Naturally, if you work on human energy you are going to come to the source of all – that is sexual energy. The moment he touched upon sexual energy, all the religions were against him. The government was against him, the psychologists were against him, and his situation was a very strange one.
He had come to experience that when two lovers are approaching closer to each other, there is a magnetic force – if there is love. If there is no love, then only two bodies meet, but not two energies.
He had a scientific mind. He made a box in which two persons would make love. His idea was that the energy love creates can be caught and can be used. Now this was a troublesome thing. He could not show anything – the box was empty. There was no way to materialize the biological energy, but he gathered every possible evidence.
Somebody was suffering from impotence. Wilhelm Reich would put him in the box and his impotence would disappear, at least for a few days, as if his battery had been recharged. It was an indirect proof but something had happened. In the box, something had happened, the box was not empty.
He told lovers, “Even without loving, you can simply lie down, cuddling, melting into each other.” His work was strange, hard…and it was made more difficult by the society because they started immediately condemning him, saying that he was in conspiracy with the devil – just like me! – saying that sex had to be renounced and he was teaching people some strange exercises.
Those strange exercises show his genius. He had no idea of Tantra, he had never been to the East. But the exercises that he found are ten thousand years old. He discovered them and thousands of witnesses who were healed by him…because soon he started healing other patients, not only the sexual ones. Because sex energy is pure energy, it can be converted into many forms. It can become your intelligence, it can become your silence. He started treating people.
The treatment was simple: he would just put them in the box. They would remain for fifteen minutes or twenty minutes, a few sessions – and they were cured. But medical science was against him because “this man cannot practice medicine.”
This is how law is blind. This man cured thousands of people of strange diseases which were not curable by ordinary, official medicine but that couldn’t be counted. The question was whether he had a registration: “Is he licensed to practice?”
Wilhelm Reich said, “I don’t use medicine, I don’t prescribe anything. My whole medicine is the box. If you accept it as medicine, then the medical faculties of your universities have to prove what kind of medicine is there. When I tell you to look into what I have found, you think I am crazy and when I cure people, then I am criminal. I have not harmed anybody.”
But medical science, the Christian Church, the government – all started many cases against him. You can start any case – it may be absolutely false, unfounded, but you can harass the person for years. So many cases…and the man became so tense and there was nobody to support him, not even the people of his own profession. They were against him because their psychoanalysis would die if his energy box succeeded.
Medicine is not ready to accept somebody who has no medical certificates. His friends left him. He was in great agony because he knew he had found something of great value for humanity and he also saw that he could not convince anybody. He was only convincing people that he was crazy. People were simply laughing, making cartoons, bringing court cases against him.
Finally he was jailed because he was practicing medicine without a license. Now you see the tricky world. He was not practicing medicine, he was practicing healing – that you can say, but you cannot say he was practicing medicine. He had not harmed anybody, and he was ready to cooperate with any research group. He was available to talk about everything he had discovered.
But his discoveries were going against Christianity, his discoveries were going against your so-called morality. His discoveries were going against your whole social structure, educational structure, political structure.
He was one of the greatest revolutionaries ever and he has remained unknown, unrespected, unremembered. And in jail, they must have tortured him immensely. He was not a man who can fall apart easily; he was a very integrated person and the people who knew him testified that it is very difficult to find such a strong, well-rooted and grounded person – but he went mad in jail.
I suspect he was forced to go into madness. It is very easy to drive anybody mad when all the powers are in your hands and the person is made absolutely helpless. When he became mad…. This is the world: when he was at the peak of his fame, there were friends, there were colleagues, there was a beautiful woman who loved him. But when he came out of jail, the woman divorced him, the friends disappeared, the colleagues made it clear to him that they didn’t want any more connection with him because even to be connected with him created suspicion.
It is sad that he died, but I will say he was forced to die. If you boycott a person in such a way that he becomes an island in the great ocean of humanity – separate, isolated, cannot communicate with anybody, everybody thinks he is mad – naturally, his will to live will disappear.
He shrank and died. And it is strange that after his death his work has remained where he left it. It has immense potentiality. It needs to be developed and it needs to be developed in collaboration with Tantra.
I call Wilhelm Reich a modern Tantra master, although he was not aware of it. Perhaps in his past lives he may have known the secrets of Tantra – because his work contained the secrets of Tantra.
You will not believe that in India there were at one time, two thousand years ago, two hundred thousand followers of a special group of tantrikas. They lived naked. Couples used one gown, just one loose gown around both, made of a special silk which prevented the radiation of any kind of energy from going out or in. They would go for begging or anything but they would remain together, naked, in their gown.
They were doing a great experiment, of melting and mixing the female and the male bio-electricity. Because the very meeting of this bio-electricity can help you to go into deep meditation without much effort in fighting with your thoughts. There were one hundred thousand couples and Raja Bhoj, the king in those days, was so furious – “This is destroying our whole morality, this is corrupting our children. Children will see and they will ask, what kind of people are these? – naked in one gown…. These people will corrupt our whole religion and tradition.”
Bhoj decided to kill all of them. One hundred thousand couples – that means two hundred thousand people – were killed all over the country, burned alive. Not a single couple was left alive; their literature was burned, their temples were burned. Never before or after has any tradition been so brutally destroyed, so inhumanely destroyed.
But when you bring up the subject of sex, immediately you annoy all the people who are in power because nobody who is in power wants people to live to their optimum sexually. They want you to live your minimum sexually because at the minimum you can be enslaved. At the maximum, you are so powerful, you are so intelligent – you are a rock and you cannot be destroyed. Whoever tries to destroy you will be destroyed.
Wilhelm Reich will have a revival because what he was doing was absolutely scientific. No Christianity can prevent it, no government can prevent it. And perhaps….
I have so many sannyasins educated in psychology, in psychoanalysis, in analytical psychology and different schools – perhaps a few of my sannyasins will start working on Wilhelm Reich. He belongs to us. I give him posthumous sannyas.

============================================================

Osho,
Waiting for you to get well, there came a point where I wasn't waiting anymore for something – it simply became just waiting. Discovering the beauty and sweetness of it was so precious. Waiting needs no patience. It is like living in moonlight – a mysterious quiet joy, so nourishing and restful, becoming a womb connected with you in a circular flow of energy. And just when I felt I could go on waiting forever and ever – wondering if I was becoming too much of an Indian! – you shower on us again the gift of your physical presence, the golden bright sunshine setting me aflame again.
Osho, can you ever be as happy with us as we are with you?
Purna, the experience has been immensely valuable.
On the path of mystery, all objects are nothing but excuses – because you cannot wait without an object, without it being for something.
The moment waiting is for something, it is desire; it is not waiting. And by its very nature, desire goes on becoming narrower.
You love – the beginning of love is a wider experience, because love has not become desire yet. You have not started to take your beloved for granted. The calamity of marriage has not happened yet, you are still free to move in any direction. The other is not yet binding. The other is not yet a hell because there is no relationship yet. No promises are yet given, no decisions for tomorrow are yet taken. You are entirely satisfied with the moment.
When you are in love, who cares about the future, about a life beyond death? When you are in love, life is here at the very center of your love, but only before you commit the common fallacy of humanity. You love somebody but the love is not defined yet, is not reduced to law – you have not been to the marriage registrar’s office, you have not been to any priest to destroy your love and give you a guarantee.
You have not asked for the guarantee yet – that’s why you are free.
You have not asked the other person to be a certain way and only then you will love. Your love is still unconditional, you love the person as he or she is. Your love is not yet possessive.
But soon that moment will come, and out of this beautiful experience of expansion of consciousness you will start being afraid to lose it.
Who knows about tomorrow?
The woman may turn away, the man may not recognize you.
Basically, we are strangers. And all that we know about each other is arbitrary – the name, the address, the face, the beauty – because all these will be changing.
Your beloved may have the most beautiful eyes and tomorrow, blindness is possible. Unless you have learned to love as the other is, the beautiful beginning, the beautiful sunrise in your consciousness, will turn soon into a dark night of the soul.
The same things that you used to love now create anger, now create hatred. The same things that you used to appreciate are now nothing but nagging…. The reception room was beautiful, and because of the beauty of the reception room you have entered a jail.
But this is not the only possibility, of lovingness turning into a narrow, ugly desire to dominate, to possess, to be jealous of. If this were all, no intelligent person would have tolerated life for a single moment. For the intelligent person, suicide would have been the only way out.
But it is not so – because there is an alternative.
Love can become too much concentrated on the object, the beloved. And this is the misery; then you become dependent and nobody loves dependence.
The alternative is that love does not become addressed to a single person or a single object, but takes a diametrically opposite dimension – not toward the object but toward one’s own subjectivity.
One becomes love.
It is not a question of loving someone, of being in love with someone. It is simply a transformation of your consciousness: love is your fragrance. It has nothing to do with anybody else in the world.
That’s what happened, when you were waiting and waiting for me.
A moment is bound to come – if you are silent, joyous, trusting – when waiting can become a depth in your soul. And because you are not waiting for something or someone, you are the waiting – a silent watchfulness. And because you are not concerned with anything particular, objective, then everything that happens feels as if you were waiting for this.
All the flowers bloom for you and all the stars shine for you. Because you have not attached yourself to a particular flower, you have simply become an opening, a loving, a waiting consciousness.
This is not only true about waiting; it is true about all spiritual qualities. Either the quality can move toward an object or it can move toward one’s own being. When there is no object, the energy is bound to move inward – energy cannot remain without movement.
Energy is movement.
When there is nothing outside, your own life forces turn inward to the very source of your being.
And this is what I call enlightenment.
You cannot desire enlightenment; you can only wait.
You are asking me if I love you in the same way, with the same intensity, with the same totality as you love me.
It will be difficult for you to understand: there is a love which is not the love that you have known.
Your love, howsoever pure, carries something of biological unconsciousness in it. You are not totally free to love anybody.
Suddenly one day you fall in love with a person.
It is not your action. It is something unconscious in you – your chemistry, your biology, your physiology. They are all conspiring and giving you the idea of love.
I cannot love you in that sense.
My love cannot become a bondage to you in any way.
And my love is qualitatively different: I love not because you are lovable; I love because I cannot help it. And it is not a question of loving someone. Just the way I breathe in and out, and my heart beats, love radiates on its own accord.
It is possible that you will see that I love someone more, someone less…. Because you always think in terms of quantity: more or less. And your conclusion has a certain validity, too. But you are not looking at things right side up; you are looking at things upside down.
My love is just like the light – it is neither more for somebody nor less for somebody. But still, for the blind man it will not exist. For the one who cannot see properly, it will be dim. And for one who can see with a clarity it will have a different intensity.
It is the same light, but it will depend how much you can receive.
If you are totally open, you can receive it all.
And because it is not a quantity – it is pure quality; hence indivisible – I can give you my whole heart without having any trouble in giving my whole heart to many other people. Because it is not mathematics, such that I have given the whole heart to one person and now what am I doing? – I am finished!
That is not my experience.
I have always given my whole heart, because I am lazy. Who bothers to cut one’s own heart into pieces? And then to give in a miserly way, pieces…and those pieces will be dead.
The heart is alive only in its totality, in its organic unity.
But the trouble is in your wrong conditioning.
I can give to the whole world, to each single individual, my whole heart – and still my whole heart remains with me to be given to any newcomer. Because newcomers are always coming!
You may not be able to understand many things about what the situation is when you are love. For example, when you are love, your love cannot be hot. And in this world, people want hot love. Hot dogs to eat and hot love to enjoy, and their paradise is complete!
My love is neither hot nor cold. It is cool.
Unless you become very calm and cool, you will not be able to understand it. You have known only the hot love – and remember, the danger with the hot love is that sooner or later it is going to become cool. Everything hot is bound to become cool sooner or later, and the final end is that it will become cold. You cannot prevent it, it is a natural process.
So each hot love turns into hot hate. But you are accustomed to hot – either friendship or enmity, but it has to be hot. You are so insensitive that unless something is very hot you cannot feel it. Hence, your question.
My love is cool.
To understand it, you will have come to the same temperature.
And cool love is not only love, it is much more. Because of its coolness, it is meditation, it is silence, it is serenity, it is tranquillity, it is centering. It is not a small phenomenon.
I love you more than you can ever be loved.
But my love and your experience of love are so different that you will have to change gear. This is what happened while you were waiting. You waited one day, two days, three days…. And I was sending messages: “Within one or two days I will be starting….” You know I am crazy, I have my own ways of working.
I would not have started speaking. It is because of Darshan, Bhadra and Hansa. I was not seeing people for the simple reason that I find it impossible to say no to anything. And when Hansa recited a small piece of Urdu poetry, which means “I don’t have any complaint. As it is, I am happy; I don’t have any complaint. But life without you is not life at all….”
It was impossible to say no.
So I said to them, “Inform my people that I will start speaking today. Rather than saying no to you, I can stop again!” I have my ways – and this time I will not allow Bhadra, Hansa and Darshan to see me!
But this is significant to understand: whether I am speaking or not speaking, whether I am seeing you or not seeing you, if you can be here feeling the invisible presence, that is more than can be expected of human beings. And that is the golden key.
And in what situation you will wake up nobody knows. Everybody is asleep for different reasons and needs different situations to wake up.
Perhaps it helped Purna greatly. She was waiting one day, the next day…. Naturally when you have to wait too long, waiting becomes not an excitement but a settled state. She settled with waiting. She forgot even what she was waiting for. This is the moment when energy starts turning inward. And to shower in your own energy is the greatest ecstatic experience available to man.
But the second part of her question…she will have to learn a little more, to experience a little more about love – object-less love; love not as a relationship but as a state of being. Then she will be surprised: it is cool, not hot. It is non-possessive, it is non-jealous, it has no conscious or unconscious desire to dominate the other.
True love is not a beggar; it does not ask you to “love me.”
True love shares its whole being, its whole joy, all the songs, all the flowers, all the stars. It is a celebration. And you are not obliged – true love is always obliged that you participated in the celebration, that “You allowed my love an entry into your being,” that “You trusted me so much that I am grateful.”
I know you love me.
But I would like you to rise higher, because right now you are just walking on the ground, the lowest rung of the ladder. And you have the capacity to take off into the sky – sky beyond skies. You can reach to the very climax of existence and its beauty, its truth, its eternity, its deathlessness.
What has happened to you, Purna, continue it in other realms, in other directions.
In love, drop the object.
In meditation, don’t meditate upon somebody or something – drop the object.
All over the world, whenever you tell people to meditate, they immediately ask, “On what?” because verbally, meditation is action, activity.
On what has one to meditate?
Meditation begins only when there is nothing to meditate upon, when there is simply consciousness – you are aware – but you are not concentrating on anything.
Concentration is a kind of imprisonment. And all our educational programs around the world are teaching people to concentrate.
A man like Adolf Hitler creates concentration camps to kill people – his concentration camps are crude and primitive. All the religions have created concentration camps for you, but they are psychological. They have created a certain prison inside your mind. You cannot go out of it because wherever you go, it is always within you. You cannot run; howsoever fast you run, it is always with you.
A Sufi story is….
A man was very much afraid of darkness; he had a paranoia. He was also afraid of aloneness – these two things are always found together. The man who is afraid of darkness will necessarily be afraid of aloneness, and vice-versa. Because darkness gives you a feeling of aloneness in a vast universe. It may be populated with nine hundred billion people, but in darkness you are alone.
As you start a revolution in you, transforming love from objects and pouring it into your own source, you will be absolutely mystified – coming to know that you have so much love that you can bless the whole world.
But your love will be more like compassion, cool, more like friendliness. Your love will be free from its biological, hormonal, chemical past. For the first time it will be beyond matter. For the first time you will not be forced by some blind forces in nature – you will decide.
And when you have so much to give, and when you discover that the more you give, the more you have it, then love is no longer a relationship but a pure sharing, with no desire of gaining anything in return.
Love has gone beyond the world of the marketplace; it is no longer business. It is for the first time pure play, leela.
But about the second part of your question: your love is certainly hotter. And you know, I don’t like heat! You can see…two air conditioners!
You will have to experience a higher and more refined, more purified energy. Only then you can understand whether I love you more or you love me more. Right now it can be said that you love me more. My love is simply love – neither more nor less. I cannot figure out how to love less. I have tried! – but I am ashamed to say to you that I have failed continuously for my whole life. I have not been able to love less and neither can I love more. More and less are words that don’t belong to the spiritual realm. They belong to the world of matter.
The English word matter is from a Sanskrit root, matra. It means that which can be measured. From the same root, matra comes the French word metre.
That which can be measured is not my love.
That which cannot be measured, that which cannot be more or less, that which is just for you to share…. Because this whole existence is made of the stuff called love. As you understand your reality, you have understood in miniature the reality of the whole existence – it is made of the matter called love.
We are living in an ocean of love, unaware.
But there are ways to grow and become aware of the tremendous ecstasies that are possible to you. Just loving a single person you feel so happy…just think of yourself becoming love. The whole existence becomes your beloved – the trees dancing in the wind and the sun, the clouds moving in the sky, a beautiful sunset…. Once you understand that you are part, an intrinsic part of this loving existence, this constantly rejoicing existence, you will drop all boundaries and all limitations on your love, on your intelligence.
You will be reborn – reborn as a Gautam Buddha, a fully awakened consciousness.
Your experience has directed you toward a right source.
Just follow it – with ease, with relaxedness. And much more, so much more that you cannot imagine, is going to shower on you…roses and roses and roses.

Osho,
You have said recently that a sannyasin has no nationality anymore. Do you say the same thing about age? Since I have been a sannyasin, I have felt ageless. I am sixty-two and young people accept me as one of them. How is this possible?
Meditation is a transformation of your whole being. You are no more part of a crowd, no more a cog in the wheel. You have taken your responsibility on your own shoulders; you have become a free individual.
Nationality will disappear, because these are all arbitrary lines, man-made – and their existence is ugly, because their existence shows that man is not mature yet. Otherwise, what is the need to have so many nations, and every nation having great armies…. People are dying in poverty and seventy percent of the national income all over the world goes to the military. Humanity is living on only thirty percent, and the army gets everything better – naturally, because they have sold their lives and they are being prepared for death, either to kill or to be killed.
This seems so useless. Why should there be wars? Why should there be violence? And why should nations continue after five thousand years of experience shows that they are cancerous, destructive?
The man of meditation is bound to be a citizen of the world.
He is not going to be a Christian or a Hindu or a Mohammedan. Because he can contact existence himself; there is no need of any mediator, no need of any priest, holy book, church. All these religions have been creating nothing but bloodshed, burning living human beings and doing all kinds of ugly acts against innocent humanity.
As you become more silent, as your eyes become more clear, as the smoke that surrounds you disappears, then religions, nations, discriminations between black and white, discriminations between men and women – all are going to disappear.
And it is right that you are feeling ageless. Meditation starts taking you beyond time because it is going to take you beyond death.
You will be surprised that in Sanskrit there is only one word for both death and time. It is kal. Kal also means tomorrow – tomorrow there is only death and nothing else; life is today.
As you become peaceful…. Your tensions are your weight. When the tensions are not there, you become weightless.
And the consciousness which is your reality has no time-space limitation. Your body grows from childhood to youth to old age to death – these changes are happening only to the body. These are the changes of the furniture in the house…painting the house, changing its architecture. But the man who lives in the house – the master of the house – is unaffected by all these things.
Consciousness is the master.
Your body is only the house.
So the moment you enter meditation you have touched within yourself something of the universal – which has no age, which has no limitation either of time or space.
This is not only happening to you. I receive many letters from older sannyasins saying that they are feeling so young, and they don’t see any generation gap. They mix with sannyasins and not for a moment does the idea come that they are eighty years old and these are twenty year-old kids. But they communicate and nobody thinks that it is a little strange.
One woman sannyasin from Scotland wrote to me, “Now, Osho it is going too far!” She is seventy-eight, and now she is running after butterflies! And the whole village thinks she has gone mad because she is continuously laughing and enjoying and the village cannot believe it. Because they have seen her, always miserable…they cannot believe what has happened to her. She is behaving like a small child.
She asked me, “What to do? Should I try to behave in the old way?”
I said, “You can try, but you cannot succeed. So don’t waste your time, just go after the butterflies. And why bother about the idiots of the village? You enjoy yourself.”
Meditation is not something mental.
Meditation is something concerned with your being.
Just plugging into it a little…and suddenly everything is different. The body will go in its own way, but you will know that you are not the body. People will die, but you will know that death is impossible. Your own death will come – but meditation prepares you for death so that you can go dancing and singing into the ultimate silence, leaving the form behind and disappearing into the formless.

Osho,
Many people are experimenting with the drug ecstasy. I heard you say once that a lie is sweet in the beginning and bitter in the end. And truth is bitter in the beginning and sweet in the end. I have been meditating, but I don't have the experiences people report from the drug ecstasy. Is the drug like the lie and meditation, the truth? – or am I missing something that could really help me?
Ecstasy can create a chemical change for the time being. It can make you feel a great well-being, more intensity in life, more color in the world. But this is only going to last for few hours and then you will again be back with a thump on the ground, and now life will look even more miserable, because now you have something to compare it with.
Drugs like Ecstasy cannot reach your consciousness. They can only reach your mind. They have nothing parallel to meditation.
Meditation reaches your consciousness. It is a state of no-mind. And drugs like Ecstasy reach only to the mind, and give you a euphoria, beautiful dreams, fantasies which appear to be real. So when people tell you that they have experienced so many beautiful things, you feel sad. You have been meditating and you have not felt anything and these people are feeling things through an ordinary, chemical drug.
Their experiences will not happen to you.
The path of the drug and the path of meditation are totally different.
On the path of meditation, you will experience silence; you will experience a joy without any reason; you will experience immense light, a luminosity arising from your very center – as if you have become a star. But these things only happen in the beginning part of meditation. As meditation grows, all experiences start going.
The ultimate in meditation is a state of no experience.
Just pure nothingness – because that is the source of existence and that is the place where existence goes again and again to renew itself.
Now we have on experimental grounds the conclusion that has been reached in the East by many mystics, that just as everything in existence moves in a circle – stars, sun, the moon, the earth, everything moves in a circle – everything that is born, dies. Earths are born and then they die. Of course, they have a long life. This earth has been here for four million years. But this is not a long life; it is still a child. Four million years means nothing because the sun is almost ten million years old and our sun is not very old; it is one of the youngest in the universe.
There are suns which are so old and so far away that when I came to know about it, it was really shocking. There are suns so far away that they will never know that the earth existed – for the simple reason that when the earth was born four million years ago, the rays that started moving toward the earth from those faraway suns have not yet reached. The distance is so great. By the time they reach, the earth will be finished.
So if somebody from that star were trying to find about the earth, he would miss it completely because it would be lost between two rays. If he were taking a photograph, no image would appear on his film – just emptiness.
In this vast universe, the Eastern mystics have come to realize that even the whole universe goes into death once in a while. Planets die, suns die, stars die – every day new stars are born, new planets are born. Whole solar systems have disappeared, not leaving even a trace behind, and new solar systems have appeared. They say, and I agree with them, that the whole universe dies. Then there is darkness; everything has gone to sleep. And again there will be dawn; again planets will be born, stars will be born – a new cycle of creation. Millions of cycles of creation have happened and they will go on happening.
Your consciousness belongs to the eternal which never dies. At the most, it goes into sleep when the whole universe dies, and comes back in the morning awake, fresh – a new world is beginning.
Just remember one thing: that for all the secrets of life, meditation is the only key. So go deeper into meditation and don’t be bothered about experiences. Just look at those people who are taking Ecstasy. I don’t think it is a dangerous drug, but look at those people. Do you see the light of the eyes of Gautam Buddha? Do you see in their gestures the grace of a Krishna? Do you see something in their life that has changed because of their experiences?
Nothing has changed. They have become more sad, more miserable. Now the only hankering is to get the drug – they can remain hungry, but the drug is needed. They are deceiving themselves.
The only criterion for a right method is that it should transform your life. You will become more peaceful, more loving, more intelligent, more aware. Your life should show it – only then is what you are doing right. If by taking a drug you enjoy dreams, I will not say don’t enjoy dreams because I am always for totality – enjoy totally! But you don’t know anything about meditation. At least, don’t disturb the meditators. You are disturbed…. Soon you will get fed up. Those same scenes which were psychedelic in the beginning will start becoming ordinary. And what are you going to gain?
Your ignorance remains the same, your cruelty remains the same, your anger, your violence, your jealousies remain the same.
Meditation is a science of transforming the qualities of life. It is not just to give you a little consolation or a little entertainment. It is to transform you so that you can become part of the universal circus. It is so hilarious; you just have to be clear enough to see it. Just watch any man and you will be surprised: the world is full of hilarious people, but nobody is taking note. Otherwise you need not go and waste your money – just sit by the side of the road and watch the show.
Don’t be bothered by any experiences that people who are taking drugs will tell you about. Meditation is not concerned with experiences but with the experiencer. Experiences are outside things. Meditation is concerned with you, not what happens to you, not what you see…. A beautiful rose – certainly under the influence of a drug it will look more beautiful, more radiant but still, what is the use? You remain the same person. Your heart does not open its petals, you are as dead as before. Except for meditation there is no way. Drugs can give you hallucinations, illusory experiences….
I am not in any way against anything. My whole approach is to use everything in such a way that it can become a nourishment to life, an evolution to consciousness. I am not against drugs either. It is such a foolishness on the part of governments all over the world that alcohol is not condemned, although alcohol is more dangerous than any of the drugs.
This is how you can see that you are being dominated by fools. Alcohol is allowed, and drugs…. Many of them are harmless, but thousands of people and particularly young men and women are in jails because they were taking drugs that the governments decided should not be taken.
It is strange that the government does not ask the medical colleges to investigate whether they are harmful or not, and if some drug is harmful, but gives a beautiful experience – illusory, hallucinatory, but at least something in this world which is just like a desert…If some drug has some harmful effects, medical science is advanced enough to remove those harmful effects. Drugs can be purified to such an extent that anybody can take them and have the experience. Because no government has the right to prevent anybody from having any experience. He is not harming anybody….
The function of the government should be to take care of people. There are so many medical colleges around the world – do research, find something which gives beautiful experiences to people, nourishment to the body, health to the mind. And you will be surprised at why I am saying this. I am saying this because if good, harmless drugs are made available and people are allowed to take them, these people are soon going to be fed up with the drugs and their experiences.
Sooner or later they are going to move toward meditation – there is no other way.
We will have used the drugs. Without harming the person we will have managed it so that the drug has given him some experience and now he wants something more which the drug cannot give. And in fact, as you take a drug every day its impact goes on declining. Every day you have to add more quantity. But finally, every drug becomes useless, your body becomes immune to it.
I have been with people who have taken all sorts of drugs but they are not drug-addicted people; they are following an ancient path which has used drugs. And then the moment comes when drugs don’t affect them at all. You can give them as much quantity as possible, and nothing happens to them.
In their monasteries they have dangerous serpents, particularly cobras. If you are bitten by a cobra you are finished. And these people allow the cobra to bite on their tongues! In the beginning they have psychedelic experiences, and now the cobra poison cannot kill them…they are full of poison.
The strangest thing is that the cobra dies because the poor cobra has never come across such a man – so full of poisons! The cobra has a small gland in his mouth, that is all – the rest of his body is without any poison. In China, the cobra is a delicacy – just cut the head and you have a beautiful vegetable.
The people I was talking about soon get immune to cobra poison too, and that is their test. Then their master allows them initiation. Now nothing can create hallucination in them.
So drugs have been used in the East for centuries as a help to meditation. Now they have destroyed all possibility in the man that any poison, any drug can create illusion. His consciousness is far stronger now. No poison can kill him, no poison can make him even unconscious – he remains alert and conscious.
As far as I am concerned these people were doing the right thing and it will be good if rather than behaving fascistically, we allow our people to have the experience if they want – but give it in such a way that soon it can indicate to them the path leading toward some meditation.
I am not against drugs. I am not against anything, because everything can be used in the right way and everything can be used in a wrong way. Poison can be medicine and medicine can be poison, it all depends.

============================================================

Osho,
When I listen to your discourses, you take me on an indescribable journey. If afterward someone asks me about what you have said, I hardly remember. But when people ask me personal questions, answers are coming out of my mouth which astonish me the most. Osho, am I becoming a parrot of your words?
Listening to me is less like listening and more like drinking. Although it is a verbal communication, that is only the superficial part of it. Hidden beneath it is the real communion where meanings are absorbed and words are forgotten.
You cannot become my parrot – at least while I am alive.
It is impossible to become my parrot. You will go crazy! My words are so full of contradictions that the poor parrot will be crushed under those contradictions. And it is a sure signal that you are not becoming a parrot because you don’t remember my words. The parrot only remembers words, but whatever is being communicated to you is absorbed.
It has to become part of your blood, your bones, your marrow – not part of your memory. Unless it becomes your blood, your bones and your marrow, it cannot transform you.
And the transformation is happening. You are aware of it, that in answering a personal question or responding to a situation, something comes out of you that is not yours. You are surprised even by your own words – because listening silently, not paying attention to the words but to the wordless message contained in them, you are slowly, slowly moving your very consciousness.
You will not become more knowledgeable here. You will become a new man, a man who knows the meaning of life, a man who has experienced the great benediction of silence and serenity. His actions are bound to reflect his consciousness.
And if you cannot remember my words, don’t be worried about it. You are nourished by the meaning, and it is the meaning that will change you, your actions, your responses. It is not the power of the words that transforms anybody. There is no need to be afraid, you are on the right track.
One thing has to be understood: you remember only things which you have not understood. Things that you have understood need not be remembered – they will act, they will be in your eyes. They will be in your gestures, they will be in your life, they will be in your love, they will be in everything that you do; but they will not be part of your memory system. They are far higher than the memory because they don’t belong to the mind.
Mind is the lowest part of your consciousness. It is good enough as far as the world is concerned, but it is not of any use if you are thinking to go on an inner pilgrimage. You will have to leave that mind behind. Its whole training is for the outside world. It will create all kinds of hindrances if you start moving inward.
It is a trained outsider.
So it is good that words are not being caught by your memory system. Your listening is so total that the words go directly to your very being, to your consciousness – they don’t need the mechanism of the mind.
The mechanism of the mind is good as far as the objective world is concerned but in the inner, in the interior of your being, mind has no entry. Mind has never entered into the innermost core of any human being in the whole of history; the very nature of its functioning prohibits it. It is by nature, extrovert. The moment you start moving inward, you are separating from your mind system, you are leaving it behind. Now you are moving on the wings of consciousness.
If what I am saying to you is becoming a reality in your life, who cares whether you remember my words or not? It is perfectly right not to remember them; any remembrance of the words will be an obstruction. Let only pure meaning spread to the deepest core of your being where words have no access, where only wordless meaning is able to enter.
A bishop, thinking to convert a Zen master – because he saw thousands of disciples, he thought it better if this old man were converted; then naturally all these disciples would be converted too. With great respect he approached the master. He had brought with him the Holy Bible. He opened the chapter containing the Sermon on the Mount. He wanted to show the Zen master the best of Jesus and if he agrees…and it is very difficult to disagree with the Sermon on the Mount. The argument inside his mind was that it is very difficult, almost impossible, to disagree with the Sermon on the Mount unless you have a superb, logical mind, something parallel to the genius of Friedrich Nietzsche – then perhaps you may be able to disagree.
Nietzsche is the only man in the whole of history who has disagreed with Jesus, and not on weak points but on the strongest. The ordinary way is to find loopholes, weaknesses, and hammer on them. If you cannot find them, create them – nobody is so much interested in going to the original sources to look.
The world lives on newspapers.
Jesus says “Man cannot live by bread alone.” I say to you, a man can live without bread but not without the newspaper. The newspaper is his whole wisdom. These are people who cannot argue against Jesus, Zarathustra or Lao Tzu.
For example, Jesus says, that God is love, God is just, always fair, always compassionate. The Old Testament’s God is a very angry God – never forgiving, never forgetting; nobody is going to avoid the punishment for his evil acts. The concept of Jesus’ God seems to be far more refined.
Loving, just, fair, compassionate…it seems to be closer to the human heart. But Friedrich Nietzsche criticizes it and his criticism is foundational and crucial. He says, “You cannot say God is love because wherever love is, hate is and if your God knows no hate, he cannot know love. How will he find it out that this is love? To define love, a certain experience of hate is needed. To define silence, noise is needed. To define beauty, ugliness is needed. You are alive because every day many people are dying and you can see the distinction. If nobody was dying, you would not even be able to imagine what life is.”
His criticism is very psychological. He is saying that you are taking one part, one side of a coin, and leaving the other side. This is impossible. You cannot have a coin with only one side. You can go on making it thinner but the other side will remain – either both or none.
Nietzsche says Jesus’ God is nothing but the completion of the Jewish concept of God. He was anger, he was hate, he was rage. Jesus has taken the other side of the coin, but both are halves and God is whole. If there is any God, he can only be whole.
Jesus says, “If somebody slaps you don’t be angry, but with humbleness give him the other cheek also.” It is such a beautiful idea, but a man like Friedrich Nietzsche has an insight and maturity which the common masses cannot have. His criticism is one of the examples of the highest reaches of logic.
Nietzsche says, “If somebody hits me on one of my cheeks, I am not so inhumane as to give him my other cheek. That is egoistic. It is trying to prove that ‘you are just an ordinary human being – I am a messiah, a messenger of God. I forgive you and if you enjoy hitting me, you can hit me more.’” Nietzsche’s point is that you are reducing the other person to utter humiliation. Nobody in two thousand years’ history has raised this question.
Nietzsche says, “If somebody hits me, I will hit him as hard as I can because I am just as human as you are. I don’t want to prove myself holier than you, higher than you, superior to you. I respect your humanity and I accept your challenge. You have slapped my face. You have given the challenge to me.”
He is saying that Jesus’ idea is disrespectful. And certainly if you look deep into its psychology, you will find it is insulting. You are not accepting the other man as a man equal to you. He is an ignorant man, unenlightened. You are awakened. You are creating a distance between yourself and the person who has slapped you.
Nietzsche says, “I cannot create that distance. That distance is nothing but fulfillment of a very subtle kind – and fulfillment not of your being but only of your ego.”
But this bishop thought that by reading from the Sermon on the Mount, the old man was bound to be convinced that Jesus was as enlightened as Gautam Buddha. He read two lines and the old man said, “That’s enough. Whoever has written these will become enlightened in some future life but as far as this life is concerned, forget all about it.”
The bishop said, “But the lines are so beautiful – each word a diamond unto itself.”
The Zen master said, “It is not a question of words. While you were reading, I was also listening to the gaps. The man was articulate as far as words are concerned but the gaps expose him completely. What he is saying is only mind stuff, it is not his experience. But the man is good. Don’t be worried; in some future life he will become an enlightened person.”
Look – life is not a difficult matter. It becomes a problem when your life wants to go one way and your mind drags you in another and you are in a conflict, torn apart. You can go to neither side…because half of you is trying to go in another direction.
Life becomes absolutely simple once you start functioning from something that is higher than your mind. In the beginning for any seeker the whole search is to find a space above the mind.
Once you have found a small space above the mind, all dualism disappears, all tensions, all anxieties disappear. And strangely enough, the mind which was never in your control, suddenly surrenders itself to you.
Mind as a master is a disaster.
Mind as a servant is a beautiful gift of nature. You just have to find the master – and it is not far away.
It is just above the mind.
Only one step.

Osho,
You recently talked about how bogus channeling is. As a Rajneesh group leader, I feel that my work is most successful when I manage to get out of the way and become a vehicle for you. At these times, whatever I'm saying or doing, I feel your love and silence pouring through me. Am I in a delusion, like all the other people who think they channel? Could you please say what my function is as a group leader, as your disciple?
The people who have been proposing for thousands of years that they are the mediums of God – in other religions of “gods” – or of those masters who are no more in the body, are becoming vehicles to them, mediums to them. The possibility is there.
If you have loved me, even when I am not in the body there can be still a contact. For love it makes no difference. But the whole thing depends on the medium – his purity, his silence, the absolute stillness of his mind. The silence has to be so great that it is as if he is no longer present – only silence is there. He has become just a hollow bamboo.
I criticized those Californian pretenders who are talking about channeling themselves with dead masters, with the people who have gone beyond and cannot come back to the earth because their work on the earth is complete. These people in California have not gone into any discipline which makes them mediums. They know nothing of meditation. They know nothing of the state of no-mind – because only in the state of no-mind is there a possibility of contacting some unembodied soul.
These people who have become channels are not in any meditative state, one thing. The second thing is that whatever messages they are bringing are such crap that it is disrespectful toward the dead. Those poor fellows cannot say anything now, that “this is not my message.”
When a message comes from a master it has to be something so absolutely needed that the masters who are no more in their bodies feel that a message should be sent to all unconscious, sleeping, blind people. But it is only when there is something urgent; otherwise, there is no need.
I have looked into a few of the books which these channels have produced – they are absolutely rubbish! They can be valued only by weighing them – that much paper has been wasted. I have not come across a single mediumistic book which shows the greatness or the grandeur of a Gautam Buddha. And strangely enough, all these mediums are not mentioning the names of the real masters because then, compared to their statements, the rubbish message that they bring will look too poor.
If somebody says, “This is a message from Gautam Buddha,” then it has to be of his quality. So they are talking about masters who have never happened, they are talking about masters who happened on the continent of Atlantis which has drowned. Fortunately there is no proof now, no document, no evidence left about whether there was such a master, ever.
But I can say that these statements are not coming from any master. The statements themselves are not luminous. There is nothing that gives them the authority of experience. It is all gibberish.
And you should also see that these people who have been chosen for this great work of becoming vehicles…their lives don’t prove it. They are just as greedy, as angry, as jealous as anybody else. Their mediumship would have transformed them. In fact, unless they were transformed, they could not become mediums.
My sannyasins working around the world in therapy groups have felt that sometimes they are open to me, available to me, and sometimes they are closed. It is human nature, ups and downs; they are not enlightened yet.
Sometimes they see the eternal snows, far away in the Himalayas; but they are far away and just once in a while, when there are not clouds and the sun is shining, you can see them.
But you are not there.
When a sannyasin is closed, his first work should be not on the group participants, his first work should be upon himself. He has to open, he has to be available to me. This is simply an excuse – because if he is open to me, he is open to the whole existence.
The moment you open your door, immediately the fragrance of the flowers enters without making any noise. The sun rays enter. A cool breeze comes in. You have opened the door to the whole universe.
To be available to the master is just an excuse. You will be afraid to be open to the whole universe – it will be too much.
The master convinces you that there is no need to open all the doors and all the windows: “You just open a small window – a special window for me.” But once you open even a small window, the whole sky enters in. And the joy, the peace, the beauty that you feel will make you open all the windows and all the doors.
My therapists have been seeing the difference in their work. When they are open and available they can see and feel so decisively, so indubitably, that something from beyond is pouring through them. They have just become a hollow bamboo, playing the song, allowing the song to flow. The song is not of the flute. The greatness of the flute is that it does not hinder the song in any way but helps it, allows it to reach into the world.
There is no question of channeling – although I have given you my number. It is a difficult number.
Zero is my number and unless you are zero, you cannot find it. You have to be zero to be in tune with me.
But then you will see a tremendous change in the quality of your work. You can do miracles to the participants.
If you are closed, you may be able to conduct a group because you know the technical side…. Do you know the difference between the scientist and the technician? The technician is not a scientist, and the scientist is not a technician. The scientist discovers the hidden treasures of existence and also discovers the techniques and methods to use those treasures. The technician is only concerned with the technique. He is not a discoverer, but he knows exactly what has to be done.
There will be a great difference of quality but it may not be felt by the people who have never known anything higher.
A therapist who is not in deep meditation, is not open, is not merging into the universe, will not be able to become a real help to the participants. Perhaps a consolation…perhaps those participants will feel the euphoria for a few days and then it will fade out. Then again they need another group. They become addicts.
Group addicts are in the same category as drug addicts. The group has not helped them to be free and independent; the group has made them slaves. Now they will be continuously searching – this group, that group.
But no group is going to give them an insight into themselves because the therapists themselves are not in a situation where all problems are solved, all questions dissolved, where they are simply relishing each breath. They have their problems just like you have.
It happened….
One of the great psychologists, one of the founders of the movement of psychology, Alfred Adler – he is one of the trinity: Sigmund Freud, Carl Gustav Jung and Alfred Adler, these are the three pillars. He was talking to his students and a very embarrassing situation arose. One statement he made, that “My experience…” and it was a lifelong experience of the thousands of patients he had studied. He said, “My experience with people is that it is not just an accident that a person becomes a teacher in a school. He wants domination. He is not strong enough to become a terrorist, but he can become a teacher and can torture thirty small boys and girls.”
It seems there is some truth in what he is saying.
Everybody chooses a particular profession; there must be a psychology behind it. It has been found in many surveys that the people who study medicine are the people who are most afraid of death. Your doctors are more afraid of death than anybody else. They have come to medicine in search, unconsciously, of finding a way that leads beyond death. It is not a deliberate decision but if they are hypnotized and asked, the answer comes clear: they are afraid of death and they have joined the profession out of that fear.
In the life of one of the emperors of India, Aurangzeb, there is an incident. He had revolted against his father, kept him in jail, and taken over the empire. He writes in his autobiography: “My father requested of me from jail, ‘I would like to have at least thirty students to whom I can teach religion, literature, poetry. In this way I will remain engaged, and engaged in an activity which is very close to my heart. I love children, I love poetry, and now there is no work for me.’”
The comment of his son is, “He still wants to dominate. The desire for having thirty students has nothing to do with education because in his whole life he was never interested in education; he never opened great universities or colleges or anything. He never did anything for poetry or literature. Now, in jail, he wants thirty students so that he can dominate. He can still remain an emperor although the empire will be very small – only thirty students.”
But people are even satisfied with one person – one woman, one man. Just a small empire confined in a small flat.
Adler was saying that politicians are all suffering from an inferiority complex. They feel inferior for any stupid reason. For example, Lenin, the man who created the Soviet revolution and the Soviet Union was very much worried and concerned and always was conscious of the fact that his legs were small. His upper body was bigger and his lower body was very small. His legs could not reach to the floor. Sitting on the chair, his legs were just dangling there and he was trying to hide them in every possible way so that nobody would see them hanging there in the air.
That was Lenin’s problem. That created the Russian revolution. That made him the greatest revolutionary in the world. That made him the greatest, most powerful man on one-sixth of the land of the earth – the Soviet Union is one-sixth of the land of the whole earth. It is almost two continents. It starts in Europe and it ends in Asia, it covers the whole of Europe and Asia.
All politicians are in search of power. It is a will to power. But why? You must be feeling somehow powerless. You want to prove to yourself and to the world that you are not powerless because you know that if you don’t do anything, you will suffer your whole life from inferiority and everybody else will look at you as inferior.
This situation has to be changed.
In this way, Adler was going to describe every profession possible, and what is the psychological reason behind it. Just then, a student stood up and asked, “What about the psychologists? Is there something loose in their heads? Why does anybody choose psychology? According to the philosophy you have expounded there must be something wrong with his mind, and I agree totally with it.”
Adler was very much shocked – that meant he was mentally retarded, sick, something was wrong in his mind. He never mentioned that theory again! He mentioned it only once in his whole life. That is rare, because the theory is very significant and very true.
Why does a man want to be a therapist? Has he done his own therapy? Is he finished with his homework? If not, then what right has he got to interfere in other people’s lives, their minds, their unconscious, their superconscious? He has only read these words, and he is trying these words on poor people – poor because they are being treated as guinea pigs, poor because they have paid two hundred and fifty dollars to be treated as a guinea pig!
And there is a human tendency which is not taken note of…. When somebody pays two hundred and fifty dollars for a therapy session, if he says after the session, “Nothing happened,” then everybody will say, “You are an idiot! They cheated you – two hundred and fifty dollars gone. And we have been telling you that you were hanging around wrong people, but you never listened.”
Now two hundred and fifty dollars are gone, the whole week is destroyed, and to be treated by people as an idiot…this can be avoided.
They come out and before they get out of the therapy premises, they start smiling. They start walking as they have never done before, so light! Now, let the people ask.
And people will say, “We were wrong, something has happened. Look at that man – singing a song, unafraid of the world. He has never been like that. It is worth two hundred and fifty dollars.” And when they ask him, he tells them what great things have happened, great experiences. This way he saves face.
This is an old phenomenon, and the psychology is simple.
I must have told you a story….
A man was caught in the middle of the night, in the bed of somebody else’s wife. The man was not supposed to come home that night but his work was finished so he came home earlier. He could not believe it. His wife was very devoted – that’s how he had known her – and this man was also well known to him. He was certainly a nice gentleman, but what was happening was not nice. He became so furious that he took out a knife and cut off the man’s nose.
The man was well respected in the society…now everybody would be asking tomorrow: “What happened? How come you were found in that house? Why did you go there in the middle of the night?” – a thousand and one questions, and he had no answer. And this nose, absent, will be seen more than when it was present and nobody bothered about it.
There was not much time. He escaped in the night.
On the way, reaching the other town, he met another traveler who was going in the same direction. The traveler asked, “What happened to your nose?”
He smiled, he danced….
The traveler said, “What is the matter?”
He said, “It is so simple. My master used to say, ‘It is very simple but unless you experience it yourself, there is no way.’”
He asked, “What do you mean by all these things?”
He said, “I have experienced God. Only the nose has to be sacrificed, the nose symbolizes the ego.”
The man said, “That’s right! I am also a seeker. It will be a blessing if you accept me as your first disciple.”
So he took the man by the side of the road, behind a bush and cut off his nose. The nose was gone. The man looked all around and he said, “But I don’t see any God.”
The master said, “Neither do I. But what to do? When your nose is gone some reasonable, rational and acceptable explanation is needed. Now you go into town, smile, dance and whoever asks, ‘What is the matter?’ just tell him that, ‘It was such a simple thing and religions have made it so complicated just to exploit people. You have only to cut off your nose. Except for the nose, there is nothing between you and God.’”
People said, “We never heard this philosophy before. We have seen all kinds of scriptures and all kinds of religious preachers have been in the town. Nobody has told us that the nose is the problem.”
He said, “You come to my master. He does not go inside the town, he remains outside. I am his chief disciple. Those who are interested in seeing God, I can give them appointments.”
A few people were interested. In the evening, a few more noses disappeared and everybody looked all around and said, “But where is God?”
The master said, “Don’t be foolish, there is no God. Now there is no nose either! But you will have to say something to people; otherwise, they will call you an idiot. It is up to you – to be intelligent, wise, enlightened or to be idiots.”
Within two weeks, almost half of the town was without noses. And everybody was talking about God and the beautiful experiences. Even the king became interested.
He said, “Just for a nose, losing God is stupidity. So many people cannot be wrong…and they are my people.” He called them and asked them, “Tell us exactly what happened.”
They told the king, “We met this great master and he said that there is not much of a problem. If you are just ready to remove your nose, the curtain is opened; God is available, and everything that saints have been talking about for centuries. And he was right. Now for the first time we are alive.” And they started dancing….
The king said, “These are all intelligent people, so make an appointment for me.”
The prime minister to the king was an old man. He said, “Just wait a little. Let me try to find out exactly what the situation is because nobody has ever heard that cutting off the nose is the shortest way to God. You just give me three days and let me look into the whole thing.”
In the night, he came with a group of army people and caught hold of the man, who had now become a great master. They took him to the palace, gave him a good beating and told him, “Unless you tell the truth, the beating will continue.”
He said, “You know the truth, I know the truth, everybody knows the truth. I have been caught in the bed of somebody else’s wife and that madman has cut off my nose. Now what do you suppose I should do? – go around town telling everybody what happened? So I thought this was a good chance. I have been thinking many times to renounce the world and this is the best chance. Even if I don’t want to, I have to renounce at least this town where people know me and go to another town. Then I talked with this man on the road who was a fellow traveler. I was not certain that he would be convinced – because it is so stupid. But people are stupid, and the man agreed!”
“I was feeling sad for the poor guy. It was at least relevant in my case because I was caught with somebody else’s wife and he was angry. Now this poor guy has not even been caught with somebody’s wife but he was so convinced…I tried to tell him, ‘You are too young. First live your life – and this is a simple method, you can come any time.’ But he wouldn’t leave me so I had to cut off his nose.”
“He could not find any God and I told him that I had also not found any God, but now this is the only way to protect our respectability. ‘You go into the town and dance and sing and declare that, Whoever wants to see God need not wait a single moment. My master is there, I will give you the appointment.’”
The prime minister brought the man to the king and said, “Listen to the story – and you were going to get your nose removed! Then you would have started seeing God – that seems to be very logical. And perhaps all of us in your court would have been forced to remove our noses because it does not look right that the king has achieved God-realization and you are living with a God-realized person, still in ignorance.”
They told the man, “You go back to your home town. Otherwise, you will have to remain in jail.”
This man certainly seems to be criminal.
But all your religions are doing almost exactly the same in different ways.
The therapist has to remember that the moment he comes in he should, if he is honest, tell the participants that “I am no longer open to existence and in this state of closedness, I can only do harm to you. I will work only when I am open, vulnerable.”
And the master is only an excuse.
It is easier to be open toward me because you love me and you trust me. But while you are becoming open to me, you are becoming open to everything.
So it is not really being open to me – that is only a strategy, a device. The reality is to be open to the whole existence. With that vastness, clouds wandering inside your chest, you will be able to help many people to understand their situation, to accept whatever they are, to learn methods of becoming more conscious.
And the therapist has to remind people continually that he is not the master. The moment the therapist starts playing the role of the master, then he is going to do much harm to people.
I have known hundreds of therapists. They have the same problems as you have, perhaps more, and they are trying to help you. They are drowning and they are trying to save somebody who is drowning – perhaps drowning together is better than drowning alone.
The therapist knows nothing beyond mind. His only work is to bring people to a normal, peaceful mind. This is not a great achievement but you will make the person able to function in life in a normal way.
The madman is nothing but one who is behaving abnormally. The therapist simply pulls down the abnormal man to the normal state. His whole work is confined within the mind.
He cannot be a master and if he wants his therapy to be of significance, he has to function as a vehicle, as a channel to a master he loves.
Then therapy goes through a transformation.
Then you are not just trying to work out how these people should be brought to normality; that is only a preparation. You have prepared the ground, but don’t think you have prepared a garden. After preparing the ground you will need seeds, plants and much care and much love to make a beautiful garden.
A man can be normally mad – that’s what the whole of humanity is. A man can be abnormally mad – psychoanalysts, psychologists, psychiatrists are trying to somehow bring him back.
And the third category is the man who has gone beyond mind.
The function of the master is to take you beyond the mind.
The therapist can be helpful, he can prepare the ground, he can take out the weeds, but that does not mean that he becomes a master, that does not mean he becomes a gardener. That is a totally different affair.
Therapy in itself can be used as a step, but if you know only therapy and nothing more beyond it, that which was going to become a step, becomes a block. It is the same stone. Either you use it as a stepping stone or it becomes a block preventing you from moving further, higher, closer to your sources.
Right now, all over the world there are many therapists. But my therapist is unique in the sense that he is not only working according to the findings of psychology – he is working according to the findings of Yoga, of Tantra, of Sufism, of Zen, of Tao, of Hassidism. He’s a spiritual guide. But for that, knowledge acquired only from books will not help.
You will have to go through a transformation.
And the participants in your groups can also be helpful to you, just as you can be helpful to them; because their problems are your problems, your problems are their problems. And remember one thing: it is easier to solve somebody else’s problem because you are not involved. You are detached, you can see more clearly because you are not in the mess. You can help that man to come out and you can learn something for yourself because many times, you will be in the same situation.
I allowed therapists in my communes to work on the participants and to work on themselves.
The real work is upon yourself.
Only when you have a light within you, you may be able to share it with others.

Osho,
It's hard to imagine my ever being very courageous. In fact, most of the time, I feel like a mouse. Can the qualities of love and meditation turn even a mouse into a buddha? PS I've been so mousy that this is my first discourse question in eight years.
A mouse can become a Gautam Buddha.
He just needs a bottle of alcohol; as he becomes drunk, he starts forgetting that he is a mouse. Who says he is a mouse? Under the impact of alcohol, he may start roaring like a lion. But as the alcohol goes, with its influence on your mind and body, you will be a mouse again.
And it is very painful. To be a mouse is okay but to be a mouse again – that hurts! But the mouse has his own qualities, he has his own intelligence. Millions of human beings have many potentialities, many talents, and they remain unused.
So if other animals who are deeper in darkness, deeper in unconscious, cannot achieve to higher states of consciousness, you should not laugh at them.
You must have heard the ancient story, which is almost universal – in every language, in every country, something like that story exists….
For centuries it has been going on: that the mice are always tortured by the cats and they are always having conferences, discussion groups – how to get rid of the cats?
Finally, one old mouse said, “I have heard from the ancients…there is a way. You have to tie a bell round the neck of the cat, and all problems will be solved – because wherever she is, we will know. It is only when we do not know that we are caught.”
But the whole crowd laughed, giggled. They said, “We have been hearing this type of thing in every conference, but the question remains the same: who is going to tie a bell around the neck of a cat?”
The old man said, “The solution is in our hands, but the person who can manage to transform it into a reality has not happened.”
A young boy said, “I can do it. This is nothing.”
They said, “You must be mad. You are not even adult, you don’t have any voting rights.”
But the young boy said, “The problem confronting us has nothing to do with citizenship, old age. It has nothing to do with these things, it has something to do with intelligence. I have it.”
They said, “Okay, give him a chance. We are afraid – because your father and mother have gone for a holy pilgrimage and surely you will be eaten by the cat. What answer will we give them?”
The boy said, “Don’t be worried. I have figured it out completely scientifically.” And he managed!
He used to go into the neighborhood medical store; that was his most-loved place. So he brought a few sleeping pills and dropped them in the cat’s milk. Naturally, once the cat drank the milk, she fell unconscious for fifteen or twenty minutes. That was enough time – he tied the bell around her neck and the next day everybody was puzzled, the cats were puzzled because they could not get a single mouse. The mice were puzzled… “For centuries we knew that the only solution was a bell but nobody did anything. And now we can see that it was a simple thing.”
If you look into the lives, the past lives of Mahavira – in many of his lives he was an animal. The same is the case with Gautam Buddha. Both have told hundreds of stories of their past lives. In many of their lives, they were plants, in many of their lives they were birds, in many of their lives they were other animals.
In one story, Buddha said he was an elephant and the forest caught fire and he was running – all the animals were running out of the forest. The fire was becoming more and more dangerous. The elephant was running and he came out of the circle of fire. Just for few minutes he wanted to rest under a tree, and as he was going to put his fourth foot on the ground, he was alerted by a small rabbit who was sitting there, under the protection of his foot.
The elephant was in trouble. If he put his foot down on the ground, the rabbit would be finished. If he did not put his foot down…the fire was coming. And the fire came but the elephant remained determined not to kill the rabbit. He died in the fire. Gautam Buddha said, “I was born as a man because of my small act of compassion toward the rabbit.”
No animal, no tree, nothing in existence is incapable of becoming enlightened. It may take a little time, or a little more time, but enlightenment is a destiny. It is a destiny of the whole existence.
The whole existence has to become one day a festival of lights.
The idea of non-violence in the East arose because of this discovery: that each animal has the potential to become the highest peak of truth, consciousness, love. It is ugly to kill them for eating. The idea of not killing animals for eating came from the experience that they all are capable of becoming gods in their own right. They are equal to you – maybe a little more unconscious, a little more in the dark, but they are not different.
We are one family.
And it is not only so about the animals; this whole existence is one family.
To see and experience it as one family is what I mean by love.
Love becomes the most important phenomenon in the transformation of man.
You have not asked a question for eight years. There is no need to be worried about it. You may not have asked, but I have been answering your questions too. It is only a question of waiting a little; if you are not going to ask, I am going to answer anyway.
And don’t be worried that you have fear in your heart.
Everybody has fear in the heart because everybody has death in the future.
It cannot be said that you can enter into discipleship only when you have dropped fear – that will be closing the door. I say unto you: fear, greed, anger, everything is allowed.
You just come a little closer, enter the temple.
The very entry burns out all that is false in you.
Only pure gold remains.

============================================================

Osho,
Recently I developed epileptic fits – apparently due to a tiny cyst in my brain – which the specialists don't understand. But for me it feels like something amazing is happening. The first fit, in June, came totally as a surprise, and felt like a big hit on the head: wake up! Since leaving the commune I have been living unaware. Afterward I changed; wanted to be alone, silent, to meditate and to listen to you. Gradually I'm more with friends again, feeling more mature, more centered. Then, while feeling physically very well and clear in myself, another fit happened a few days ago. Already I feel something different again, a greater intensity – sometimes very afraid, sometimes so ecstatic I feel I could explode! Generally I am more playful. For the first time I feel beautiful, safer, more loving. Life is very beautiful and joyful. I enjoy the prelude to the fits; my learned knowledge disappears and I'm left with a sense of me – very easy, no effort. But fear comes too: I'm afraid of what might happen, and during the fits I sense a huge no in me. I feel that if I could say yes instead, it would somehow be better. Osho, please could you comment?
There are a few things which are important for everybody, not only to the questioner.
The most important thing is that medical science, physiology, psychology, are very immature in the sense that they are only doing their work on the surface of human beings. They are not finding a way to man’s center. And because they do not accept the existence of some consciousness beyond mind, of some consciousness beyond death, they are completely closed, prejudiced against the whole tremendous effort mystics have made in finding the center of consciousness.
Many times the diagnosis of a physiologist or a physician may be absolutely wrong for the simple reason that his vision is not comprehensive enough. He understands man only as matter, and mind as just a by-product of matter, a shadow phenomenon with nothing beyond it, nothing eternal, nothing that is going to remain forever.
They have created a picture of human beings which creates despair in intelligent people. And because of their outright rejection, their approach is not scientific; it is as superstitious as any other fanatic religious or political person’s. Science has no right to deny consciousness unless it has explored the inner sky of human consciousness and found that it is dream stuff, not a reality but only a shadow. They have not explored – they have simply assumed.
Materialism is the assumption, the superstition of the world of science, just as God, heaven and hell are superstitions of the religious world. Science is not yet pure science and it cannot be, because the scientist is not yet innocent, unprejudiced, ready to go with the truth in spite of himself and his conditioning.
The fits that are happening to you are not a disease. I am not a physician but I am not looking from the physician’s side of the phenomenon, I am looking from the other shore. Your fit is really a rushing, overwhelming consciousness that your mind cannot contain, and because it cannot contain it, it goes unconscious.
I will not call it a disease. I will say you are blessed. And the reason I am so certain that it is not a disease is because after the fit you feel blissful, ecstatic as you have never felt. After a disease you cannot feel ecstatic – you will feel exhausted. After a disease you will feel weak, shaken, wobbly…but you are feeling ecstatic, you are feeling more blissful than you have ever imagined you could feel.
The fruit is the evidence of the tree it has come from. If it is juicy, sweet, tasteful, it is saying something about the tree because whatever it has is a gift from the tree. The tree must be young, the tree must be full of juice. Just looking at the fruit or the flower you can infer much about the tree.
What happens after your fits proves that your fits are not those of a sick man – and I want you to understand something which is missing from medical science. Your fit is because of an abundant release of energy. The mind is capable only of a certain amount: the day-to-day energy which is exhausted very easily. From your center, floods of energy are approaching the brain system. The brain system, the mind, is not able to absorb that much energy; it goes into a state of coma. The doctor will look at the coma, he will wonder about the fit, he will try to find the cause…. And your doctors have not been able to find the cause; they will never be able to find the cause because they are looking in the wrong direction. They are looking in the mind itself, as if something is wrong in the mind; hence the fit. Nothing is wrong in the mind – but the energy beyond the mind is becoming available to the mind.
Mind is a beggar. You will have to learn to live as an emperor, and the fits will disappear.
The fits are symbolic that great changes are happening in you.
I am reminded of a few things which will be helpful to you. Five thousand years ago in China, acupuncture was discovered in an accident. A man had suffered his whole life from terrific migraines, and the Chinese medicine had not been helpful at all. They did everything but nothing worked. It seemed the case was hopeless. But they were in the same fallacy as your physicians are.
This man had gone to the forest to collect some wood and was hit by a hunter’s arrow accidentally. The arrow hit his leg and his migraine evaporated instantly!
Now ordinarily you could not connect the two; this was a new revelation. He went back to his physicians and told them what had happened: “This arrow has done something: for the first time in my life I am feeling healthy in my head; otherwise it was always heavy.” Even if it was not a severe migraine, something of the pain had become almost natural to him. But it had disappeared so miraculously that he was afraid to take the arrow out; it was better to live your whole life with this arrow stuck in your leg than to have that migraine again!
But the doctor said, “The arrow cannot be allowed to remain. It will create poison in the body; it may be poisonous already. It has to be pulled out. But don’t be worried, it has given us some clue.”
This is how acupuncture was born. The physicians took out the arrow, but the migraine never returned. Over hundreds of years, slowly, slowly they discovered that there are seven hundred centers, interconnected in the body, and it is not necessary that your migraine has its source in your head. The source can be anywhere in the body. It can be at any of those seven hundred centers. The only thing that has to happen is that that center is vibrating your brain, sending waves of energy to your brain which are hitting other centers and creating the migraine.
Now because of that arrow a particular center in the leg was dead – it could not broadcast anymore. That was the cause, and they were trying everything but it was all off the wall! And they had no idea, nobody ever had any idea that the center might exist somewhere else and unless that center was cured, the effect that was showing somewhere else would continue to show.
This fit is something very similar to the fits of Ramakrishna. He is the only mystic in the East who used to go into unconsciousness with any slight provocation. Somebody would start singing a song of devotion to God and that was enough…in the middle of the road, in the traffic of Calcutta – which is the maddest in the whole world! What you see in Bombay is the best in India; if you want to see the real thing, go to Calcutta! It is simply crazy. It was so difficult to take Ramakrishna from one place to another place because even if somebody said “Jai Ramji” – that is a common greeting in India, “Victory to the God, Ram” – that would be enough, Ramakrishna would fall flat on the ground. Just the name of Rama…he was so sensitive, his system had developed to such a delicate vulnerability, that even a small triggering and he would be in samadhi.
Doctors were called and they were in the same difficulty, they could not figure it out: the man was perfectly healthy, there was no reason for him to become unconscious, and it remained a mystery to the physicians. But the reason why it remained a mystery to them was that they were not ready to look from a different perspective. It is not the kind of fit in which you become unconscious because the quantity of consciousness in you is so small. Some shock – your wife dies, your business goes bankrupt – just a slight shock is enough because there is not much energy, you are not very conscious. It is just a small amount of energy, it can be crushed by any accident. This is the nature of the ordinary fit: you lose your conscious energy and only unconsciousness remains.
As far as the questioner is concerned, it is happening totally differently. It was happening totally differently to Ramakrishna. It is not that your consciousness disappears and you become unconscious; on the contrary, so much consciousness descends that you are not able to cope with it. Your mind is simply in a state as if suddenly frozen…so much is showering and your mind has no experience, no discipline to manage it. It is too much, and because of too much consciousness, it will be felt on the outside that you are having a fit.
The symptoms are the same. Only one thing is different and that is what happens after the fit – that is decisive. If it is a fit where consciousness has disappeared the man will find himself utterly weak, sad, feeling as if he has died and is coming back to life again. He will not have any memory that he has been unconscious for two hours, but his whole body will show symptoms that he has passed through a trauma, a painful trauma.
If it is not a fit but a glimpse of samadhi, the person will wake up rejuvenated, young again, fresh as he has never been – absolutely silent, peaceful, with a clarity to things.
Even your question has that clarity. The question has not come out of your confusion but out of your clarity.
Rejoice, and allow those fits. Don’t try to control them, don’t even make an effort to control. Rather, try to be awake while the fit is there. Slowly, slowly you will become capable of being awake while the fit is there, and then there is no fit because you are no longer unconscious and there is no discontinuity in your consciousness. It is a continuous flow…growing, flowering, becoming wider and bigger.
You need not be worried about it, but you should not be going to the physicians and doctors because they will stigmatize you, convince you that something is wrong. They will make you afraid that you are losing control of your mind. They can make you so much afraid of the disease that you will start to unconsciously prevent the fit and that will be a disaster. Even now, although after the fit you are feeling beautiful, still – in the fit you feel a great “NO,” you don’t want to go into it. You have already accepted the idea of the doctors that it is a disease, that if you go deeper into it you will be mad.
I say to you: if you can go deeper into it you will be certainly mad in the same sense that Gautam Buddha is mad, Socrates is mad. These people are not really mad, they alone are sane but they are in a mad world.
And they are in such a minority that only after millions of people does there come a point when somebody becomes enlightened. He is so alone. And the whole world is not ready to accept anything that has not been happening to them…and naturally they are in a majority. And this man – Gautam Buddha or Mahavira or Bodhidharma – is trying to say that he has achieved something which you have not achieved. It hurts your ego, it annoys people, it irritates people because it brings the question clearly into their focus: “Is there life, a sane life?” They know life is not sane, but where to find the sanity?
All the religions have been saying that to find it is a very difficult job, it takes lives and lives to attain. So they are discouraging people…all the religions have been a tremendous disadvantage to humanity because they have all discouraged you. An authentic religion should encourage you.
You are asking me, because you must be feeling inside that if you can say yes totally to this strange space that overwhelms you…. Why do you want to say yes to it? And why does there come only a big no?
The no is coming because everybody you talk to about it is going to tell you that this is a dangerous disease: “Pull yourself together, pull out of it.” It is the world around you that is making you afraid.
I would like to say to you that there is nothing to fear. You can say yes. You can allow existence whatever it wants to do with you. You can simply leave yourself in the hands of the unknown, and a miracle is waiting for you.

Osho,
My daughter, Ma Shanti Mara, who is seven years old, asked me to translate her question to you because she does not speak English. Her question is: “Warum gibt es Gott?” – why is God? She is now at school and confronted with “religion,” and more and more the question was forming in her heart and head. Now she is beginning to realize that at home, sannyas is happening, and outside, something else. Would you please comment?
The question is significant. Children always – almost always – ask, “What is God? Where is God? How does he look?” These are simple curiosities. But Shanti has asked a rare question, very rarely asked: why is God? There is no question of what God is, there is no question of where he is, there is no question of how he looks.
Her question is more fundamental – “Why?”
Why is the hypothesis of God needed?
It is not a simple curiosity. She has pinpointed the weakest point of all the religions – why God? No religion has been able to answer the question, no philosopher has been able to figure it out. Because whatever reason you give – “God is because of this reason,” – God becomes secondary. And no religion can put God second to anyone, so they go on round and round giving answers and knowing perfectly well that none of their answers is going to answer the question. But I can answer the question because I do not belong to any established religion.
God is because you are full of fear.
It has nothing to do with religion, nothing to do with philosophy. It has something to do with your psychology. God is your fear, projected, magnified unto the skies, made bigger….
The Indian God has one thousand hands. He must look like a centipede! So if you meet some big centipede, be respectful! – who knows…. The Indian God has three faces – obviously he needs them so that he can look all around; otherwise he is looking to one side and on the other side the world goes mad, which is always possible. So he has to be continuously on watch. The idea looks very good but it is basically your fear.
The fear is whether God knows you or not. So big a crowd on this small planet…and there are estimated to be fifty thousand planets in the world where there is life. And this is only about the world that we have come to know through science; it is not the whole world, it is only a small part. Every day new territory is revealed, and Albert Einstein said in one of his letters that it seems the world has no limits.
Logically it cannot have, because to make a limit you need two things. You cannot make a limit with one thing. You have a fence around your garden because the gardens of your neighbors are there. You can make a fence – but can you create a fence where the world ends, and there is nothing beyond it? And even nothing beyond it is something beyond it. Who knows what that nothing contains? And it will be infinite, the exploration has to continue.
Man’s science is very undeveloped and you will be surprised; if you look backward then you can understand. Whatever you are doing in the hospitals and the medical colleges seems to be right, but if you look at the history of fifty years ago, you will be surprised – everything that has looked right has proved wrong in fifty years’ time.
Just fifty years ago the treatment for a madman was bleeding – his blood had to be taken out. Naturally, he became weak – if he was a violent type of madman, destructive, attacking people, naturally he will not do such a thing now. He cannot do it, he is so weak. Do you think this is treatment? You have simply made the madman weak. Soon, within a month or two, he will be back again. Once the blood that was taken out is replaced by fresh food, air, sun rays, he will prove that what you have done was simply stupid. And now they recognize that it was stupid, it had nothing to do with madness. But for three hundred years it continued to be the authoritative medical treatment for mad people.
Now whatever you are doing you cannot be very certain about it. Tomorrow it may be proved wrong.
But experts have a tendency to be authoritative. They will not listen to what I am saying, because to listen to me means to change their whole vision of life.
For example, I was saying that the first questioner’s fits have nothing to do with mind, that it has to do something with spiritual energy that is flooding the mind – and it has been happening to mystics, it is not a new phenomenon. They should not treat the person as insane. They should not try to prevent the fits because if the fits are prevented then the person can really go wrong, can go mad. Now, through fits the overflow of energy is released. If the fit is prevented you have closed the only outlet for it.
But they will not understand what I am saying, that you have to help the person to center his spiritual energy, to crystallize it…. And there are methods. Once it is crystallized and centered and rooted, it will not overflow the small mind and the fits will disappear, and without any harm to the person.
But to accept this small approach they will have to change their whole prejudiced mind and that seems to be one of the most difficult things for people to do. On the contrary, what they will do is to put a case in court against me saying that I am not a doctor and I should not tell people what is a disease and what is not a disease.
I am not prescribing medicines to anyone. I am simply making it clear that what you are thinking is a disease is not a disease but a blessing. If you can say yes, then the conflict between you and the overflooding energy will disappear, and for the first time you will know who you are, what the meaning of life is. For the first time you will know that there is no death – only forms change; the formless spirit continues. And you are the formless.
This is my way of deciding: If after the fit you were going into a bad state of mind – bitter, sad, frustrated, angry – then I would have said to continue the treatment because something is wrong with the mind. But because your experience after the fit is so grand, has such beauty…you should forget all about disease and the doctors. You are absolutely on the right path. Start saying yes to it and don’t go into it with fear because fear causes a shrinking. Go with joy, dancing.
It is an invitation from the beyond. Accept it gracefully, and there is much in store for you to be surprised.

Osho,
In Rajneeshpuram I used to worship for long hours every day. This would still the state of mind in general; and the peaks of meditation I experienced continuously were great. That kind of thing does not seem to be happening here in Bombay, even after so much relaxation and not much work to do. Please explain whether this is due to the surroundings and situations here, or for some other reasons.
The method that was being used in Rajneeshpuram comes from Gurdjieff. He himself got it from ancient Sufi sources.
You will have to understand a few things before you can understand the answer to the question.
According to Gurdjieff – and I agree with him – your life energy has four layers. The topmost layer of your energy is very thin, it is only for day-to-day work. By the evening you are tired and you want to go to sleep. That day-to-day energy needs recharging every night. In the morning you are again fresh, ready to work.
The second layer is the emergency layer. It is bigger because it is a question of emergency. You come home tired, the whole day…and it has not been one of those great days when whatever you touch becomes gold; it has been a very ugly day. Tired, frustrated, you just want to go and drop dead into bed, but as you are dropping into bed – unfortunately you are still alive – the house catches fire! You forget all your tiredness, you are running for hours to put the fire out. You have forgotten that you are hungry, you have forgotten that you had come just to go to sleep. You are so full of energy, so vibrant, that even when the fire is put out it will take hours for you to go to sleep because you became so excited. It was not only that the house was on fire, you were on fire too! It will take a little time for the fire to cool down. All the thoughts that have been moving so fast in you will take a little time to settle. This is the emergency level.
When somebody fasts for many days he has to live on the emergency level. When somebody forgets his way in the forest for days together, he has to live on the emergency level. Ordinarily, we have made life so secure, comfortable and safe that millions of people never come to know their emergency layer of energy.
Then there is a third layer which is even bigger. That connects you with the whole life of the universe. And below that is the fourth which has no boundaries, it is unlimited. When you reach to the fourth you are one with existence. Then the whole energy of existence is your energy.
In the commune…and this was misunderstood all over the world; this is how everything is misunderstood. People understand only that for which they have been conditioned. They think that is all, while in fact the whole has no boundaries and you can go on exploring in any dimension, to any depth, without coming to the end.
People were working twelve hours a day and sometimes fourteen hours a day. To outsiders this looked like they had been hypnotized – otherwise who is going to work fourteen hours continuously? But the reality was that these people were under a certain program of evolving consciousness. It is somewhere from twelve to fifteen hours that the first layer disappears, is finished. If you have been working hard for twelve hours, the first layer will be burned out. Ordinarily you stop, it is time to take your supper and go to bed.
This is where Gurdjieff comes in. He says, “If you can continue now, when there is no energy, you are completely empty of energy as far as you know – those hidden layers are not known to you – continue!” A moment comes when suddenly all day-to-day energy is exhausted, and immediately the second layer becomes available to you. You are flooded with an energy so powerful that people who have come to that energy have felt that now they can do anything. Nothing is impossible, the energy seems to be so great.
But before you can reach the second level the first has to be exhausted. And there is no way of giving you any proof, argument or evidence. You have to do it and experience it.
Anybody who has done it has never come back empty handed. Once you have tasted the second layer of energy – which is purer, unpolluted – naturally your desire to go deeper becomes a thirst, an intense longing….
If you go on working for thirty-six hours, non-stop, you can open a passage to the third layer of your energies. And to be in the third layer of energies is to know things that you always wanted to know. It is in this layer of energy that one experiences love without attachment, one experiences love as sharing, not as relationship. It is in this part of energy that you experience yourself separate from body, from mind, from everything. You are just a witness – and that is the fourth.
Between the third and the fourth there is a very thin Japanese paper curtain. From the third you can even see things moving into the fourth, behind the paper curtain. And it is only a question of removing the curtain, because if it was for you to work and exhaust the third layer it would be impossible. You cannot exhaust it, it is far bigger than you.
You are connected with the whole life system. The fourth brings you home, brings you back to the crystal-clear nature of your being.
Here in Bombay you are relaxed, there is not much work for you to do; that’s why your meditation is not going deeper. That work part was an essential part. If the whole day long you are relaxed, your relaxation will remain superficial – it will be spread over a long period but it will be thin. If you have been working intensely for twelve or fourteen hours you deserve the same intensity, the same depth of relaxation – that is a natural phenomenon, a nature that is continuously looking after you. But even nature cannot go against its laws.
The law is: if you want the experience of deep relaxation then you will have to go into deep exertion.
There is no need to go anywhere else. Here you can do jogging, running, swimming. Exert yourself so the first layer, which is never fresh…. It has to be used every day. It is just pocket money, you need not carry it forever. As you start some kind of work with totality you will find your meditation coming back – and it will be deeper this time, because in the commune whether you were consciously aware of it or not, unconsciously you felt that you were being forced to work. The very idea that you are being forced to work destroys the beauty. Your work remains half-hearted and your meditation will remain half-hearted too.
I know that working twelve hours or fourteen hours is difficult – and particularly if you have not worked so much in your life it is painful.
The whole body hurts, sleep becomes difficult. Because you don’t understand why this much work is being given to you, there is resistance…you do it, but not with a dance.
Here nobody will be forcing you. You will be doing your jogging or swimming or running on your own accord. This will bring you closer to totality and a total act brings its reward in a total silence.
From tomorrow morning start…a few other sannyasins may be ready to come and join you, and it will be good on Juhu Beach. So first jog and dance and sing and then rest there on the beach for a few seconds or a few minutes just listening to the sound of the waves, feeling the sun, the wind. Fall in a kind of synchronicity, become one with it.
It is not that you are separate from the ocean and the earth and the sun. You are not. We are all connected. And to remember all those connections makes you a member of this vast universe. The trees and the rocks and the stars all turn into a great brotherhood.
Life starts giving you its secrets as you become more and more available to it. It is very just and very fair. You get only that which you deserve.

Osho,
I have heard that some people claim to be doing the same work that you do. Is it not true that while others are trying to alter the major disturbances in people's programs, your only reason for living is to ensure the elimination of the programs altogether? In any case, could one program eliminate another, even if it wanted to? Are they not left behind on the shores of western maintenance-man psychology? – tepid reformers, not revolutionaries?
No program can replace another program. Every program can repress the older program in you. The older program goes deeper into the unconscious and the new program becomes your personality. And psychologists are deceiving the whole world by saying that they are deprogramming people. It is not deprogramming, it is only reprogramming.
Your insight is true, that the therapists, psychoanalysts and others of the same kind, are claiming that they are doing the same work as I am doing.
In the first place, I am not doing any work.
In the second place, their work and my approach are totally different.
You have got the point, that they are simply adjusting people’s normal behavior. All the psychologists are doing only one thing and it is the best paying profession in the world: they are just keeping you mediocre, normal.
It is good that these people did not appear a little earlier; otherwise Jesus Christ would not have been crucified but psychoanalyzed. All the mystics of the world would have been put into psychiatric hospitals – they have to be made normal, they are behaving abnormally.
Mahavira walking naked – naturally it will look like something has gone wrong in this man’s head.
The psychologists are just maintaining the society as it is. Hence the society pays them more than any other profession, although their work is nil. But the society pays them highly for the simple reason that the status quo should not be changed. If people remain normal then they cannot gather courage enough to change the structure of the society, to change the future of man.
Normal people do normal things.
Revolutionary action is not a normal thing.
The very idea to change humanity completely, to change the human world so deeply that it becomes disconnected with the past is not within the hands of normal people. It needs geniuses, and all geniuses are abnormal.
The word abnormal can be used for both: those who have fallen below the mind and those who have gone above the mind. Both have become abnormal. That’s why there is sometimes a similarity between a madman and a mystic, some kind of similarity. You may not be able to figure out what is similar but there is some kind of similarity, and the similarity is that both are out of the mind. One has fallen below the mind and one has gone above the mind. Both are no longer living in the mind – that is the similarity. But it is such an invisible phenomenon that to figure it out is difficult.
In the west there are many people of the quality of Ramakrishna who are in madhouses, because in the west going above the mind is simply not acceptable – there is no “beyond”, so Ramakrishna is simply mad.
In the east just the opposite has been happening for centuries. There are many mad people who are thought to be saints because their behavior has some similarity. You may not be able to grab hold of it but there is some similarity.
I have been in touch with a few people who have been worshipped like incarnations of god but really they were just mad. But once you have accepted something, you start interpreting accordingly.
Near Jabalpur where I lived for twenty years, there was a man – Tuntun Pal Baba. no relation to Tintin! He was very old, ancient. He never said anything.
I went many times and remained there for a few days just to watch him. He started becoming afraid of me because he certainly understood that I was not his follower or worshipper, that I was looking for something else.
He had a paralysis of the left side so he could not even hold a cup of tea with his own hands. His left hand was almost dead and his right hand was also trembling; he was old and weak so somebody would have to hold his cup. Even drinking the tea was difficult because half of his face was paralyzed. So tea would be flowing all over his robe and just in the middle…he lived only on tea. He would give the cup to somebody. half the tea he had taken himself, and half he would give to somebody – whoever was present there. That was his prasad.
Such a disgusting scene…because his saliva was going into it and people would drink that tea as if they had found nectar. And these were the people who had gone there for some desire to be fulfilled, some sickness to be cured. Somebody is childless…a child to be given; somebody’s son is lost and he wants to find him…all kinds of people, but not a single spiritual seeker.
And there was no answer – the only answer was the cup of tea. So you would drink the tea, go home, and with the miracle of Tuntun Pal Baba have a child immediately! Hundreds of people were going, just a queue the whole day. If one hundred people come, fifty are going to be cured – they were going to be cured even if they had not come, because everybody who becomes sick does not die. So the business is perfectly good: at least fifty percent are going to be cured and these fifty percent will spread the news, they will exaggerate it – which is just human nature – and more people will be coming.
Because of the Indian conditioning, the other fifty who failed thought they must have done some evil act, so evil that even a paramhansa’s blessing is not able to remove it. Or perhaps they would have to find another source of divine grace; perhaps Tuntun Pal Baba is not the right person for them. They will never come back to tell the story that the prasad, The present from Baba has not worked. Only the people for whom it has worked will come back again, and with new people…the crowd will go on growing.
I used to sit there and watch the crowd, the faces – what kind of people come and what does that man have? One afternoon in the hot summer there was nobody else, I was alone with the baba. He asked me, “Why are you unnecessarily torturing yourself in the heat in this village?” I don’t know how this idea entered people’s minds that I am an incarnation of god. The more I denied it, the more they became convinced – because that is one of the symbols of the incarnation of god, that he will deny it.
“I am a humble man, I am not a reincarnation of god,” he said. “I am a poor man, uneducated. I had no idea that I was creating trouble for myself. The more I denied, the more people were coming. And because of this paralysis I cannot talk much. And this tea! – I have not started it, people just started it themselves, because there is nothing else with me – I only drink tea. People just started it. The cup might be half full and somebody would take it out of my hand and give it to somebody else, and the whole day…. so the whole day I have to drink tea!”
I said, “You should have told them that this was nonsense. I can take you out of this place.”
He said, “What is the point? Because they are being helped, although I am not helping them.” He was a sincere, simple man…. “They are being helped so what is the harm? Even if fifty percent of people are helped…poor people, they cannot pay for medical treatment, they cannot go to big cities and big hospitals. If they are being cured, let them believe that I am a god. But sometimes even I start giggling in the night – what kind of a god? Half paralyzed, cannot eat anything, only liquid…and now that liquid has become only tea.”
The last time I visited him he was dying. He whispered in my ear, “Try to explain to these people that you create these illusions yourself and you don’t even give me a chance to refute it. I am saying I am not a reincarnation but you are not ready to listen to it.”
I have seen a few more people. This man was not mad at least, he was only sick, old. But I have seen mad people. Their madness is thought to be something divine. In their madness they may do anything, they may dance on the street….
I was passing through Kanpur; I had a meeting in Kanpur and after the meeting, as I reached the railway station I saw a crowd. Somebody told me that there was a godman, and that’s why the crowd was there. So I went inside the crowd and I could not believe…this man used to be a servant in the hostel where I had lived. He felt a little ashamed.
I said, “Don’t be ashamed. in this country you can be ashamed of anything but not of being a reincarnation of god – enjoy! Because in your job what were you getting?”
He said, “That much is being collected by my followers now.”
He had six followers who were continuously collecting money from people. If you gave money you could go close to him, touch his feet, have his blessings. He had nothing to say.
I asked him, “When can I see you alone?”
He gave me a time in the night and he met me. I said, “You were a simple person, what happened?”
He said, “I also cannot figure out, what happened. I had gone to a marriage party and there, in the sweets, they had mixed some drugs so I started doing strange things. I threw my clothes off, went naked into the market…and a crowd followed me, and the same people who had given me the sweet started saying, ‘He is a reincarnation!’ I was half conscious, half unconscious. I could hear somebody saying, ‘He is a reincarnation of god!’ and I was not in a state to argue. In fact, I thought perhaps I was a reincarnation of God!”
“I started dancing more madly and since that day, I am enjoying it. It is a good business. No qualification is needed.”
In the West, they are making one mistake. Here we are making another mistake. But the mistake is possible….
The man who has gone beyond mind and the man who has fallen below mind – both are out of the mind, so there is some similarity. That similarity should not deceive anybody – because the person who has fallen below mind will be sad, tense, searching for the lost home, nervous, feeling unworthy. You have to look into the qualities and the feelings of the man.
The man who has gone beyond the mind will be feeling like a child, innocent, will be relishing existence and its beauty, will be creative. He cannot be destructive. He may paint, he may sculpt, he may sing, he may dance, but a man who is moving above mind is bound to pour a little more beauty into the world, a little more music, a little more poetry – that is his contribution.
Only your contribution proves where you are – whether you are mad or you have gone beyond mind to authentic sanity.
What is happening is perfectly beautiful. Just say yes – not a verbal yes but an existential yes, in which every fiber of your being is involved.
You are very close to the opening of a new world, of a new consciousness for you.
It is for this consciousness that you are here with me.