---
title: Sufis The People of Path Vol 2 01
series: Sufis The People of Path Vol 2, 01-15
talk_number: 1
url: https://oshoworld.com/sufis-the-people-of-path-vol-2-01
language: English
duration: 01:39:10
author: SUFISM
scraped_at: 2026-01-03T09:21:07.480955+00:00
---
There was once a woman who abandoned the religion in which she had been brought up. She left the ranks of the atheists too, and joined another faith. Then she became convinced of the truth of yet another. Each time she changed her beliefs, she imagined that she had gained something, but not quite enough. Each time she entered a new fold she was welcomed, and her recruitment was regarded as a good thing, and a sign of her sanity and enlightenment.
Her inward state, however, was one of confusion.

At length, she heard of a certain celebrated teacher, Imam Jafar Sadik, and she went to see him.
After he had listened to her protestations and ideas, he said, ‘Return to your home, I shall send you my decision in a message.’
Soon afterwards the woman found a disciple of the sheik at the door. In his hand was a packet from the master. She opened it, and saw that it contained a glass bottle, half full with three layers of packed sand – black, red and white – held down by a wad of cotton. On the outside was written: ‘Remove the cotton and shake the bottle to see what you are like.’
She took the wadding out and shook the sand in the bottle. The different colored grains of sand mixed together, and all that she was left with was a mass of grayish sand.
Man is a paradox. And man is the only animal, the only being, that is paradoxical – that is man’s uniqueness. Man’s special being is his innermost paradox. All other animals are non-paradoxical.
A tree is a tree, and a dog is a dog, but man is never in a state of isness. He is always becoming, growing. Man is always surpassing himself; that is his paradox. And it is at his very core of being. It is not accidental, it is very fundamental. Once you understand this paradox you have your first glimpse about human-ness – what man is.
Man is always a project, a becoming. His being consists of becoming – this is the paradox. He is always between that which he was and that which he is going to be. He is always between his past and future – a bridge hanging between two eternities, the past and the future. He is a surpassing, a continuous surpassing. Man is never content with that which he is; he is trying to go beyond, always trying to go beyond. Whatsoever he is doing, all his effort is basically how to become something more, something higher, something better.
Man is a progress, a wayfarer, a pilgrim – and his life is a pilgrimage, a non-ending pilgrimage, that goes on and on. A dog is born, a tree is born…. The tree is born with all its tree-ness and the dog is born with all its dog-ness. Man is not a given fact; man is born only with a possibility, with a potential. Man is born as a blank, as a nothingness; nothing is written.
All other beings have a certain essence, a certain soul. In man it is just the reverse. His existence comes first and then he starts seeking for his essence. In other animals essence comes first, then existence. They already bring a built-in program; they never grow, they remain the same. That’s why they look so innocent, so unworried, so non-tense. Look into the eyes of a cow – how peaceful, calm, tranquil she is. There is no anxiety no anguish, no clouds. Look into the eyes of a man. They are always cloudy. They always have anguish, there is always trembling: the trembling of. “Whether I am going to make it or not?” – the trembling of, “Whether I will be able to find myself or not?” – the trembling of, “Whether I will be fulfilled or remain unfulfilled?”
The animals are at ease, relaxed; man is a tension. This is his glory and this is his anguish too. This is his dignity and this is his problem too. It is his glory because he is capable of creating himself – he is a god. And it is his anguish because the possibility is always there that he may fail, he may not be able to create himself. Who knows? It is glory because of freedom – he has not been programmed. He is the only animal who remains without a program. He has not been given a map, he has not been ordered.
Man is the only being who is uncommanded. with no orders. He comes into existence empty and then he starts groping for his being. Then he starts groping and creating and searching. Man is an adventure.
But with the adventure is uncertainty, insecurity, failure, fear. One can always go wrong. There is more possibility of going wrong, less possibility of being right. There are a thousand and one ways – which one is the right one? You are always anxious. And whatsoever you choose you choose with uncertainty because you can never be certain whether this path will lead to your goal or will end in a cul-de-sac somewhere – whether it will reach anywhere or will just end in a desert.
Man’s glory is his freedom: that he can create himself, that he can be himself, that nothing is forced on him, that he is open-ended. And man’s misery is because he cannot be certain, can never be certain that he is on the right path, that whatsoever he is doing is meaningful or not.
Man is the only animal who goes mad. He has problems to face, to solve, to grow beyond. This is the first thing I would like you to understand.
There was a great Sufi master – one of the greatest in all the ages – Al-Ghazzali. He says: “On the path of human growth from man to God – from man the potential to man the actual, from possibility to reality – there are seven valleys.” These seven valleys are of immense importance. Try to understand them because you will have to pass through those seven valleys. Everybody has to pass through those seven valleys.
If you understand rightly what to do with a valley you will be able to go beyond it, and you will attain to a peak – because each valley is surrounded by mountains. If you can pass through the valley, if you don’t get entangled in the valley, if you don’t get lost in the valley, if you don’t become too attached to the valley, if you remain aloof, detached, a witness, and if you keep on remembering that this is not your home, that you are a stranger here, and you go on remembering that the peak has to be reached, and you don’t forget the peak – you will reach to the peak. With each valley crossed there is great celebration.
But after each valley you have to enter another valley. This goes on. There are seven valleys. Once you have reached the seventh then there are no more. Then man has attained to his being, he is no longer paradoxical. There is no tension, no anguish. This is what in the past we have called buddhahood. This is what Christians call the state of being a Christ. This is what Jainas call Jinahood – becoming victorious. There are many names, but the basic idea is that unless man becomes God he remains in anxiety. And to become God these seven valleys have to be crossed.
And each valley has its own allurements. It is very, very possible that you may get attached to something and you will not be able to leave the valley. You have to leave it if you want to enter the second valley. And after each valley there is a peak, a great mountain peak. After each valley there is jubilation and the jubilation goes on becoming more and more intense. And then finally, in the seventh valley, you attain to the cosmic orgasm – you disperse. Then only God is.
Listen to these seven valleys and try to understand them. And don’t think Al-Ghazzali is talking about something philosophical. Sufis are not interested in philosophy at all. They are very practical people. If they say something they mean it. If they say something, it is said for the seeker. It is not said for the curious ones, not for intellectuals, but for those who are on the path, those who are really working hard to have a glimpse of the truth. It is for the seekers.

The first valley…. The first valley is called the valley of knowledge.
Naturally, knowledge has to be the first because man starts by knowing. No other animal has knowledge; only man knows, only man collects knowledge. Only man writes, reads, talks. Only man has language, scriptures, theories. So knowledge has to be the first valley.
The negative part of the valley is that you can become knowledgeable, you can get hooked on knowledge. You can forget the real purpose of knowing and you can become attached to knowledge itself. Then you will be accumulating more and more knowledge and you can go on for lives together accumulating knowledge. You will become a great scholar, a pundit, but you will not become a knower.
The way of the knower is utterly different from the way of knowledge.
There are two things when knowledge happens: the content of knowledge – you know something – and the consciousness, the mirror, you who knows. If you become too attached to the content of knowledge rather than to the capacity of knowing, you will be lost in the valley. That part which can make you entangled, hooked, attached, I call negative.
If you become knowledgeable then you are lost; you cannot cross the first valley. And the more knowledge you have, the more confused you will become – because there is no way to decide what is true. Everything that you hear, if rightly put before you, logically placed before you, will look right. There is no other way for you to decide; there is no criterion. That’s why it goes on happening. You go to one master and you hear him, and he looks right. Then you go to another master and you hear him, and he looks right. You read one book and it looks right; you read another book – maybe just the opposite – and that too has its logic, and it looks right. There is no way to decide what is right. And if you go on accumulating you will go on accumulating contradictions – opposite statements. And there are millions of standpoints and sooner or later you will become just a crowd of many philosophies and systems. That is not going to help. That will become the greatest hindrance.
So the first thing is that in the valley of knowledge one has to remain alert that one has to be emphatically concerned with the capacity of knowing – not with the object, not with the content. One should emphasize witnessing, one should become more and more alert and aware, then one becomes a knower. Not by knowing many things but just by becoming more aware, one becomes really a knower.
The path of knowledge has nothing to do with scriptures. opinions, systems, beliefs. It has something to do with the capacity to know – you can know. You have this immense energy of being conscious. So be concerned with the container, the consciousness, and don’t be concerned with the content.
Don’t be concerned with the known, be concerned with the knower. Knowledge is a double-arrowed phenomenon. One arrow points to the known, another arrow points to the knower. If you go on looking to the known you will be lost in the valley. If you start looking to the knower you cannot be lost, you will be able to transcend the valley. And once you transcend the valley of knowledge there is great, great joy – because you have understood something very essential in you, something that is going to remain to the very end, something that is very fundamental: the capacity to know, the capacity to be conscious.
So if you look at the knower, if you become more alert about the knower, you have used the positive.

The second valley is called the valley of repentance.
When you start looking at who you are, naturally great repentance arises. Because of all that you have done wrong, all that you have done and should not have done. you start feeling repentance. So a great peak comes with consciousness – but suddenly, with consciousness, conscience arises. Remember, the conscience that you have is not the true conscience. It is a pseudo-coin; it is given by the society.
People have told you what is right and what is wrong; what is moral, what is immoral. You don’t know exactly what is moral or what is immoral. But after crossing the first valley you will be able to know exactly what is right and what is wrong. And then suddenly you will see what wrong you have done – how many people you have been hurting, how sadistic you have been with others, how masochistic you have been with yourself, how destructive, violent, aggressive, angry, jealous, you have been up to now. All that will come to your vision. That is a natural by-product of becoming conscious – conscience arises.
This conscience has nothing to do with the ordinary conscience that you have – that is borrowed. So you can have it and still it does not hurt; it does not give pain so real that you can be transformed through it. You only know so-so what is right, and you go on doing the wrong, you go on doing whatsoever you want to do. Your knowledge of the right does not create any difference in you. You know that anger is bad but you remain angry. On the one hand you know that anger is bad, on the other hand there is no problem, you continue to be angry. On the one hand you know that possessiveness is not good, and on the other hand you go on hoarding, you go on possessing – not only things but you even start possessing persons. You possess your wife, your husband, your children – as if they are things, as if they can be possessed. You destroy through your possessiveness, and you know it is wrong.
This borrowed conscience does not help, it simply burdens you. With the first valley crossed, your own conscience arises. Now you know exactly what is wrong and it becomes impossible to do otherwise. This is the point where the Socratic dictum becomes meaningful – that “Knowledge is virtue.”
Now the negative part of the valley of repentance…. The negative part is that you may become too worried about the guilt concerning the past – that you have done this wrong and that wrong, and you have been doing millions of wrongs. You have been unconscious here for so long that if you start counting all of that, it will create a kind of morbidness. You will become so guilty that, rather than growing. you will fall into great darkness.
So if guilt arises and you become morbid and you become too troubled by the past, you will remain in the second valley. You will not be able to surpass it. If the past becomes too important, then naturally you will be continuously crying and weeping and beating your chest and saying, “What wrong I have been doing!”
The positive part is that you should become concerned with the future, not with the past. Yes, you have noted that you have been wrong, but that was natural because you were unconscious. So there is no need to feel guilty. How could one be right when one was unconscious? You have taken note of it – that your whole past has been wrong – but it does not create a burden on your chest. You take note of it. That taking note helps you because you will not be able to do it again – you are finished with it. You feel sad that you have been hurting so many people in so many ways, but you feel joyous also, simultaneously, because now it will not happen any more. You are freed from past and guilt! You don’t become concerned about it, you become concerned about the future, the new opening.
Now you have your own conscience; now the future is going to be totally different, qualitatively different, radically different. You will be thrilled with the adventure. Now you have your own conscience, and your conscience will never allow you to do wrong again. It is not that you will have to control – when the real conscience has arisen there is no need to control, no need to discipline. The right becomes the natural thing. Then the easy is the right and the right is the easy.
In fact, once the conscience has arisen in you, if you want to do wrong you will have to make great effort to do it. And even then there is not much possibility of succeeding.
Without your own conscience you have to make much effort to be right, and even then you don’t succeed. So one is thrilled. One feels sad for the past but one is no longer burdened, because the past is no more. That is the positive part – that one should feel that the transformation has happened, that the blessing has arrived, that God has given you the greatest gift of conscience. Now your life will move in a totally new dimension, on a new track.
This is where real morality is born, virtue, sheela.

The third valley…. The third valley is called the valley of stumbling blocks.
Once the conscience has arisen you will now be able to see how many blocks exist. You have eyes to see how many hindrances there are. There are walls upon walls. There are doors too but they are few and far between. You will be able to see all the stumbling blocks.
Al-Ghazzali says there are four: one, the tempting world – the world of things. They are very fascinating. Lust is created. Why have all the world religions been saying that one has to go beyond the temptation of the world? – because if you are tempted too much by the world, and you hanker too much for the worldly things, you will not have enough energy to desire God. Your desire will be wasted on things.
A man who wants to have a big house, a big balance in the bank, great power in the world, and prestige, puts all his desiring, invests all his desiring in the world. Nothing is left to seek God.
Things are not bad in themselves. Sufis are not against things, remember. Sufis say that things are good in themselves. but one who has started seeking for God and the ultimate truth cannot afford them. You have a certain quality and certain quantity of energy. The whole energy has to be put into one desire. All the desires have to become one desire, only then can God be attained, only then can you surpass this third valley.
Ordinarily we have many desires. the religious person is one who has only one desire, whose all other desires have fallen into one big desire – just as small rivers, small streams, small tributaries fall and become the big Ganges – like that. A religious person is one whose all other desires have become one desire: he desires only God, he desires only transcendence.
So the first is the tempting world; the second is people – attachments to people.
Sufis are again, remember, not against people, but they say that one should not become attached to people. Otherwise that very attachment will become a hindrance, a stumbling block to God. Be with your woman and be with your man, be with your children, be with your friends, but remember that we are all strangers here and our togetherness is just accidental. We are travelers, we have met on the road. For a few days maybe we will be together – feel thankful for that – but sooner or later, ways part. Your wife dies, she goes on her own way, and you will never know where. Or, your wife falls in love with somebody else, and your ways part. Or you fall in love with somebody else. Or your son becomes grown-up and he takes his life into his own hands and moves away from you – every son has to move away from the parents.
We are together on this road for only a few days and our being together is just accidental. It is not going to be forever. So be with people, be lovingly with people, be compassionately with people, but don’t become attached – otherwise your attachment will not allow you freedom enough to go beyond.
So the second is people, attachments. The third Al-Ghazzali calls Satan, and the fourth, the ego.
By Satan the mind is meant – the mind that you have accumulated in the past. Although conscience has arisen, although you have become more conscious than ever, the mechanism of the mind is still there lurking by the side. It will lurk a little longer still. It has been with you for so long that it cannot leave you suddenly. It takes time. And it waits and watches – if some opportunity is there it will immediately jump and take possession of you. It has been your master, you have functioned as a slave. The mind cannot accept that you have become a master so suddenly. It takes time.
The mind is a mechanism, it is always there. For the seeker, the mind is the devil. All the stories about the devil are nothing but about the mind. The devil – or Satan, as Sufis call the devil – is just a mythological name for the mind.
When the devil tempts Jesus, do you think some devil is standing there outside? Don’t be foolish! There is no devil standing outside. The temptation is coming from Jesus’ own mind. The mind says, “Now that you have become so miraculously powerful, why bother about other things? Why not have the kingdom of the whole world? You can have it! It is just within your reach. You can possess the whole world, you have so much power. You are so spiritually high. Your siddhis are released. You can have all the money and all the prestige that you want. Why bother about God and religion? Use this possibility!” Mind is tempting.
And when Jesus says, “Don’t come in my way. Go away!” he is not talking to some devil outside. He is simply saying to the mind, “Please don’t come in my way. I am no longer concerned with the desires that you have, I am no longer concerned with the projects that you have, I am on a totally different journey. You know nothing about it, you keep quiet.”
And the fourth is ego – one of the greatest stumbling blocks on the path of seeking. When you start becoming a little conscious, when your conscience arises, and you start seeing the stumbling blocks, a great ego – from nowhere – suddenly takes possession of you: “I have become a saint, a sage. I am no longer ordinary, I am extraordinary!” And the problem is that you are extraordinary! It is true! So the ego can prove it. That is the greatest problem, because the ego is not just talking nonsense. It is sensible. It is exactly so!
Still one has to be alert that if you get entangled with the ego, with the idea that “I am extraordinary’ then you will always remain in the third valley. You will never be able to reach the fourth, and the fourth will bring more flowers and higher peaks and greater joys – and you will miss.
This is the place where siddhis – spiritual powers – become the most hindering thing.
The negative part is to start fighting with these stumbling blocks. If you start fighting, you will be lost in the valley. There is no need to fight. Don t create enmity. Just understanding is enough.
Fighting means repression. You can repress the ego, you can repress your attachment to people, you can repress your lust for things, and you can repress your Satan, your mind, but the repressed will remain, and you will not be able to enter into the fourth valley.
Only those who have no repressions enter the fourth valley. So don’t start repressing.
The positive part is: take the challenge – that the ego is challenging you. Don’t take it as an enmity, take it rather as a challenge to go beyond. Don’t fight with it; understand it. Look deep into it. Look into the mechanism of it: how it functions, .how this new ego is arising in you, how this mind goes on playing games with you, how you become attached to people, how you become attached to things. Look into the how of it with cool observation, with no antagonism. If you become antagonistic in any way, then you are caught. If you become indulgent, you are caught. If you become antagonistic, you are caught. And these two are the easiest things. People know only two things: either they know how to become friends or they know how to become the enemy. That is the only ordinary understanding possible.
The third thing will help. Be watchful, witnessing; neither inimical nor friendly. Be indifferent. Just see that they are there, because if you take any feeling attitude – for or against – the feelings will become bondages. Feeling means that you become attached. Remember, you are as attached to your enemies as you are attached to your friends. If your enemy dies, you will miss him as much as you will miss your friend – sometimes even more, because he was giving some meaning to your life. Fighting with him, you were enjoying a trip. Now he is no more. The ego that was being fulfilled by fighting with him will never be fulfilled again. You will have to find a new enemy.
So don’t make enemies and don’t make friends. Just see. Be very, very scientifically observant. That is the positive thing to do. Explore what ego is, and explore joyously. Explore what lust is, and explore joyously.

Then comes the fourth valley: the valley of tribulations.
Entry into the unconscious happens in the fourth valley. Up to now you were confined to the world of the conscious. Now, for the first time, you will enter into the deeper realms of your being, the unconscious, the darker part, the night part. Up to now you were in the day part. It was easier. Now things will become more difficult. The higher you go, the more you have to pay. With each higher step the journey becomes more arduous and the fall becomes more dangerous. And one has to be more alert. On each step more awareness will be needed, because you will be moving on higher planes.
The valley of tribulations is the entry into the unconscious. It is the entry into what Christian mystics have called “the dark night of the soul.” It is the entry into the mad world that you are hiding behind yourself. It is very weird, it is very bizarre. Up to the third a man can proceed without a master, but not beyond the third. Up to the third one can go on one’s own. With the fourth a master is a must.
And when I am saying that one can go up to the third on one’s own, I don’t mean that one has to go and I don’t mean that everybody will be able to go. I am simply talking of a theoretical possibility. Up to the third it is theoretically possible that a man can go without a master. But with the fourth, the master becomes an absolute necessity – because now you will be sinking into darkness. You don’t yet have any light of your own that you can use in that darkness. Somebody else’s light will be needed – somebody who has gone into that dark night and for whom it has become possible to see in that darkness.
The negative part of the valley of tribulations is doubt – great doubt will arise! You don’t know what doubt is you don’t know yet! All that you think is doubt is nothing but skepticism, it is not doubt. Doubt is an altogether different phenomenon.
Somebody says, “God is”; you say, “I doubt.” You don’t doubt. How can you doubt? You are only being skeptical. You are only saying, “I don’t know.” Rather than saying “I don’t know’ you are using a very strong word doubt. How can you doubt? Doubt is possible when you are facing a reality.
For example, you have never seen a ghost. And you say, “I doubt the existence of ghosts.” That is not doubt, that is just being skeptical. You are simply saying, “I have never come across one so how can I believe. I doubt.” That is not doubt. Doubt will be when one day, passing through the cemetery, you suddenly come across a ghost! Then your whole being will be shaken. Then you will be for the first time in a state where doubt arises: whether that which you are facing is true or an hallucination.
Doubt is very existential; skepticism is intellectual. Skepticism is only in the mind; doubt enters into your very being, your whole body-mind-soul. Your totality is shaken.
In this dark night of the soul, doubt arises. Doubt about God – because you were seeking for more light and this is happening, just the opposite. You were seeking for more bliss and you have fallen into the dark night. A great doubt arises about whether you are going right, about whether this seeking is worth it – because you were seeking for gold, you were seeking for great light and great enlightenment and nirvana and samadhi and satori, and instead of satori and samadhi, this dark night has overwhelmed you. Even those lights that used to be there are there no more. Even those certainties that used to be there are there no more.
You used to know certain things; now you know nothing. You had some security. Even that is gone. The very earth underneath your feet has slipped away; you are drowning. Then doubt arises. Then you start feeling that maybe this whole religious trip is nonsense, maybe there is no God, maybe you were fooling yourself, maybe you have chosen something absurd. It was better to live in the world, to be of the world. It was better to have many more things: to enjoy power, to enjoy sex, to enjoy money. What have I done? I have lost all and this is the result!
To every seeker this moment comes. And if this doubt arises, then naturally one starts defending oneself against the darkness. One creates an armor around oneself against the darkness, the invading darkness. One has to protect oneself. If you do that you will be thrown back again to the conscious part of your mind. You will miss the mystery of darkness. Light is beautiful, but nothing compared with darkness. Darkness is more beautiful, more cooling, more deep. Darkness has depth; light is shallow. And unless you are able to welcome darkness you will not be able to welcome death.
So the first teaching is that you have to accept, welcome, relax. This darkness is the first glimpse of God. It is dark, but later on you will understand that it was not dark. It was really that for the first time you had opened your eyes towards God and it was too dazzling, that’s why it looked dark. It was not dark; darkness was your interpretation.
Look at the sun for a few seconds and soon you will be surrounded by darkness. It is too much; you cannot bear it. A man can go blind by looking at the sun too long. Look at the sun for a few seconds and then go into your house and you will find the whole house full of darkness. Just a moment before you were there and you could see everything. Now you cannot see anything; you will stumble over things.
That it is dark is interpretation. But it is natural. Later on when you have transcended the valley then you will be able to look back and see the reality. Only a master can hold your hand in this dark night of the soul and make you confident, can say to you and convince you – “Don’t be worried. It only looks dark, it is not dark. It is the first meeting with God. You are coming closer.”
There are three things to be understood: sleep, death and samadhi.
Sleep is like death. In the East we say it is the small death, the tiny death. We die every night and disappear into the dark night. Then comes death – a bigger death than sleep. The body disappears but the mind remains and is born again. Then comes the ultimate death – samadhi – where body disappears and mind disappears and only the innermost core, consciousness, remains. That is the ultimate death.
In the fourth valley you encounter the first glimpse of how the ultimate death is going to happen to you. If you reject it, if you defend yourself against it, if you create an armor, you will be thrown back to the third valley, and you will miss. And once you have missed the fourth you will always remain afraid to go again into it.
My observation about people is that people who have entered into the fourth valley some time in their past lives, and have become too frightened and escaped from it, are the people who are always afraid of anything deeper. Love – and they will be afraid. Orgasm – and they will be afraid. Friendship – and only so far; beyond that they will be afraid. Discipleship – and they will be afraid. Surrender – and they will be afraid. Prayer – they will be afraid. They will be afraid of all those things that can again bring them to that fourth valley. They may not be consciously aware of why they are afraid.
The fourth valley is very important because it is just in the middle. There are seven valleys, the fourth is just in the middle. Three are on this side and three are on that side. The fourth is immensely significant; it is the bridge. The master is needed on this bridge because you pass from the known to the unknown, from the finite to the infinite, from the trivial to the profound.
The positive part is trust, surrender; the negative part is doubt, defense. The master starts teaching you about trust and surrender from the very beginning so that by and by it becomes your climate – because it will be needed when you enter into the fourth valley.
Sometimes people come to me and they say, “Why can’t we be here without surrendering? Why can’t we meditate and listen to you and be benefited as much as we want? What is the point of surrendering?”
They don’t understand. In the beginning it may not look very relevant. Why? For what? You can listen to me without surrendering and you can meditate here without surrendering. You can pass through growth groups without surrendering. It seems perfectly okay. Surrendering does not seem to be needed at all. But you don’t know what is going to happen in the future. For that, preparation has to be made right now. You cannot wait for that moment. If preparation has not been made before, then you will miss. Then when the right time comes, when your house is on fire and you have not dug the well yet, and you start digging it, by the time it is ready, the house will be gone.
One has to dig the well before the house catches fire! So right now it may not seem relevant. I can understand. Logically it is not relevant right now. Listening to me, what surrender is needed? Meditating, what surrender is needed? But when you enter the fourth valley, surrender will be needed. And you cannot suddenly learn the ways of surrender. You have to go on learning them before the need arises. Surrender has to become your climate.

The fifth valley…the thundering valley.
In the fifth valley you enter death. In the fourth you entered sleep, darkness; in the fifth you enter death. Or, if you like to use modern terminology for it: in the fourth you enter the personal unconscious; in the fifth you enter the collective unconscious. Great fear arises because you are losing your individuality.
In the fourth you were losing light, day, but you were there. In the fifth you are losing yourself – you don’t feel as if you are, you are dispersing, you are melting. Your feeling that “I am a center” starts becoming vague, cloudy.
With entry into death, entry into the collective unconscious, great fear arises, great anguish is felt – the greatest anguish that you will ever feel – because there comes the question: to be or not to be? You are disappearing; your whole being will hanker to be. You would like to go back to the fourth. It was dark, but at least it was good – you were there. Now, the darkness has become more dense. Not only that, you are disappearing into it. Soon not even a trace will be left of you.
The negative part is clinging to the self. That’s why great teachers – Buddha or Jalaluddin Rumi – insist – “Remember, no-self, anatta.” Sufis call it fana – one disappears. And one should prepare for this disappearance, one should be ready – not only ready but in a deep welcome. It is going to bring great joy, because all your misery is contained in your ego. The very idea that “I am” is your ignorance. The very idea that “I am” creates all kinds of anxieties and problems for you. The ego is the hell.
Jean-Paul Sartre has said: “Hell is other people.” That is not right. The hell is you, the hell is the ego! If other people feel like the hell, they feel like the hell also because of the ego – because they hurt it continuously. They go on pushing your buttons. Because you have this wound of the ego everybody seems to hurt you. It is just your idea that “I am special” and when somebody does not recognize it, it gives pain. When you don’t have any idea of being special – what Zen people call “to become ordinary” – if you become ordinary, then this valley can be crossed. If you become nobody, then this valley can easily be crossed.
So the negative part is clinging to the self and the positive part is relaxing into no-self, into nothingness – being ready to die, willingly, joyously, voluntarily.

Then comes the sixth valley – the abysmal valley.
One disappears. In the fifth, one was disappearing; in the sixth, one is no more. One is a memory of the past, one disappears. In the fifth, one was entering into death; in the sixth, death has happened, one has died, one is no more. That’s why it is called the “abysmal valley.” It is the most painful, because it is the sixth – the last but one. One passes into the greatest pain of not being, of nothingness. One cannot believe it – because in a certain sense one is, and in a certain sense one is no more. The paradox has come to the ultimate peak. One is and one is not. One can see one’s own corpse – one is dead – and still one knows that one is seeing, so one must be in some way, in some sense. All the past ideas of the self have become irrelevant. A new idea of self arises.
Death happens, one disappears. This is what Christians call crucifixion. Nothingness has arrived; one is just an empty sky. Hindus call it samadhi, Zen people call it satori.
And the negative part complains. It will be good to remind you. At the crucifixion Jesus shows both attitudes. First he complains. He looks at the sky and says, “Why? Why have you forsaken me? Why have you abandoned me?” This is the negative part. He is complaining. He is dying and no help is arriving. He is on the cross – and deep down somewhere there must have been a lurking desire that God’s hand will arrive and everything will be okay and the cross will become a crown and he will descend with new glory. Somewhere there must have been a lurking desire in the very unconscious core of his mind – he may not have been aware of it. He had waited long enough, the last point had come. He had carried his cross on the hill, he had suffered all kinds of humiliation, but he had waited, patiently waited – waited for this moment. Now his hands have been nailed. Now it is a question of seconds and he will be gone. Now there is no time left to wait any more and the help has not come and God is not visible. Hence the cry, “Why have you forsaken me? Why have you abandoned me?” This is the negative part, natural even to a man like Jesus.
If you think of your past and then complain – “I have been doing all that was asked of me to do, all that you have ordered me to do. I have followed you blindly, and this is the result? This is the fulfillment…?”
The positive part is deep gratitude. With the second, the positive part, one forgets the past, one looks into the future and one trusts. The last test has come, the ultimate test, and one feels grateful that “If this is your will, let it be done.” That’s what Jesus did. He showed both the attitudes. First he showed the negative – which is very human. I love Jesus because he showed that. He was very human. That’s why he used to say again and again, “I am the Son of Man.” As many times as he says “I am the Son of God” he says “I am the Son of Man.”
He was eternity come into time; he was the beyond come into the world. He belonged to both the world and the beyond. That’s how each master belongs – to both. One foot is in this world, the other foot is in the other. And on the crucifixion day, in that moment when all is disappearing, Jesus shows both attitudes. First, he shows the attitude of being “Son of Man.” He says, “Why? Why have you abandoned me? I have hoped, I have prayed, I have lived a life of virtue – and this is the fulfillment? This is the reward?”
But then he immediately understands that he is missing the point. If this is the will of God then this has to be so. He surrenders. The positive is gratitude, surrender.
With “Why have you abandoned me?” he recognizes his complaint, his humanity. He must have laughed in that moment, he must have seen his limitation as a human being, and he dropped it. Immediately he says, his immediate statement is, “Thy kingdom come, Thy will be done.” Gratitude has arisen, surrender is total. Now there is nothing more.
Jesus dies as Son of God. And the gap is very, very tiny. In just a split second he changed from being man into God. The moment complaint changes into trust, you change from human into God. He becomes prayer. “Thy will be done.” Now he is no more. Now he has no will of his own.

And then comes the seventh valley, which is the last, the ultimate – the valley of hymns, the valley of celebration.
Rebirth, resurrection, happens in the seventh valley. That is the meaning of the Christian idea of resurrection – that Christ is reborn, reborn in the body of glory, reborn in the body of light, reborn in the body divine. Now there is no positive, no negative. Now there is no duality. One is one. Unity has arisen – what Hindus call advait. The dual has disappeared. One has come home.
The valley of the hymns…. Al-Ghazzali has given it a beautiful name. Now there is nothing left – just a song, a song of celebration, praise of God, utter joy. This is what I call the ultimate orgasm.
If I were going to name this valley I would call it the valley of total orgasm. Only celebration is left. One has flowered, bloomed. The fragrance is released. Now there is nowhere to go. Man has become that for which he was seeking, searching, struggling.
Man is a paradox. He is not what he is. He is that which he is not yet. But the day you realize the ultimate, you will have a laugh arising in your very heart, because then you will know that you were always this. It was just unknown to you. The future was contained in you, just hidden. You had to discover it. These seven valleys are the valleys of discovery.
This is a beautiful map; this is the Sufi map.

Now this story.
There was once a woman who abandoned the religion in which she had been brought up. She left the ranks of the atheists too, and joined another faith. Then she became convinced of the truth of yet another. Each time she changed her beliefs. She imagined that she had gained something, but not quite enough. Each time she entered a new fold she was welcomed, and her recruitment was regarded as a good thing, and a sign of her sanity and enlightenment.
Her inward state, however, was one of confusion.
This woman was lost in the first valley – the valley of knowledge – and she got hooked to the negative. She became knowledgeable. She went to this school and to that; she went to this teacher and that; she studied this doctrine and that; and each time she started something new she would be thrilled. It would be a kind of honeymoon. And sooner or later she would be fed up with it and she would start moving and searching again.
The total result was that she gathered much knowledge of diverse nature, much knowledge of contradictory systems. All those systems work, remember – never forget it! Each system works, but it works in its purity only. If you mix it with many systems it will never work. It will be like you take a few parts from a Mercedes-Benz and a few parts from a Rolls Royce and a few parts from a Chevrolet and a few parts from a Ford and a few parts from a truck and a few parts from somewhere else, and you put them together. They are all useful, but this mechanism that you have created out of them is not going to work. A part that was functioning in a certain mechanism will not be able to function with other kinds of parts. Each system is an organic whole. It is complete in itself. If you listen to Mahavira and find a few beautiful thoughts, and then you go to Buddha and listen and find a few beautiful thoughts. and you make a concoction – a kedgeree – you will become confused. Those fragments that you have taken from Mahavira were beautiful, but they belonged to a certain system; they were organic parts of a certain whole. They can function only in that whole, they cannot function with anything Buddhist. And the Buddhist fragments are beautiful, but only in a Buddhist system.
Now this woman became more and more confused. And this woman is very representative of many people – many people here also – who have been going to this teacher and that, to this system and that, and go on gathering. And they think that just by gathering a few wise statements they are going to become wise. They are utter fools! They will simply go mad.
Each system is perfect and works. But don’t mix it with anything else; let it function on its own.
This woman …abandoned the religion in which she had been brought up. Then she became an atheist – she abandoned religion itself. Then she …joined another faith – she abandoned atheism too. And Then she became convinced of the truth of yet another. Each time she changed her beliefs, she imagined that she had gained something, but not quite enough.
She was just collecting fragments, wise sayings. These wise sayings may look wise, may be useful to the system from which they have been taken, but they become useless the moment you take them out.
It is said of a Hindu mystic that he went begging. And a woman looked at his eyes…. He had beautiful eyes. Saints have beautiful eyes, nobody can have eyes like a saint – the depth, the joy, the feeling that one has arrived, the relaxation, the rest, the compassion. The woman became immensely attracted to the eyes. She started following the mystic.
One day the mystic asked, “What is the matter? Why do you go on following me? I don’t see any religious search in you.”
The woman confessed. She said, “In fact, I don’t have anything to do with religion. I have simply become attracted to your eyes; you have beautiful eyes.”
The mystic said, “You go home. Tomorrow I will come to your home.”
She was very happy. She thought that the mystic was also interested in her. She took a bath, perfumed her body, decorated everything with flowers, cleaned the whole house. With great expectation and hope she was waiting. And then came the mystic. She could not believe it! He had taken his eyes out and he had brought them on a plate.
And he said, “You keep them, otherwise you have to follow me unnecessarily. You keep these eyes. You can have them. I don’t have much use for them because whatsoever I needed to see I have seen. And it doesn’t look good that you go on following me just because of these eyes. You keep them.”
But are these eyes, eyes any more? They are not. They were eyes only when they were in the organic unity of the body. Now they are nothing. Now you can look into them and you will not find any depth. You can look into them and you will not find any compassion or any love. There is nothing!. They are just ordinary pebbles, meaningless. The meaning is always in the totality.
So never think that you can become wise by collecting wise sayings. That is not possible. In this age many people have tried that. In India, Mahatma Gandhi was trying it – take a few things from the Koran and a few things from the Bible and a few things from the. Gita and a few things from the Dhammapada, and collect them and make a concoction. That concoction he used to call the synthesis of all religions. This is just meaningless. You cannot create a synthesis of all religions. It will be like you cut off one of my hands and a leg of Krishnamurti and the head of Meher Baba, and put them all together and call it synthesis of all religions. It will not be of any use. It will stink! It will be ugly. That’s what Mahatma Gandhi has done.
No synthesis is possible, and no synthesis is needed! No synthesis is needed between a rose-bush and the lotus – they are perfectly beautiful as they are. Lotus is lotus, rose is rose, Islam is Islam, Hinduism is Hinduism, Zen is Zen, Sufism is Sufism. And Judaism is Judaism, and Jainism is Jainism. They are perfectly beautiful as they are. They are not lacking anything.
Each system is complete.
Now this woman gathered something from everywhere. And each time she went to a new school…. Of course, whenever a new recruit comes, the people feel very good. It proves that they are right. This woman has been to that master and that master and that master – and she has left, abandoned all. And now she has come to their master! So their master must be the highest master, the greatest master. So they all welcomed her and they recruited her and regarded it …as a good thing and a sign of sanity and enlightenment.
It was not sanity; she was going insane. And it was not enlightenment; she was getting farther away every day. But to know that, she had to come to a real master.
Her inward state, however, was one of confusion.

At length, she heard of a certain celebrated teacher, Imam Jafar Sadik….
Only a real master can be shocking. All others who are just pseudo are never shocking. How can they shock? You are their customers, they have to persuade you – they cannot shock you. They have to adjust themselves to you. In fact, they always say what you want to hear, they never say that which will be shocking – otherwise you may leave them.
I know. I have been in contact with millions of people in this country. And because I went on shocking them, by and by they left. They were not here to listen to the truth, they were here to listen to their truth – and they had nothing. they had no truth at all. If they had had truth, there would have been no need to come to listen to me in the first place. But they thought that they had the truth. If they go to a pseudo-master he will say the thing that they want to hear. He will accommodate himself to them. And whenever a master accommodates himself to you, beware – he is no master! Because if he is accommodating himself to you, how can he transform you? He is your follower. He is trying to console you. He cannot be a transforming medium.
Transformation is painful. A master has to work with a hammer in his hand.
This woman came to Imam Jafar Sadik. When she came to him….
After he listened to her protestations and ideas, he said: “Return to your home, I shall send you my decision in a message.”

That’s the way of the Sufis. They are very, very experimental people, and very practical and down to earth. Rather than saying anything, he says, “I will send a message. You go home.” He must have seen the reality of the woman – that she was already too confused. Saying anything to her would be confusing her more. Right now nothing could be taught to her. Right now she did not need to learn any more, she had already learned enough. She needed unlearning. So he didn’t say anything.
Soon afterwards the woman found a disciple of the sheik at the door. In his hand was a packet from his master. She opened it, and saw that it contained a glass bottle, half full with three layers of packed sand – black, red and white – held down by a wad of cotton. On the outside was written: “Remove the cotton and shake the bottle to see what you are like.”
She took the wadding out and shook the sand in the bottle. The different colored grains of sand mixed together, and all that she was left with was a mass of grayish sand.
Sadik is trying to show her – “You have become just a confusion. You have become mixed with all kinds of colors, and the result is that you are just gray. You don’t have any color.”
And these three layers of sands are very significant.
Sufis say there are three ways to God: knowledge, love, action – just as Hindus say: dhyan marga, bhakti marga, karma marga. This is because man has three faculties: the faculty of cognition, the faculty of feeling, and the faculty of action. The body is the source of action; the heart is the source of feeling, love, devotion; and the intellect is the source of cognition, knowledge, knowing.
Because of these three faculties in man, there are three doors. Through these three doors man can enter into the divine. Action is black because it is the lowest. Feeling, love, is white because it is the highest. And between the two is the intellect – red. The intellect is painted red because it is very aggressive, bloody; it has the color of blood. The heart is painted white by Sufis because it is innocent, pure. White is the symbol of renunciation.
You can ask the physicists. The physicists say that the color white means that all the rays of the sun have been turned back. The color black means that all the rays of the sun have been absorbed. The red means that only the red is turned back; the green means that only the green is turned back. Each ray of light has seven colors. If a certain thing absorbs all the colors, it becomes black. If a certain thing renounces all the colors, it becomes white. So black is indulgence, white is renunciation.
Love is sacrifice, love is renunciation. When you love you are ready to give all. By giving, you become white. Intellect is very aggressive, always in a fighting mood – argumentative; hence the color red. Action is the lowest – body-rooted. But all these three doors are there.
There were three layers of sand in the bottle; the bottle was half full. And the master said, “Remove the wad, shake the bottle and see what happens. That is your situation. There is something from the people who talk about love and live in love; and something from the people who talk about knowledge and live through intelligence; and something about the people who talk about action and live through action – and they have all become mixed in you. and now you don’t have any color any more. You are just grayish – a confusion.”
This must have been a great shock to the woman – because everywhere else she had gone before she had been welcomed, and everywhere they had told her that now she had become enlightened because she had chosen the right master. Now she had come to the right door. Now she had become sane. Up to now, wandering here and there, she had been mad. She was recruited with great welcome. But Sadik hammered her. He did not even feel it right to say anything to her. He sent a message – a very practical device to show her, her state of consciousness. She was lost in the first valley. She could not go beyond the first valley.
The story is of great significance. Many of you are lost in the first valley. It you want to go to the second, you will have to drop all the rubbish that you have gathered in your mind. All kinds of thoughts you will have to drop. You will have to unlearn.
Unlearning is the positive path. Through unlearning you will have a new attitude arising in you – you will be less concerned with the known, you will be more concerned with the knower. And once you have dropped all your knowledge it will be very clear to you whether it is action that is going to be your door, or it is love, or it is knowledge. Right now you are a grayish mass.
Meditate over this story, and meditate over the seven valleys. Let me repeat it again: man is a paradox. Man is the only being who tries to surpass himself. Man is the only being who has a great longing to transcend. This is man’s glory, because this is God’s gift to man; and this is man’s anguish too.
Now it depends on you whether you will make it into a blessing or into a curse.
Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
I have often thought that if children were raised in a free and loving environment rather than the insane society that we grew up in, they would all mature into free, loving, enlightened beings. But if this were so, many of the primitive societies would be overflowing with enlightened beings. Why is this not so?
The first thing: before you can get to yourself, you will have to lose yourself. The child is born in innocence, and if the child never loses his innocence he will never become enlightened. Enlightenment means that you have lost it and regained it – paradise lost and regained. It is part of enlightenment that first you must lose it.
It is like a fish who has always lived in the ocean – it is impossible for the fish to know the ocean. It is very obvious to those who are standing outside but it is not so obvious to the fish. It has been born into it, it is part of it, it is like a wave. To know the ocean, a little separation is needed, a little distance is needed. The fish will remain unaware of the ocean and will die. But take the fish out, let the fish out, throw the fish on the bank, on the hot sand, and there will be pain and there will be suffering – but in that suffering the fish will know for the first time that she has been living in the ocean. And for the first time a great thirst, a great desire will come to go back to the ocean. And she will make efforts to go back.
And if she succeeds and reaches back into the ocean there will be great joy. She had been in the ocean forever but there had been no joy. But now there will be joy, now she will be thrilled, blessed! Now each moment will be a kind of ecstasy. And it is the old, the same ocean she was born in. What difference has happened? A new consciousness has arisen. The fish is no longer innocent, the fish is enlightened.
In primitive societies you will not find buddhas, you will not find christs. Primitive societies live in the ocean. Innocence you will find, a childlike innocence you will find, an animal-like innocence you will find – but you will not find a buddha. A buddha is one who has recognized his innocence. This recognition makes the difference. But to recognize, you first have to lose.
I can understand. Your question is very relevant. If this insane society drives you into neurotic paths, then the logical mind will say then why are the primitives not all enlightened? This society drives you into madness but through that very driving you start moving away from your innermost core. Suffering arises, and a great desire to come back home arises. That desire is what religion is all about – to come back home.
What the society has done you will have to undo. Religion is against the society, the antidote to society. That’s why when religion becomes part of society it is no longer religion. It becomes Christianity, Hinduism, Jainism, Judaism. Then it is no longer religion. Religion is basically against society. It has to be – because society takes you away from yourself and religion brings you back to your own being. It destroys, demolishes, all that the society has done. But before it can demolish, the society has to do something.
So buddhas exist only in a very cultured society. Enlightened people exist only in a very insane society. It will look paradoxical, but this is how it is.
If you look from this standpoint then you will be rebellious but you will not be against the society. There is a difference. You will be very compassionate, even towards all this insanity that is created by the society. It is part of the game. It makes enlightenment possible.
Take another example. A man has lived always in health. He does not know what a fever is; he does not know what a headache is. He does not know any kind of illness. Can you imagine him feeling his health? It is not possible. In the very nature of things he will never know what health is. And he is healthy. So to know that one is healthy and the well-being of health, health alone is not enough. One can be healthy, perfectly healthy, and one may not be aware of it – because the awareness comes from the opposite. The awareness comes from a dialectical process. The thesis must be opposed by the antithesis. Health must fall into illness, then you become aware of what you have lost. And if you can regain it there is great joy.

There is a Sufi story….
A very rich man was searching for bliss, for truth – or whatsoever name you want to give to his search. He had much money and he was ready to offer any amount of this money to anybody who could give him a key. He went from one teacher to another, but nobody could supply him with happiness. He was ready to pay any price; that was not a problem at all.
He was carrying a big load of diamonds in a bag and he would put the bag before a master and he would say, “Now take this, but tell me the secret of bliss.”
Then he came to a Sufi teacher. The Sufi was sitting under a tree. The rich man came on his horse with his famous bag – it had become famous all over the country – and he put the bag before the master and said, “I am in search of happiness and I am ready to pay anything. Here are many diamonds – crores of rupees worth. You can take them, but give me happiness.”
And the Sufi master did something. Sufis are people who do. Rather than answering, they create a situation. The master simply jumped upon the bag and ran away!
For a second, the rich man could not believe what was happening. Such a famous master! And then he suddenly realized what had happened. The master had gone with his diamonds! So he started shouting and running after the master. But in that village the master knew every street every nook and corner. And the rich man was running after him and shouting, “I have been robbed! My whole life’s treasure has been robbed! This is a thief. Catch hold of him. This is no longer a master. This is a fraud. This man is a cheat.” And he was shouting and running. But he could not get hold of the master because the master knew the streets of the town.
The whole town gathered. The whole town started collecting around the rich man and they said, “Don’t be worried.” But he said, “Why should I not be worried? I have been completely destroyed. All that I had was in the bag and that man has escaped with it.” And he was crying and he was as miserable as one can be.
Then the whole crowd and the rich man went in search and found the master sitting back under his tree with the bag in the place where the rich man had put it. And his horse was standing there. The rich man came and jumped on his bag. Holding the bag close to his heart he gave a great sigh of relief and he said, “Thank God!”
And the Sufi master said, “Are you happy or not? This is the key to happiness. Are you happy or not? Tell me.” And the man said, “Really, I have never been so happy!”

In a primitive society people are innocent. They are like Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden. They have not yet tasted the fruit of the tree of knowledge. A civilized person is Adam expelled. He has tasted the fruit of the tree of knowledge. He is no longer innocent, he is corrupted.
But Adam cannot become Christ. That is not possible. You first have to fall to rise, you have to lose to get. Adam prepares the way for Christ. By being expelled from innocence, a new possibility arises – he can re-enter again, he can re-enter the innocence. This second innocence – what Hindus call “second birth,” dwij – this second birth, this second innocence, is qualitatively different from the first. The first was ignorant innocence. It was not aware of itself. It was not luminous, it was dark. The second kind of innocence is luminous. A light burns in it. It is aware of itself. It is not only innocence, it is innocence plus awareness.
So in a way even this insane society does something beautiful to you – it takes away your bag of diamonds. It creates the possibility of being happy. If you are stuck in it then something has gone wrong, otherwise there is nothing wrong. Going away is part of coming back. Go as far away as possible and coming back will be as beautiful as can be. Go as distant from God as you can. The farther you go, the more ecstatic the coming back will be.
So in a primitive society enlightened people don’t exist. They exist only in an insane society. That is the first thing.
The second thing: even a primitive society is not really absolutely primitive. In fact, no society can be absolutely primitive. Society as such means that civilization has entered, even if it is primitive. It may be a primitive civilization, maybe it does not have cars and roads and airplanes – that does not matter. That does not make a society a society.
A society is made out of rules, regulations, taboos, inhibitions. Even in a primitive society they are there. they are crude, gross, as primitive as the society is primitive. but they are there. No society can exist without rules. Society means rules. No society can exist without taboos. Society means taboos. No society can exist without repressions. Society means repressions. Society means that the individual has to fit with the mass. In that very fitting, the individual loses his innocence. He becomes corrupted.
So the second thing to remember is that even a primitive society is a society, so there is some possibility of being enlightened. But the more the society becomes complex, the more there is a possibility of becoming enlightened. The more there is a possibility of becoming insane, the more there is a possibility of becoming enlightened.
Now it will depend on you how you use the situation. A civilized society creates a great possibility. You can get obsessed, you can get stuck, you can become frozen – that is your choice. Otherwise, the more complex the society is, the closer you are to becoming enlightened. You can use that opportunity.
Buddha was born in a very complex Hindu society. That was the peak of Indian civilization, the golden age. The society was very complex, very sophisticated. Buddha was born into it. And all the twenty-four tirthankaras of the Jainas, Buddha, and all the avataras of the Hindus – Krishna, Ram and others – they all came from the very sophisticated layer of the society. They were all aristocrats. They didn’t come from the low strata. They were all kings or sons of kings. Why? Because at that peak the insanity drives you really the whole distance away from God. And then the turning becomes possible.
I am not saying that the turning is going to happen inevitably – I am not saying that. It will depend on you. If you become aware of the insanity that you are living in, you will start turning. If you don’t become aware of the insanity and you remain asleep in it, you may continue to remain insane.
It is not an accident that the East is no longer much interested in religion. The East is so poor now and society has fallen so low; it is no longer sophisticated, it is no longer aristocratic. Its problems are very physical, down-to-earth. It cannot think of spiritual problems.
It is no accident that the West is becoming more and more interested in religion. The Americans particularly are becoming very deeply involved with religion – because now America is at the peak of civilization, of sophistication, of luxury, of affluence. Exactly the same thing happened two thousand and five hundred years ago in India, when India was the golden bird – just as America is today. America is modern India.
The sun is going to rise in the West. The East is deserted. The East is a potential field for communism, not for religion. Eastern countries are by and by turning communist. Communism can only be the religion of the East – it is the lowest kind of religion.
So the American mind, particularly the cultured American mind, is interested in Buddha, not in Marx; is interested in Krishna, not in Marx. But the Chinese mind is interested in Marx, Lenin, Mao. The Indian mind is interested in Gandhi, in Marx, in socialism, in communism. When you are hungry, your religion can only be communism. When your bodily needs are fulfilled, when your mental needs are fulfilled, then there is no way other than to be religious. Then you will start seeking meditation, satori, samadhi.

The second question:
Osho,
Before coming to Pune I thought I knew something about helping. Now I feel I know nothing about helping. The most I can do is be present with a client and follow my instincts at that moment. It is a very scary place.
Now you are in fact beginning to be a helper, a therapist. When you start losing that ego of being a therapist, feeling starts flowing through you. That ego is an obstruction. A real therapist does not know that he is a therapist, he is just a medium for God to flow through.
And I can understand why you are feeling scared – because all your expertise and all your past has existed around a subtle ego, around “I.” Now that seems to be relevant no more. When the past seems to be relevant no more, one feels scared. One is losing knowledgeability and that was your support, that was the ground on which you were standing. You used to know this and that, you used to know how to help, what to do, what was needed…now all that is disappearing. Now you will not know what to do and you will not know the right answer to every question.
But now, for the first time, if you remain available to the patient, your client, the right answer will come through you. It will vibrate through you. It will not be your answer, that is true, it will be no longer your answer – it will be God’s response through you.
That’s my whole work here. I am preparing a new kind of therapist, a totally new kind of therapist, whose function is not to do something to the patient, but just to be available. Their presence will be a healing presence, miracles will happen through them, but they will not be able to say, “I have done this.” God will be doing the miracle, or the unknown, or the whole. And for the first time you will be really a help, a great help.
But for a few days, a few months, a few years…. It depends. If you relax into this, surrender into this, this hesitation will disappear soon. If you don’t surrender, if you go on resisting, then it will take many months or many years. Or maybe you may succeed in resisting and it may disappear again. Then you will miss a great opportunity – a door was opening but you didn’t allow it to open.
My observation is that when a musician becomes a real musician, he throws away all musical instruments. He need not have them. Now the music arises in his innermost core; it is not produced by any instruments. When an archer becomes a real archer, he throws away his bow and arrows. There is no need for them. When a healer really becomes a healer, he forgets that he is a healer.
A man of knowing becomes completely innocent, unburdened of knowledge. And the process is…. I am not saying that you need not have any training – no, not at all. I am not saying that you need not know anything about psychoanalysis, psychiatry, medicine – I am not saying that. I am saying that you have to know all that and one day you have to forget it too. I am not saying that suddenly a man who does not know anything about archery can become an archer just by surrendering, no. First one needs to know – that is the first part. One has to learn. Then the second part, and the higher part, is that when you have learned all, forget the learning.
In Zen they say that if a person wants to become a great painter he should first learn painting for twelve years – day in, day out. He should go on learning all that is possible about colors, painting, canvases, techniques, and after twelve years he should throw away his canvas, his brush, his colors, and for twelve years he should forget all about painting. He should never touch it, never talk about it. And then one day he should start painting again. Now the painting will have something original about it. All that is needed as technique is there, but it is no more in the conscious mind, it is no more a part of the ego. It has gone deep into the unconscious. Those twelve years of training, learning, have become part of his blood and bones.
Then for twelve years he has simply forgotten about it. So from the conscious mind all has disappeared. If you ask him anything, he will not be able to say anything. He will not be able to talk about painting any more. Now he will paint like an innocent child who does not know anything, and yet in his painting will be all the expertise of the technician. Now two great things will be meeting in him: the innocence of the child and the knowledgeability of the expert. When these two things meet, there is great creativity.
What happens ordinarily? One can become just an expert, a technician…then you can paint, and you can paint perfectly, but something will be missing. The soul will be missing. The painting will be perfect. Nobody will be able to find any fault, that is true, but that is not enough for a painting – that nobody can find any fault. That is not enough. It is needed, but it is not enough. It is necessary, but not enough. Something more is needed. Just to say about a painting that there is no fault in it, is not praise.
If a poet brings a poem and you say, “Yes, it is perfectly as it should be. There are no mistakes, no linguistic mistakes, no grammatical mistakes, no mistakes in the rhythm – everything is perfectly okay,” this is not praising it. It may be dead. It has to be dead. Life is not there. It is a corpse. Everything seems to be perfect but something very essential is missing.
I have heard about a madman who escaped from his mad asylum. He was a professor of philosophy – and a very clever man. When he escaped from the mad asylum, naturally he started thinking about how to avoid detection – because they would be searching for him immediately. All over the country a search would be made. He was a dangerous madman and the police would be looking for him.
So he thought it over. What to do? How not to be caught again? And he found a very, very perfect solution. He knew why people had started to think that he was mad – it was because he used to make such absurd statements. So he thought, “I should do one thing. I should never make any absurd statements. Secondly, I should make only statements which are absolutely certain, with which nobody can find any fault. I will say only things which are proved by science and I will not say a single thing which cannot be proved. Unimpeachable, impeccable will be my statements.”
So he searched in his memory. He was a great scholar, a very famous professor. He remembered a few statements which were perfect. Nobody could find fault with them. For example: “The earth is round. Two plus two is four” – things like that. That was his whole conversation. You could say anything and he would say, “The earth is round. Two plus two is four.” He would say things like that. He would only say things like that.
Within three days he was caught. He was very much surprised. Why? When he was caught he told the superintendent, “But I am puzzled. Not a single statement have I made which can be proved wrong. Can you prove that the earth is not round? What was wrong in it? How could they detect that I am mad?”
There was nothing wrong in it – obviously, certainly. The statement was perfectly true – the earth is round and two plus two is equal to four. But it is irrelevant! Somebody is talking about his woman and you say, “The earth is round.” It is irrelevant. It is meaningless.
A technician goes on doing the right things but they have no meaning. He can make a beautiful painting but something is missing – meaning is missing. You cannot find any fault with his color, you cannot find any fault with his drawing – you cannot find any fault. If you have to find fault you will be not able to. But that is not the point. Where is the meaning? Where is the significance? Something is missing. The total is missing. It is a mechanical phenomenon. The organic unity is missing. That organic unity comes out of innocence, not out of expertise.
So there are painters who are only technicians. Because of these technicians there was a great revolt in the world of painting. People revolted. They stopped going to the art colleges, they stopped learning painting, and they said, “We will be free painters.” So they started free painting. Now their painting may be original, it may have some significance, but they are incapable of painting it on the canvas. They don’t know how to mix colors, they don’t know how to draw. The idea in their mind may be great, but they have no expertise to bring to the canvas. That’s what has happened to modern painting. Looking at a modern painting it is very puzzling. You don’t know what you are looking at. The man seems to be original but he seems to know nothing about painting.
I have heard….
Once a rich man came to Picasso. He wanted two of his paintings and only one painting was ready. And the man was ready to give him any amount of money. So Picasso said, “You wait. I will bring two paintings.” He went in and he cut the painting in two.
Now if you cut Picasso’s painting in two, or even in four, it does not make any difference – because it is just a mad jumble of colors. And he sold that one painting as two.
Another story about Picasso….
His paintings were being exhibited and the critics were surrounding one painting especially. His paintings were strange, but that was the strangest he had ever done. And they were really full of praise – like anything. And then came Picasso and he said, “Who has put it upside-down?” The painting was upside-down!
Or another story….
A rich woman asked Picasso to do her portrait. He did it. He took many months. And he was going to get millions of dollars out of it.
Then the woman came and she said, “Everything is okay, but I don’t like the nose.” So Picasso said, “Okay. Come after seven days.”
And then he was sitting before his painting, very much worried. And the woman who used to live with him in those days asked, “Why are you so worried? I have never seen you so worried.” He said, “The problem is – where have I painted the nose? I cannot find it.”
Somebody can be very technically expert – then the thing goes dead – and somebody can be very innocently, childishly original but then, then again it can’t be a real painting. Zen people are right. A painting needs both the innocence of a child and expertise – both together. Then a great synthesis arises.
One has to learn and then to forget – that’s my whole approach here. My approach about therapy is the same. This is my approach about everything – that first you have to know, and then you have to forget all that you know. Then the knowing goes into your blood. It becomes an unconscious milieu around you. It goes on functioning from the unconscious. And in the conscious you remain very, very innocent, original. Then there is great joy.
You ask me, “Before coming to Pune I thought I knew something about helping. Now I feel I know nothing about helping.” Good! That’s how it should be. Now the real helping will start.
“The most I can do is to be present with a client and follow my instincts at that moment.” That word instinct will change soon and you will start feeling intuitions instead of instincts. I can understand why you have used the word instincts – because you don’t yet know about the phenomenon of intuition. Let me explain it to you.
When the body functions spontaneously, that is called instinct. When the soul functions spontaneously, that is called intuition. They are alike and yet far away from each other. Instinct is of the body – the gross; and intuition is of the soul – the subtle. And between the two is the mind, the expert, which never functions spontaneously. So there is no corresponding word for the psychological realm. For the physical, instinct; for the spiritual, intuition – but between the two is the mind. Mind means knowledge. Knowledge can never be spontaneous. So there is no corresponding word like intuition or instinct for the psychological realm.
I can understand why you have used the particular word instinct. In the beginning it will feel like that because you are not aware of your soul yet. But good, let it be instinct. Instinct is far better than intellect. Instinct is deeper than intellect and intuition is higher than intellect. Both are beyond the intellect, and both are good.
First one becomes alert about instinct, then by and by one will become alert about intuition. And then there will be a kind of meeting of these two. Then both words disappear; then there is totality, tathata. Then one functions as a total organic unit. That is the moment when you become an instrument of God.

The third question:
Osho,
One of the key words to my and others' experiences here is “energy.” I can feel it – sometimes more, sometimes less – and I also feel that opening myself more to experiencing it, is letting it do the job of change. Still it puzzles me as it is a totally new concept to me and I should like to know more about it. Is it an inner or an outer phenomenon, or both? Can one misuse it? Please explain.
The question is from Sucheta. She has stumbled upon one thing which is very significant – energy. That’s what we are producing here.
To those who come as spectators, it remains unavailable. Those who come just to see what is happening will not be able to see it. And this is the real happening. But it is invisible. You have to become a participant, only then will you know about it.
There are two ways of knowing a thing. One is that of the spectator. You go to the movie, you sit in your chair and you see whatsoever goes on moving on the screen. You are a spectator. This is one of the problems for the modern mind. The modern mind has become a spectator. Somebody is dancing – you are watching. People are glued to their chairs before their TV sets for five, six, seven hours. The average in America is five hours. It is as if the TV set is their god and they are worshipping. They are just glued. They cannot get up, they are almost paralyzed – just watching, just looking. Somebody is making love – people are watching. Somebody is wrestling – people are watching. Somebody is dancing – people are watching. Somebody is singing – people are listening. People have become spectators.
And when you become a spectator, much is lost. Your life becomes very superficial – because God is not available through being a spectator, God is available only through participation. If you want to know what dance is, dance. Don’t be a spectator. Don t go on looking. You don’t know what dance is if you only see a dancer. You just know the movements of the dancer, you don’t know how it feels from within the dancer – how it feels to the dancer, what joy, what ecstasy, what is happening in the innermost core of the dancer. Great things are happening. If there is a real dancer, great things are happening.
When Nijinsky used to dance, sometimes he would make leaps which were physically impossible. Scientists could not figure it out. That big a leap was not possible because of gravitation. And another phenomenon was that when he jumped, coming back to the earth he would fall as if he was a weightless feather. So slowly! It had never happened before. It couldn’t happen. It should not happen. But it was happening. And they were puzzled.
And it did not always happen. If Nijinsky wanted it to happen, it would not happen. The moment he would will it, he would miss. If somebody had come just to photograph him, he would not be able to make that kind of leap. And he would feel very humiliated. It was nothing that he could do. It only used to happen when he used to disappear in his dance. Then by and by he became more aware of it – that when he was not, when the dancer disappeared in the dance, then it happened. Then suddenly gravitation no longer functioned; it was as if another kind of law started working – levitation. It was as if he started being pulled upwards.
You cannot know it from the outside. You can see Nijinsky jumping, you can watch – but you don’t know what is happening inside him. Inside him something like a satori was happening. The West was not aware of these phenomena, that s why nobody told him that this was a satori. Had he been to the East – in a Sufi country, in a Zen country, or a Taoist country – it would have been immediately recognized. And great possibilities would have opened.
Just the reverse happened in the West. Nijinsky went mad because he became so disoriented. He could not figure out what it was. He became so afraid of it – as if he was being possessed by some evil spirit or something. That which could have become the door to God became a door to a madhouse. He needed a master in that moment. He needed one who had realized this inner phenomenon. The master would have been of great help. But he was not aware that he needed a master; he was not aware that anything religious was happening. He became disturbed. He became afraid of himself.
How can you see what is happening to Nijinsky? I am here. I am talking to you. You can listen to my words but you can’t see from where they are coming. You cannot see my heart.
So one way is the way of the spectator. Another way is the way of the participant. Two kinds of people come here. Spectators come; they miss the whole thing. The whole thing looks like a crazy trip. What are people doing? What is happening to these people? Why so much dancing? Why so much singing? Why so much crying and weeping? What is happening to these people? What kind of meditation is this? Spectators come, and they are puzzled. They cannot figure it out.
Only by being a participant will you know what is happening. And if you are a participant then “energy” will be the word that will become the most important – that is what is happening around here.
Sucheta is right. She has stumbled on the right thing. “One of the key words to me and to others’ experiences here is ‘energy.’ I can feel it – sometimes more, sometimes less – and I also feel that opening myself more to experiencing it, is letting it do the job of change.”
Perfectly true. You will feel it sometimes more and sometimes less, not because it is sometimes more and sometimes less, but because you are sometimes more sensitive and sometimes less sensitive. The energy is continuously flowing, the river is continuously flowing – it depends on your sensitivity how much you will be able to feel it in a certain moment. It is not that sometimes the energy is here and sometimes it disappears, it is here twenty-four hours. It is going to be here as long as I am here, or, for those who are sensitive enough, it will be available after I am gone. It depends on you.
So when it is flowing less, then watch – you must have become a spectator. Then it is flowing less. When it is flowing more, watch. You must be a participant – then it is flowing more. So keep it as a key. Whenever it is less, just become aware that you must become more of a participant. You must have fallen into the trap of being a spectator.
That’s why I insist that while you are meditating, keep your eyes closed, have a blindfold, so that you don’t become spectators. Otherwise the tendency is there. It is so ingrained. Your whole culture has prepared you to become spectators. So even if meditation is happening to you, and you are moving into energy, suddenly the idea arises, “See what is happening to others.” And you miss. If you open your eyes, a great change has happened: you have fallen from being a participant and you have become a spectator. And this is not a small distance, it is as far away as earth and sky. And then suddenly it is no longer flowing. You are no longer here. If you want to be here, the only way to be here is to be a participant.
And if you are a participant, you need not do the job of change. The energy will do it. Let me do it. Allow me. It will happen. All that is needed from your side is not to resist. All that is needed from your side is openness, cooperation – a loving cooperation, not a fearful defense. And, yes, you need not bother about change. The change happens very easily.
“Still it puzzles me.” It will puzzle you in the beginning. The puzzling phenomenon comes because you are no longer In control, you are no longer the master of it. You cannot manage it, you cannot will it; it is beyond you, it is bigger than you. That’s why it puzzles you. We are always puzzled by the bigger because we always want something which we can define, which we can hold in our hands, which we can possess. Anything bigger than you puzzles you – because the mind feels so tiny. It falls short and cannot figure it out. And once the mind feels “I cannot figure it out” it starts freaking, it starts getting so frightened that it can start thinking of escaping.
Many people escape from here. Once the energy takes possession of them and things start happening…. And they always wanted them to happen – this is how human mind functions. They came here in the first place for something to happen. If it doesn’t happen, they are angry. If it starts happening, they are frightened. Fear and anger are the same energy. Fear is negative anger and anger is positive fear. The difference is only of positivity and negativity. And this is how people are working. If it doesn’t happen, they are angry – as if I am not doing it to them. They are not cooperating, that is the only thing. But they are angry at me – as if I am doing it to others and not to them. They go on writing letters to me. That something is happening to somebody else, why is it not happening to them? – as if I am responsible. It is not happening to you because you are not cooperating.
And it cannot happen to you if you are expecting. Your very expectation is a barrier. And it cannot happen to you if you are competitive, if you are thinking that it is happening to your girlfriend or your boyfriend or somebody and it is not happening to you. If you are competitive, it is not going to happen to you. All competition is out of the ego. Then you are angry.
And if it happens, then you become frightened. Then you become so afraid that you start thinking of where to go now and of how to escape from this place – because something is happening which is crazy. It is crazy – crazy in the sense that you don’t have any idea of what it is, you don’t have any mind to explain it, you don’t have any philosophy to make it clear to you.
“Still it puzzles me," Sucheta says, “as it is a totally new concept to me.” Right, it is a totally new phenomenon. Don’t call it a concept. It is not a concept, it is a reality. It is not an idea. This energy is not an idea. It is the most pregnant force in the world. It is through this force that people are transformed. It is alchemical. It is about this force that alchemists have been talking down the ages. It is this chemistry that transforms the gross into the subtle, that transforms the iron into gold, that changes the lower into higher, that transforms sex into prayer energy, that makes you capable of moving into different planes, higher planes, higher plenitudes. It is not a concept.
But I can understand what she means. she is saying that she has no philosophy to figure it out. But there is no philosophy and I cannot supply it. Nobody has ever been able to supply any philosophy to figure it out. It is so big; philosophies are so small. Philosophies are in the mind of man and this is universal energy. Mind cannot contain it. And you should not try to do that, otherwise the mind will come in and will disturb your receptivity for it.
“And I should like to know more about it.” Forget. Knowing more about it is not going to help; being more into it is going to help. And being more into it is the only way to know more about it. Don’t do the reverse.
Ordinarily our mind says, “First know more about it, then go into it.” That seems to be more clever. But it doesn’t work. The mind says, “First know, then go into it. Without knowing, jumping into it is dangerous, can be dangerous. You may be lost. Or you may not come back again. Who knows? Whether this is good or bad, divine or devil, who knows? So first know everything about it.” But there is no way to know anything about it without going into it. That is the danger, that is the risk, the gamble.
That’s why I call sannyasins the gamblers. They are ready to go into the unknown with me without any hitch or hesitation. I cannot give them any guarantee. It is not possible in the very nature of things. A guaranteed truth is a lie. The truth cannot be guaranteed. One has to go into it with a throbbing heart. One has to take the risk. The danger is there. Either you will become enlightened or you will go mad – that danger is there.
That is why a master is needed, and a great love for the master is needed – so you can trust him. So that when things start going out of your hand, he can take them in his hand. If you don’t trust him, then madness is going to happen. So I never suggest to anybody to go into this unknown without a master.
I know that sometimes it happens that a person can go without a master, but that should be an exception, it should not be made a rule. We can forget about it. Yes, it happens that once in a while a man escapes danger and reaches to truth without being guided. But that should be thought of as accidental; one should not make an ideal of it. It is far better, far happier, far more joyous and celebrating, to go with somebody who knows the way, who has been on the way again and again.
Sufis say that if you want to ask the way to a certain peak, ask the man who comes down and goes up every day. Ask the postman who goes to the mountain peak to deliver the post – who comes every day and goes every day. Ask the man who knows the path so perfectly that he can go with a blindfold, he can go in darkness without any light. Ask that man.
But I cannot give you any knowledge about it. There exists none. Experience is the only way to know it. I can give you an invitation; I can tell Sucheta, “Come along with me. Drop your resistances – conscious and unconscious. Drop your fears. And also drop this mind which wants things to be explained.” There are things which cannot be explained because there are things which are mysterious. And those are the real things. That which can be explained is meaningless; it is trivial, it is mundane. All that is beautiful, all that is true, all that is great, is beyond explanations. It is a mystery. You have to go into it. You have to savor it.
“And I should like to know more about it.” It is good that you want to know more about it but the way to know is to be more into it.
“Is it an inner or an outer phenomenon, or both?” It is neither – because for energy there is no in nor out. In and out are our divisions created by the ego. It is like your house. You say that this is inside my house and this is outside. Do you think that the sky is divided between the inner and the outer because you have made a small wall? The sky is not divided. The sky remains undivided, indivisible. There is no in and no out. It is one sky. The sky that is inside your house is the same sky that is outside your house. And there is no way to cut it into parts.
And so is energy. It is one vitality, it is one God, it is one life. All is one unto it. It is neither lower nor higher, neither inner nor outer, neither material nor spiritual. All divisions are egoistic. It knows no divisions.
“Is it an inner or outer phenomenon, or both? Can one misuse it?” No, there is no possibility. You cannot misuse it because before you can get it, you have to disappear. You get it only with the condition that you are not – so who can misuse it? If you are, you never get it. This is a built-in protection. Nobody can misuse it – because before you can get it, you have to disappear utterly. That is a basic requirement. Nobody can misuse God. It is prohibited by its inner mechanism – because before you enter the shrine of God you have to disappear.
And once you are not, who is there to use or misuse? Forget the word misuse. You cannot even use it! It starts using you. You become just instrumental – a passive vehicle, a hollow bamboo. God starts flowing through you. When he starts singing, you become a flute; otherwise you are a hollow bamboo, you remain a hollow bamboo. All songs are his. He uses you. You cannot use, you cannot misuse, because you are no more.

The fourth question:
Osho,
Why do you go on saying, “When you find a master,” when you are right in front of me?
The question is from Anand Vimoksha. I go on repeating it because although I may be in front of you, you are not in front of me. And unless we both confront each other, unless we are face-to-face, heart-to-heart, I will have to go on repeating it.
Vimoksha, I am in front of you, but where are you? You are not in front of me. You are still hiding; you are still hiding in your cave. You are still afraid to come out and confront me. It is a confrontation, it is an encounter. And I have to go on calling you, “Come forth! Come out!” That’s why I have to repeat again and again, “When you find a master.”
The master has found you but you have not yet found the master. I have chosen you but you have not yet chosen me, Vimoksha. It has to become your choice too – then there will be a meeting. And in that meeting will be a disappearance of me and you.

The fifth question:
Osho,
You say one should not feel guilty, but how is it possible to avoid it? The slightest negative emotion or quality, if turned inwards, kills oneself; if turned outwards, kills others. It seems to me that unless and until one has fully realized the spirit or become enlightened there must always be a deep existential humiliation.
The question is from Hannah.
First, there is no existential humiliation as such. There are only psychological humiliations. And they are created by you.
Existence knows nothing of humiliation because existence knows nothing of the ego. Have you ever seen a tree humiliated? Have you ever seen a rock humiliated? Have you ever seen anybody except man humiliated?
Watch nature and you will be surprised. If two dogs are fighting, they don’t start fighting like human beings. They are not so foolish. They first show to each other how much “I am.” They bark, they jump, they show their chests, they show their teeth. They simply show that this is “I am.” What you are, you show, and the other shows, and then it is decided – because they are not foolish. There is no need to fight. Then it is decided who is stronger. Then the one who is the weak one shows his back, puts his tail between his legs and goes away.
But there is no humiliation. Remember, if you think that the one who is going away with his tail between his legs is humiliated, you are wrong. You are bringing your human mind in it. It is a simple decision. If I ask you which is bigger – two or three? – and you say three, is two humiliated. Foolish! Just foolish! They are wise people, these dogs. They have decided without any violence, without any conflict. Just by a mock fight they have decided. What is the point of going into a real fight when it is decided that one is weak? Of course the stronger will win, so why go into it?
The one who has left the field is not a coward, remember. He exposed his whole heart, put everything on the table, was not hiding any card, not even a trump card. Seeing that the other has all the great cards and he doesn’t, it is finished. There is no need to fight and there is no need to feel humiliated – “God has made him a bigger dog and God has made me a smaller dog – so it is finished.”
A man came to a Sufi master and asked him, “Why am I not like you?” And the Sufi master said, “You puzzle me. I can ask the same thing – ‘Why am I not like you?’ – and become very humiliated. I am not like you either. God never makes two persons alike. You are you, I am me.”
A man came to a Zen master and asked the same thing, “Why are you so pious, so beautiful, so graceful? Why am I not like you?” And the master said “come outside.” And he took him outside and he showed him two trees standing in his garden. One was very big, whispering to the clouds; another was very small.
He said, “Look, one is big and one is small, but I have never seen the smaller one asking the bigger one, "Why am I not like you?" And I have lived here for many years. There is no problem. The big is big; the small is small. The small is happy in being small; the big is happy in being big. There is no comparison so there is no humiliation.”
Hannah is an egoist. I remember many years ago when she took sannyas. It was not much of a sannyas either. But I never say no. Just out of politeness I never say no. Why should I say no? She took sannyas at Mount Abu – it must be five or six years ago. When I gave her a name…. I remember the name I gave her; it was one of the most beautiful that we can give in India. I gave her the name “Ganga.” That is the most beautiful river, the most sacred to the Hindus. And on the sides of this river Ganga has flowered all that has been beautiful in India. The Vedas were written there, the Upanishads were sung there, Buddha talked there, Mahavira walked there. All the twenty-four tirthankaras, Krishna and Ram and Buddha, and all the great saints – they all owe something to the Ganges, to Ganga.
Hannah immediately refused. She said, “I don’t like this name. My name, Hannah, is beautiful.” Just out of politeness I said, “Okay, I will keep your old name.” But that very moment, she became closed to me and she has remained closed to me. Since then I have not been able to make any contact. She refused me! I gave her sannyas, but she refused me. Her own ego and her own name and her own past was too much.
Remember, it is the ego which feels humiliation, it is not existence. Existence has no humiliation. The bigger the ego you have, the more humiliated you will feel. And remember, the reason is your ego. Existence is completely unaware of any kind of humiliation. The rose is not humiliated before the lotus because the lotus is so big. And the marigold is not humiliated before the rose because the rose has such a beautiful fragrance. Nobody is comparing. Nobody has any ego to compare. Nobody is competing. Existence is pure silence as far as comparison is concerned. It is our psychological cancer, the ego, which feels humiliation.
The second thing: “You say one should not feel guilty, but how is it possible to avoid it? The slightest negative emotion or quality, if turned inwards, kills oneself; if turned outwards, kills others.” There is no need to turn it anywhere, in or out. You can simply watch it and it disappears, evaporates. It goes neither in nor out.
For example, anger has arisen in you. It is a negative poison. Now there are three possibilities of response. Hannah mentions only two; she knows only two. Many people know only two. One is to throw this anger, this fire and poison onto the other. Then it is destructive. And naturally, after you have burned the other, wounded the other, you will feel guilty. I can understand. You will feel foolish, you will feel stupid, you will feel that you have done something wrong. You should not have done this.
Or the other possibility is that you don’t throw the anger on the other, you turn it inwards. Then you hurt yourself. Then you wound yourself. Then you will have stomach ulcers. Then this fire will rage inside you. Then you will always be sitting on top of a volcano. You will never be at ease; you will be always restless. All joy will disappear from your life.
The society, the church, the state, is in favor of the second. The society says, “Don’t be angry with the other. Do whatsoever you want to do with it – swallow it – but don’t be angry with the other.” If you suffer from ulcers, that is your business. If you suffer from cancer, that is your business. And the society has given you explanations such that the cancer need not be connected at all with your anger; the ulcer need not be connected with your anger.
If you swallow anger today the ulcers won’t appear just today – they will take years. Maybe after forty years of swallowing the anger, the ulcers will appear. And after sixty years of swallowing the anger, cancer will appear. So you will not be able to relate anger with the cancer. You will not be able to find any reason to show that it is anger that has created the cancer. That seems to be so far-fetched.
The society has decided that you should just behave rightly. The society protects the other because the society consists of the other. The society says that you can be self-destructive, that is your business. The society is against murder but it is not against suicide. It is suicide if you turn your negative emotions inwards. I am against both because both will create guilt and both will create complexities.
What is my approach? My approach is that if anger is there – watch. Witness that anger is there. Don’t do anything about it. There is no need to do. Just look at it. And you will be surprised that just by looking at it, it starts disappearing. The cloud sooner or later disperses, is gone. And when the cloud is gone and you have not done anything about it – neither throwing it out nor throwing it in – you will not feel any guilt ever.
And this is how one should relate to all kinds of negative emotions. Be a witness. Just watch it. Sufis call it sahada – be a witness. Hindus call it sakshin – be a witness. Just watch. Don’t do anything. Doing is not needed. All doing is wrong. If you do anything about it, something is going to be wrong – because you will be doing under its impact. If you do it to others, it will be wrong; if you do to yourself, it will be wrong. Anything done under the impact of a negative emotion is going to be wrong. And then later on guilt will arise.
But there is a way not to do – be a watcher, just be a witness. See it. It is there. You are not it, you are the seer. Sit silently when you are angry, when you are jealous, when you are full of hatred. Close your doors. Sit silently. Let the anger be there, let the anger flash in front of you, let the hatred move like a movie – and you be a watcher.
And you will be surprised. It cannot be there forever, one thing is certain. Sooner or later it goes. It only takes minutes to go. And when it is gone, it is gone; it leaves no trace behind it. No guilt is created. And a man who does not create guilt is religious. I call a man who does not create any kind of guilt religious.

The sixth question:
Osho,
This morning in the lecture I was fast asleep and suddenly felt a hard weight on my back. At first I thought I must be snoring or making a noise and someone must have woken me to stop me, but I found out that no one had hit me. What was it?
The question is from Sheela.
I have not answered it up to now because each day when I wanted to answer she was asleep again! It is not a new question! I have been waiting. But today she is awake so I thought that this is the moment.
Can’t you recognize my hand when I wake you?
Enough for today.

============================================================

Imam Mohammed Baqir is said to have related this illustrative fable:
‘Finding I could speak the language of ants, I approached one and inquired, "What is God like? Does he resemble the ant?"
‘He answered, "God! No, indeed – we have only a single sting, but God, he has two!"
What is God?
Al-Hillaj Mansoor says:
It is the gathering together then the silence
Then the loss of words and the awareness
Then the discovering and the nakedness.
And it is the fire clay then the fire
Then the clarity and the cold
Then the darkness then the sun.

And it is the orgy then the casting away of cares
Then the wish and the approach
Then the conjunction then the joy.
And it is the strain then the relaxation
Then the disappearance and the separation
Then the union…
Then the fusion.
What is God?
It depends on you. Your God will be your God, my God will be my God. There are as many Gods as there are possibilities of looking at God. It is natural. We cannot go beyond our plane; we can only be aware of God through our eyes, through our minds. God will be just a reflection in our small mirror. That’s why there are so many concepts about God.
It is like the moon in the sky on a full moon night. There are millions of rivers and reservoirs and oceans and small streams and small puddles on the road – they will all reflect God, they will all reflect the moon. A small puddle will reflect the moon in its own way and the big ocean will reflect it in its own way.
Then there is great controversy. Hindus say something, Mohammedans say something else, Christians say something else again – and so on, so forth. The controversy is foolish. The conflict is meaningless. God is reflected in millions of ways, in millions of mirrors. Each mirror reflects in its own way. This is one of the fundamentals to be understood. Not understanding this fundamental there is naturally antagonism between religions, because they all think, “If our standpoint is right then the other has to be wrong.” Their rightness depends on the other’s wrongness. This is stupid. God is infinite, and you can look at him through many ways, through many windows. And naturally you can look at him only through yourself – you will be the window. Your God will reflect God as much as it will reflect you; you will both be there.
When Mansoor says something, he is saying something about himself. This tremendously beautiful statement:
…then the union… then the fusion.
– is much more about al-Hillaj Mansoor than about God. This is Mansoor’s God. This is Mansoor’s unique experience.
Mansoor was murdered, crucified, like Jesus. Mohammedans could not understand him. This happens always. You cannot understand any point higher than your own. It becomes a danger to you. If you accept it, then you accept that there is some possibility which is higher than you. That hurts the ego, that humiliates. You would like to destroy a Mansoor or a Christ or a Socrates just for a single reason: that you cannot conceive, you cannot concede, that there is a possibility of some higher standpoint than yours. You seem to believe that you are the last thing in existence; that you are the paradigm, that you are the climax, that there is no beyond. This is the attitude of the stupid and the irreligious mind. The religious mind is always open. The religious mind is never confined by its own limitations. It keeps remembering that there is no end to growth; one can go on growing.
It is said in the Bible that God created man in his own image. This is a human statement; it says nothing about God. It simply says something about man. It is man writing about himself. Naturally man thinks in terms which are anthropomorphic. Man thinks in terms of man being the center of existence. God created man in his own image. He has to…at least in human scriptures he has to follow the human mind and the human ego.
Just the contrary is the case. Man has created God in his own image. Man’s God is a human God. You can see. You can go into the temples and you can see the images of God. They are made in the form of human beings – a little better, more beautiful. but still a modification, a decoration of the human body. They have human eyes with a little more compassion. Just a little more is added. The ideal human being, that’s what our Gods are.
When Nietzsche declared that God was dead. he was, in fact. not saying anything against God himself. He was simply saying that the God that we have followed up to now is no longer applicable because man has grown up. The God that we have been following up to now was a childish, juvenile God. Humanity was juvenile. Somebody worshipping a stone as God is saying a very, very primitive thing. His statement is very primitive, pagan. Somebody worshipping an idol is a little better, but still limited. All forms are limited. Somebody worshipping a tree…a little more alive because the tree has a kind of vitality. God is vital; the tree participates in god so it is vital. God is green and fresh and so is the tree; and God blooms and the tree blooms. There is an at-oneness.
But a tree is a tree. It may be a faraway reflection of the divine, but to worship the tree as God is ignorant. Somebody worshipping a river may be right in his own way – because the river also expresses the divine, everything expresses him – but everything expresses him in a limited way. He is all. So no single thing can express him in his totality. How can a single thing express him in his totality? If you worship the tree, what about the river? If you worship the river, what about the sun? If you worship the sun, what about the moon? You are worshipping only one thing – and because it is limited and one, it cannot represent all.
When Nietzsche said “God is dead,” he was saying that all formulations of God up to now have become irrelevant. Man has gone beyond them; man has become more mature. Man needs new Gods every time. As man becomes more mature he needs a more mature God. Look in the Old Testament. God is ferocious, very jealous. God declares, “I am a very jealous God. If you worship somebody else I will be your enemy. I will torture you in hell. I will throw you into fire.” This seems to be a very primitive God; seems to be conceived of by a Genghis Khan – not very cultured, not very sophisticated yet.
The Hindu God is far more sophisticated. Krishna with his flute is far more cultured. But Buddha reaches to the very peak because he drops the idea of God. He talks about godliness. The very word God makes God like a thing: defined, clear-cut, solid, concrete, like a rock. Buddha drops the very idea. He says, “There is godliness but there is no God. There is divineness. Existence is full of divineness, bhagwat, but there is no God like a person sitting there on a golden throne controlling, managing, creating. No, there is no God as a person. The whole existence is full of divinity, that is true. It is overflowing with godliness.”
Now this is a far higher concept. we drop the limitations of a person. We make god more like a process. The ancient concept says that God created the world, he was the creator. Buddha does not agree. He says, “God is creativity, not a creator.” God is one with his creativity. So whenever you are creating something you participate in God.
When a painter is lost in his painting, when he is completely absorbed in his painting, he is no longer an ordinary painter. He is divine in that moment of absorption. “…then the union… then the fusion.”
A dancer lost utterly in his dance is a human no more; hence the beauty, hence the utter beauty. Even those who are just spectators, even they start feeling something strange, incredible, fantastic, happening.
It happened that for nine years before al-Hillaj Mansoor was crucified he was confined in a jail. And he was tremendously happy because he used those nine years for constant meditation. Outside there were always disturbances, distractions – friends, followers, the society, the world, the worries. He was very happy. The day he was put into jail he thanked God from his very heart. He said, “You love me so much. Now you have given me complete protection from the world and there is nothing left except you and me – then the union… then the fusion.”
Those nine years were of tremendous absorption. And after those nine years it was decided that he had to be crucified, because he had not changed a bit. On the contrary, he had gone farther in the same direction. His direction was that he started declaring, “I am God – an-el-haq! I am the truth, I am the reality.”
His master, al-Junnaid, tried to persuade him in many ways – “Don’t say these things! Keep them inside you, because the people won’t understand it and you will be getting into trouble unnecessarily!”
But it was beyond Mansoor. Whenever he was in that state – what Sufis call hal – whenever he was in that state, he would start singing and dancing. And those utterances would simply overflow; it was not possible for him to control them. There was nobody to control; all control was lost. Junnaid understood his state, but he knew the state of the people too – that sooner or later Mansoor would be thought to be anti-religious. His declaration, “I am God,” was a fact, his experience was there behind it, but people didn’t understand it. They would take it as arrogance, as ego, and there would be trouble. And the trouble came.
After nine years they decided that he had not changed a bit; in fact he had grown deeper into it. Now he was continuously declaring, “an-el-haq! I am the truth! I am God!” So finally they decided that he had to be crucified.
When they went to take him out from his prison cell, it was very difficult – because he was in a hal, in that mystic state. He was no longer a person, he was just pure energy. How to drag pure energy out? The people who went there were just struck dumb! What was happening in that dark cell was so fantastic! It was so luminous. Mansoor was surrounded by an aura not of this world. Mansoor was not there as a person. Sufis have two words for it: one is baka, another is fana. Baka means you are defined by a personality, you have a definition around you, you have a demarcation line that this is you. Fana means that you are dissolved into God and you don’t have any definition. Baka is like an ice cube and fana is like the ice cube which has melted and become one with the river.
This constantly happens to the mystics: they move from baka to fana, from fana to baka. It is almost like day and night. By and by there comes a kind of rhythm. Sometimes you will find the mystic in the state of baka – and when you find him in the state of baka you will see the most unique individuality that has ever been seen. In the state of baka he will be a unique individual – very original, very pure, clear-cut. he will be like a peak standing against the sky, or like a star in the dark night – so clear, so separate, so individual. That is the meaning of baka – individual.
You will not find these kinds of individuals in the ordinary world. There are people but not individuals, persons but not individuals A person is one who has no individuality; he is just an anonymous part of a mass. He lives like they live, he talks like they talk, he eats like they eat, he goes to the movie that they go to, he purchases the car that they purchase, he makes a house like they make – he is continuously following “they,” the mass, the collectivity, the crowd. He is not himself; he is very confused. His boundary lines are very messy. They are there but they are in a mess; they are not clear-cut. If you look into him you will not find him there. You will find layers upon layers of conditioning. He will be a Mohammedan because he was born in a Mohammedan house. He will be a Hindu because he was born into a Hindu family. He will be reciting the Gita because his father used to recite it – and his father’s father. For ages they have been reciting it, so he is reciting it. It all seems accidental. He has no uniqueness in him. He is just a part. He lives like they live, he dies like they die. He lives their life, he dies their death. He never asserts himself, he is never rebellious. This is the state of the ordinary personality. This is not individuality.
Individuality arises only when you become very clear-cut, when you attain an original shape of your being, when you do your thing, when you don’t care what others say, when you are ready to sacrifice your whole life for your freedom, when freedom becomes your ultimate value and nothing else matters – then you become baka, individual. And this is the paradox: only individuals can go into fana, into that utter dissolution, desolation, into that utter disappearance.
First you have to be, only then can you disappear. If you are not, then what is going to disappear? First you have to detach yourself from the crowd, only then can you take the jump. So this is the paradox: the man in the state of baka can go into the state of fana, and only he can go.
The mass man cannot go into fana because he does not know who he is. He has no address yet, he has no name yet, he has no identity yet. He is just a number. He can be replaced very easily, he’s replaceable. He is just a part doing a certain kind of work. He is a function. For example, he may be an engineer. If he dies, you can put another engineer there and nobody will miss him. Or he may be a doctor. If he dies, you place another doctor there and nobody will miss him. He is a replaceable part, he is a function.
But the man of baka is not a function; he has a totally different kind of quality in his being. He will be missed forever and ever. Once he is gone you cannot replace him. You cannot replace Jesus. You can replace the pope of the Vatican; many times you have replaced him. Each time one pope dies he is replaced. You can replace the Shankaracharya of Puri very easily, there is no problem – one dies and you put another there. But you cannot replace the original Shankaracharya. You cannot replace Jesus, you cannot replace Mohammed. Once gone they are gone forever. They exist as unique individuals – that is the state of baka. And they are the only people capable of going into fana. It looks contradictory, because fana means losing all your definition, losing all your being.
But first you have to have the being to lose it. How can you lose it if you don’t have it? How can you renounce it if you don’t have it? So the paradox is only apparent. It has a very, very universal law behind it. First you have to have something in order to drop it. First gather together.
It is the gathering together then the silence…
First gather together, integrate, become baka, and then you can go into fana.
This man, Mansoor, became a man of unique individuality. Wherever he went he was immediately recognized; it was impossible to miss him. He came to India too. In fact, because his master, al-Junnaid, told him, “It is better if you start traveling into other countries, otherwise you will be caught,” he traveled to faraway countries. Everywhere he was recognized immediately. He was a king of kings. You could not miss him. If he was standing in a crowd of ten thousand people, you would be able to see him. He had baka; he was crystal clear. His presence was immense, huge, enormous. Once you had seen him, all other persons would look pale, faint, flat. So sooner or later he would be recognized and he would have to leave the country because trouble would arise.
He went to many countries in the Middle East, but wherever he went it was okay for a few days – he could live without being recognized – but not for long. So finally he went back and said to Junnaid, his master, “It is futile. I get caught everywhere. So why not here?”
When this man was being carried from the cell, the officers who had come to take him out could not find exactly where he was. He was there, utterly there. The whole cell was full of a radiance, a presence – very solid yet indefinable. They could not enter the cell. They stood there in awe, in wonder – “What to do?” Finally they gathered courage. They tried to pull him out but they could not. Then there was only one way: his Master al-Junnaid was asked to come and help because the time was passing and Mansoor had to be crucified and they could not get him out.
Al-Junnaid came and he said, “Mansoor, now listen. A thousand and one times I have told you to surrender to God. If he wants you to be crucified, then be ordinary and be crucified. Let him do his work. Enough is enough?” And when al-Junnaid shouted, Mansoor came back out of the fana into the baka. Again there was a demarcation line; he was no longer a cloud, he became concrete and solid. The boundaries appeared. The master had come and he had to listen to his master.
Then he was taken to the gallows. It was very difficult to kill him. One thousand wounds were made on his body – still he was alive. Then they started cutting off his limbs, but still he was alive – because on the cross he again lost the state of baka and went into the state of fana. He got lost again into ecstasy, into that energy that is God.
God is energy for a man of the state of Mansoor. God is consciousness for the man of the state of Buddha. God is love for Christ. He is not a person. These three L’s have to be learned: God is love, life, light. You have heard about the three R’s. The three R’s make you civilized. These three L’s make you religious.
Be more alive – so much so that you become one with life. Then let love arise so much that you start overflowing with love. Then you know no boundaries. Then out of you a new kind of light starts arising, a luminousness. These three L’s have to be learned, and those three R’s have to be forgotten.
The whole philosophy of Sufism is to approach God as cosmic energy, with no concept. But we all have concepts and all concepts are juvenile, childish. God cannot be conceptualized.
We have been given concepts by others; we have learned them. They are just suggestions from the mass, ideas put into your head. Christians have an idea of an old man with a white beard, very ancient-looking, sitting there on a golden throne surrounded by angels, controlling the world. There is nothing wrong about it, but there is nothing right either. It is good enough to satisfy the curiosity of small children, children also need some idea about God, but one has to grow out of this childishness.
We go on hammering certain ideas into the heads of small children.

I have heard….
The clergyman said to Mrs. Mott whose baby was just christened, “Oh, Mrs. Mott, I have never seen a child that was so well behaved at a christening.”
Mrs. Mott said, “Well, it’s because my husband and I have been practicing on him with a watering can for a week.”

If you practice on a child for one week with a watering can, of course…. It becomes habitual. And that’s what has been done to humanity down the ages – ideas have been practiced on you. Those who practice them don’t know what they are doing; they are in the same trap. Their parents practiced those ideas on them. They don’t know what they are, what they are talking about. If you insist too much on asking what exactly the word God means,. you will make anybody and everybody uncomfortable. So asking questions is not supported; one has to accept these things, one has to believe these things. Nobody likes answering if you ask too much. If you go on asking, you make the other person very uncomfortable because you start seeing and touching his buttons. It is also a belief for him; he does not know what God is.
It is just out of fear that children have been trained, and out of fear they go on clinging. That’s why whenever you are afraid you start thinking more of God. In a dark night, passing through a cemetery, you are bound to remember God. When you are alone, ill, in difficulties, in frustration, in anxieties, in misery, you remember God. God is more associated with misery. If you are happy, you tend to forget God. God has no association with happiness. In reality, it should be just the other way – when you are happy you can approach God more easily because a happy mind is a flowing mind, a happy mind is an open mind, a happy mind is more vulnerable, more delicate.
An unhappy mind is closed. How can a mind that lives in fear be open? It is not possible.

I have heard….
A young man wanted to pass an old man in a wagon on a country road, but the old man would not pull over.
Finally when he had passed the old man, he took his pistol out and walked back to the wagon. “Old man, do you know how to dance?” he asked, shooting at the ground near the old man’s feet and laughing uproariously as he began to jump up and down.
When the young man started back, the old man grabbed his concealed shotgun and said, “Young man, did you ever kiss a mule?”
The young man said, looking into the barrel of the shotgun, “No, but I always wanted to.”

Out of fear you can create anything. And your God is created out of fear. Your God is nothing but your fear instinct. It is not your experience.

A little boy in Aberdeen, Scotland, was disciplined by his mother, who used to say to him when he was naughty, “Now, God won’t like that.” And when he was particularly unruly or disobedient, she would say, “God will be angry.”
Usually these admonitions were sufficient, but one night when she had prunes for his dessert at supper, he rebelled. He refused to finish the prunes on his plate. She pleaded, she coaxed. Finally she said, “Now, God won’t like this. God doesn’t like little boys who refuse to finish all their prunes.”
But the little fellow was quite unmoved. She went on further to say, “God will be angry.” But for some reason or other the little boy stubbornly refused to take the last two prunes which lay on his plate…dark blue, wrinkled tokens of his rebellion.
‘Well,’ said the mother, “you must now go to bed. You have been a very naughty boy, and God is angry, really angry.”
So she packed him upstairs and put him to bed. No sooner had she come down than a violent thunderstorm broke out. The lightning was more vivid than usual. The thunder clumped up and down the sky with shattering reverberations. The suddenly angry wind threw handfuls of rain against the windows. It was a most violent storm, and she thought her little son would be terrified and that she should go up and comfort him. Quietly she opened his bedroom door, expecting to find him whimpering in fear, perhaps with the covers pulled over his head. But to her surprise he was not in bed at all; he had gone to the window. With his face pressed against the window pane, she heard him mutter, “My, my, such a fuss to make over two prunes!”

But that’s how your God is.
You have been brought up in fear and you have been brought up in greed. Because of fear and greed you go on believing in a certain idea of God. That idea is as absurd as your greed and your fear. It has nothing to do with God, it has something to do with you and your psychology.
If you really want to know what God is, then you will have to drop all kinds of fear and all kinds of greed. You will have to drop, in reality, your whole psychology, your whole mind. God is an experience of the state of no-mind, fana; when you are no more, dissolved, then you know what God is.
So, a few things…. God is not a concept, a theory, a hypothesis, an explanation, a philosophy – not at all. How can you make a concept of something that you don’t know? You don’t know God, you have never encountered God, so whatsoever you think about him is borrowed, is pseudo. The real has to be your experience. Otherwise, God is a kind of explanation – because there are problems in life and there are puzzles in life and there are mysteries in life, and you always find it difficult to explain them. Birth is there and death is there, and this whole tremendously beautiful existence is there. From where does it come? Who creates it? Why is it created? Why is it at all? Why is it rather than not? A thousand and one questions arise in the mind and you need some comfortable, convenient explanation so you can rest and sleep well. God is a blanket explanation. It covers all your problems. In a single concept you explain everything.
Whenever you say “God knows,” you simply mean “I don’t know.” But it is a very tricky strategy. You don’t say “I don’t know,” you say “God knows.” It gives you a kind of feeling that you may not know it but there is somebody who knows – and that is your God and he takes care, you need not worry. Father knows, mother knows, God knows, somebody knows. So why bother? You can remain unburdened. But let me tell you, God is not an explanation. And those who cling to explanations will never know what God is.
God is the dropping away of all explanations and all theories and all philosophies. God is the dropping away of all kinds of thinking, because thinking is a barrier. How can you think about the unknown? You can think only about the known. Thinking is just chewing the same thing over and over again. You can think only that which you have known already. Thinking never gives you anything original; it cannot, it is not in its nature. And God is the most unknown phenomenon. God means the totality. It is not known. All explanations are kinds of deceptions – deceiving yourself, deceiving others, that you know.
A sincere, honest seeker will drop all explanations. That is what is meant when al-Hillaj says: It is the gathering together then the silence…
– the silence which comes when you drop all explanations, all theories, all philosophies.
…then the loss of words…
– then the words are not needed at all. When all theories and all explanations and philosophies have been dropped, what are you going to do with words?
…then the loss of words and the awareness…
When words are lost, in that silence awareness arises.
…then the discovering and the nakedness.
You are utterly naked. Before God you have to be utterly naked, with no explanations, no philosophies surrounding you. You have to be as naked as possible, totally nude, empty, undressed. Then only is there a possibility of contacting God.
God is not a person – that is the second thing to remember. It is human to think about God as a person. When we think about God as a person it looks warmer. Lao Tzu says “Tao,” but Tao doesn’t seem so warm. You cannot hug Tao. Tao cannot hug you. Buddha says Dhamma – the law. But the law seems to be cold. You need some warm embrace, you need a God who can love you, who can caress you, who can kiss you, who can take you close, who can hold your hand. This is human desire, desire for warmth.
But existence has no obligation to fulfill your desires. Your desire is all right, but your desire simply shows that you are missing love, not God. Try to understand it. Your desire simply shows that you have missed your parents – your mother, your father, or you have missed a beloved. Your desire simply shows that there is some hankering for love that you are projecting on to God. So God becomes a person. You transform God into a person because of your need. But this is your need, and there is no necessity that your need has to be fulfilled. You have to understand your need and drop it. That’s why my insistence is never to remain unfulfilled in your love, otherwise you will never find the real God.
Love as much as you can. Love human beings, love animals, love trees, love rocks, mountains, rivers – love as much as you can. Let there be great experience of love so that your love-need is fulfilled, so that one day you can transcend love.
Just the other day there was a question from Ananda Prem. “Why,” she asks, “do spiritual persons want to go beyond love?” This is why. Because if you are not yet satisfied in your love, you will go on projecting love-needs onto God. And that will be a false God, that will be your projection. That will be your idea, not the reality of God. You cannot see the reality of God. You will see God in terms of what you would like him to be; you cannot see that which is. You will have a kind of wish fulfillment.
So Freud is not absolutely wrong when he says that God is a kind of wish fulfillment. He’s right about ninety-nine per cent of people. He’s right about Ananda Prem. Ananda Prem is suffering from a love-need. She tries to find a lover and she cannot, because she has a certain idea of a lover. The very idea becomes an obstruction. She searches for a perfect lover. Yes, it is very difficult in the first place to find a perfect lover, and if you can find one, the perfect lover will not be in any kind of need. A needy person cannot relate to a perfect lover. Only a perfect lover can relate to a perfect lover. Both will be without needs. Their love will be of a totally new kind; it will be a kind of sharing. It is not that they need each other; just because they have so much they want to give it.
A perfect lover is one who is as happy alone as when he is with the beloved; there is no difference. Then he is a perfect lover. But he is as happy alone.
Now Ananda Prem goes on searching for a perfect lover, and because she cannot find the perfect lover and ordinary human beings are just worthless for her, now she can start projecting upon God. She writes in her question: “What about Meera? Meera loved God in the form of Krishna, still she attained.” Yes, she loved God in the form of Krishna, but Meera’s love is the love of a perfect human being. She has no need, she does not want anything from Krishna; she simply goes on giving. She has a song to sing, she sings. She has a dance to dance, she dances. She has nothing to get, she only gives. And she gets a thousandfold – that is another thing, but she has nothing to get.
If you want to become Meera, Ananda Prem, first you will have to be fulfilled about human love-needs – otherwise your Krishna will be false, it will not be Meera’s Krishna. Your Krishna will be just your imagination, your Krishna will be just a projection of a repressed desire. Your Krishna will have much sexuality. First be finished with the human needs. And the only way to be finished is to go into them. I am not against them, remember, and I am not saying that something is wrong in them. There is a great lesson in them and it can be learned only by going through them. Go through them, don’t demand the impossible – otherwise love will not happen.
Remember the limitation of human beings, and remember your limitations. And whatsoever kind of love is possible, go into it. don’t hanker for the impossible, otherwise you will miss even the possible. And the impossible cannot happen. The impossible happens only the other way round: go through the possible, let the possible be finished with, let your being come out of it fulfilled – then the impossible can also happen. You have become capable of it.
If people’s love-needs are not fulfilled, they go on projecting onto God – and poor God suffers unnecessarily. When I was reading Ananda Prem’s question I became very, very sad for God. If Ananda Prem starts loving God, then think about God too! – because he cannot go to the court, he cannot say no; he just has to suffer your love.
First go through human turmoil, human anguish – the joys of human love and the miseries of human love. Let yourself become ripe through it. Then only do you have the fragrance which can be offered to God, not before it. First become a lotus. Come out of the mud of desire. And remember, the lotus comes out of the mud. Out of desiring comes the state of desirelessness – the lotus of desirelessness. Seeing the futility of desire again and again and again, one day one becomes so mature that one drops the very desire. In that very dropping is the meeting. When there is no desire there is nothing to hinder you from seeing God. Then God is all over the place, then only God is. But God is not a person.
Christians say that God is a father. God is not a father. That simply shows somehow that your father-need is still unfulfilled. There are people who say that God is a mother. That simply shows that their mother-need is unfulfilled. There are some who think that God is a lover. Then their love-need is not fulfilled. What you say about God shows something about you. If you think of God as a father, it simply shows that you are unsatisfied with your father, that you are not yet reconciled with your father, that you have become too dependent on your father. You need a father in the sky now. Maybe your father is dead and you cannot live without a father, or maybe your father is far away and you cannot live without your father. You are still immature and childish; you need somebody to cling to. Then you will create God the father.
God is neither father nor mother nor lover nor beloved. God is not a person at all.
God is energy, cosmic energy. God is continuous creativity. God is love, life, light. God is not an object of experience either. It is not that one day you will encounter God as an object of experience. God is not an object and God is not a subject either. When subject and object meet and disappear into each other, fana, then there is a new kind of experience – what Krishnamurti calls “experiencing.” It is not even experience, because the very word experience seems to be finished, complete, rounded. God is never complete, never finished; it is always an ongoing affair, always open, always flowering, always moving. God is a dynamic energy. God is a process, not a thing.
So, an experiencing…. And what is an experiencing? What is the difference between experience and experiencing? The difference is that in experience you remain separate from the object. For example, you are listening to me. This can happen in two ways. For those who are here just as spectators, as listeners, as an audience, it is an experience. I am here separate from them; they are there separate from me. I am an object and they are the subject. They are there centered in their egos listening to me. And they are continuously judging whether this is right or wrong, whether this applies or not, whether this can be practiced or not, whether this agrees with their scripture or not – they are continuously judging inside. This will be an experience.
But those who are in deep love with me, who are not standing against me, who are not there as a subject listening to me, who get lost into it, who are en rapport with me, involved with me, involved with me as if they are listening to themselves, to their own heartbeat – then there is not an experience but experiencing. Then I am not here separate from them, and they are not there separate from me. Then there is a union and a fusion.
God is an experiencing.
If you want to know what God is you will have to learn the art of experiencing. Then there is no need to go to a mosque or to a temple or to a church. Wherever experiencing happens there is the church, there is the temple, there is the mosque. Looking at a roseflower, if you disappear into the roseflower and the roseflower disappears into you – the observer becomes the observed and there is no distinction left, there are not two things confronting each other but a meeting, merging, melting into each other – then boundaries are no longer there. Somehow you have entered into the rose and the rose has entered into you. And this is possible, this transfiguration is possible. Because it is possible, religion is relevant, meaningful – otherwise religion won’t be meaningful. Being with the roseflower, you enter into God. Then all possibilities can be used as doors to the divine.

I have heard….
Bernard Synon writes: Think of a man driving up a country hill road, who upon reaching the top, stops his car and walks over to a nearby five-barred gate. Leaning on it he gazes with pleasure at the vista spread out before him. There is a sky of breathless blue, full of birds wheeling lazily in the warm sun. Fields of emerald green ripple in the soft breeze, while on the hillsides cattle and sheep graze peacefully. The whole scene is one of tranquil beauty and the man draws a deep breath saying, “It is really lovely.”
At that moment another car draws up and the first man ;s joined by another. “Beautiful, isn’t it?” murmurs the first man.
The other man is silent for a moment, then says thought-fully, “Have you ever considered what is really happening out there? These graceful birds who wheel in the sky are seeking food. How graceful do they look to the insects they gobble? or to the writhing worms they drag from the earth with cruel and rending beaks?”
The first man shifts uneasily, “Ah, come now!”
The other man speaks again. “Those sheep so peacefully grazing – they are being fattened and will soon be dragged to the slaughterhouse trembling with fear as they smell the blood-stained floor on which they will die. Their little lambs will be snatched away to dangle from butchers’ hooks.”
The first man is silent as the voice continues.
“This emerald green grace rippling in the sun – within it murder and mayhem are constantly taking place as spiders devour flies and large insects devour the smaller. If the sounds could be interpreted and magnified, screams of pain and fear would reverberate throughout this lush meadow.”

The first is a poet; he looks through the eyes of positivity. The second is a critic; he looks through the eyes of negativity. Bernard Synon ends this small parable here. I would like to bring another man, the mystic, in.

A third car comes and out gets a mystic who listens to the stories of both the men and laughs. And he says, “Life is not either/or. Life is both/and. You are both right, but life is more than that. Yes, there is dark night and there is bright day, there is summer and there is winter, and there is life and there is death. You are both right, but you have chosen one standpoint against the other. You see only half the picture of life and you try to impose that half on the whole. Then you go wrong. I don’t choose, I simply accept as it is.”

Yes, there is death and there is life and both are intertwined. Seeing both together one transcends; one transcends to a higher peak. Then one is no longer dominated by any standpoint. Then you see life and death as part of each other, and then you are so transcendental to- both that you see eternity. Then there is neither beauty nor ugliness, there is simply truth.
Beauty is choosing one standpoint, ugliness is choosing another standpoint. Truth is not choosing any standpoint at all. Truth is not choosing.
God is not any aspect of reality. God is all the aspects together without any choice. If you choose, you miss; if you don’t choose, there is no way to miss. But there is a problem…. When you choose, you can remain yourself – all choice feeds the ego. When you don’t choose, you disappear. You disappear with your choice, likes, dislikes. You cannot exist without choosing. The ego cannot exist without choice. Choice is its very breath. Just as you cannot exist if the breath disappears, so ego cannot exist without choosing, without taking a standpoint, without being for or against. Once you don’t take any standpoint, you disappear. In that disappearance is God.
You will never meet God, remember. Nobody has ever met God. When people say that they have met God, what they mean Is that they have disappeared, only God is. The ego disappears and then there is experiencing – continuous, constant, eternal. That energy, that ever-flowing energy, is what God is.
So remember, God is not an object of experience, neither is he the subject of experience – God is experiencing itself. God is not static but a process – evolving, expanding, exploding, exploring. It goes on and on. It is an adventure; it is a pilgrimage from nowhere to nowhere. God is not there in the heavens or somewhere else – God is not there, God is here. And God is not then, God is now. And God is not that, God is this.
If you can understand these few words: here, now, this…. These three words are the three pillars of Sufism, of Zen, of all that is essential religion. These three words – let them vibrate in your being again and again: here, now, this.
Those who think of God as that – far away, somewhere else – are just imagining, and missing the obvious which is just close by. God is not far away. He is closer than you are to yourself. He’s your innermost core, how he can be far away? And God is not then, there – in the past, in the future. It is not that God used to walk in the days of Moses and talk to people, it is not that God used to talk to Mohammed and will not talk to you. It is not that he used to sing songs to the seers of the Upanishads and he has forgotten you or abandoned you. God is now. God is always now. God is never past, never future. In relationship to God, past and future are meaningless words. You cannot say “God was,” you cannot say “God will be.” You have always to say “God is.” There is only one tense: is, present. And God is here this very moment.
If you can be in a state of experiencing, God is here, now, this. If you cannot be in the state of experiencing, God is never, nowhere. This state of experiencing is what Sufis call meditation. But this God here, now, this, is a dangerous God. You have to disappear for it to be. You have to dissolve into it. It is risky. We have created substitutes to avoid the risk.

It was announced in church that a substitute preacher would preach.
A little boy leaned over and asked his mother, “What is a substitute?”
“Well, for example, son, if you threw your baseball through the window and broke it, and we didn’t have another real pane, we could put a piece of cardboard in the window…that is what we call a substitute.”
When the substitute minister had finished preaching that morning, the little boy leaned over and said, “Mother, this sure is not a substitute…he is a real pain!”

All your substitutes are real pains because no substitute can ever satisfy. No substitute can ever fulfill, no substitute can ever quench your thirst. But man is very cunning and goes on creating substitutes. Your temples are substitute temples, your teachers are substitute teachers, your prayers are substitute prayers. Your own prayer has not arisen yet, and you have not yet found the temple of experiencing. But remember, you choose these substitutes, and then you suffer. And when you suffer, you blame God.

I have heard….
Cohen, aged eighty-six, had lived through beatings in Polish pogroms, concentration camps in Germany, and dozens of other anti-Semitic calamities.
“Ah, Lord!” he prayed, sitting in the synagogue. “Isn’t it true that we are your chosen people?”
And from the heavens boomed a voice, “Yes, Cohen, the Jews are my chosen people!”
“Well, then,” wailed the old man, “isn’t it time you chose somebody else?”

No people are God’s chosen people. You have chosen to be God s chosen people – and then you suffer. Jews have suffered for a really long time. And all their misery can be condensed into this single thing: they have chosen to be the chosen people of God. That very ego has created great antagonism. And they are stubbornly clinging to it. The more they have suffered, the more stubborn they have become.
But God has not chosen anybody. How can God choose? All is his. All is he. There is no question of choice. But we choose our ideas and then those ideas become prisons, calamities. Beware! If you are suffering, then look back – you must have chosen something wrong, otherwise you cannot suffer. This is my basic observation after observing thousands of people and their miseries. Whenever I see somebody suffering and in misery, I have by and by become absolutely certain about one thing – that he is responsible, that he has chosen some wrong ideas, that he has chosen some wrong notions. But those who suffer always throw the responsibility on others. And sometimes it seems very unjust. If a couple comes to me and the wife or the husband is miserable but the other partner is not miserable at all, the miserable partner tries to throw the responsibility on the other – “He is responsible for my misery.”
It seems very hard to tell the person who is in misery that he must be responsible for his misery – because nobody else can be responsible for his misery. If the other is happy he must have chosen different values. He must have chosen values that give happiness, health, wholeness. If you have chosen wrong values, you suffer, but you can always manipulate and interpret in such a way that your suffering seems as if it has been done to you, Nobody can make you suffer. It is always basically you who decide whether to suffer or not. In every situation you can take a standpoint from which you can get out of suffering, and in every situation you can take a standpoint from which you can create as much suffering as you like. But people like to suffer. There is a reason for it: the more they suffer the more they are. In suffering the ego feels strengthened; in bliss it disappears.
So you go on saying that you need bliss, that you seek bliss, but when I look into you I find just the opposite. You seek misery, you live on misery, you look for misery. You go on saying that you seek bliss and you go on looking for misery. Unless this mechanism is understood perfectly well, you will never be able to know what God is. God is bliss. And bliss is possible only when you have understood the phenomenon of how you create your misery. Substitutes create misery.
For example, you wanted to love a woman but love is dangerous, unsocial, rebellious. And who knows what might happen? So you settled for marriage. Now marriage is a substitute for love. You will never be happy, you will be miserable. Of course you will be comfortably miserable, conveniently miserable – but miserable all the same. You will have a certain security, a good bank balance, prestige, respect, but you will not be happy. Look at your respectable people. They have all that they always thought would help them, they have it. Money they have, power they have, prestige they have. But look into their eyes – they are deserts. Not a single flower blooms, there is no joy. They are just dragging themselves somehow. They settled for a substitute.
Go and sit by the comer of a temple or a mosque and watch people coming and going. Do you see any celebration? Do you see any real joy? Do you see any dance? – nothing! People just walk into the temple as part of their formal duty, and get out as soon as they can. They have to fulfill a certain duty; they have to show society that they are religious people – it pays. But there is no joy. The temple is a substitute.
See people praying. Not a single tear comes to their eyes. See people praying. No radiance is on their faces. Not even a ripple of dance is around them. And they go on praying for their whole life. It is a sheer wastage of time and energy. They have chosen a substitute. Beware of substitutes. Only then can you find God. God has no substitute. God is the really real, the truth.

Now this small parable.
Imam Mohammed Baqir is said to have related this illustrative fable:
”Finding I could speak the language of ants, I approached one and inquired, ‘What is God like? Does he resemble the ant?’
”He answered, ‘God! No, indeed – we have only a single sting, but God, he has two!’"
That’s how all your religions and philosophies are – God is just your magnified roop, form. You have one sting, he has two. You live seventy years, he lives eternally. You become old, he never becomes old. But the difference is of quantity, not of quality. Your God is your projected, reformed, modified, decorated form. Your God is you as you would like to be.
Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
Why did Van Gogh kill himself? Why did Hemingway put a shotgun in his mouth and blow the top of his head off? Why do they poison their rivers, their air and their own food? Why do they justify it all with their reasoning, psychology and laws? Why do they come here for a couple of months, and why do you have so much compassion for them? I am sick and tired of them!
The question is from Prageet.
First, there are suicides and suicides. Each suicide has something unique about it – as each life has something unique about it. Your life is yours and your death is also going to be yours. Sometimes it is possible that your life may not be yours, but it is not possible that your death may not be yours.
Life can be anonymous. If you live with others, you can compromise too much, you can imitate – but death is always unique because death is alone. You die alone. There is no society. They don’t exist in your death. The crowd, the mass, is there when you are alive, but when you die you die absolutely alone, utterly alone.
Death has a quality.
So sometimes it happens that a man may commit suicide because he has become tired of the anonymous existence. He has become tired of all the compromises that one has to make in order to live. That’s why van Gogh committed suicide – he was a rare man, one of the greatest painters ever. But he had to make compromises every moment of his life. He got tired of those compromises; he could no longer tolerate being part of the crowd mind. He killed himself in order to be himself. He was only thirty-three or something when he killed himself. If he had been in the East there would have been another alternative: suicide or sannyas. These are the two alternatives which every man who has some sense of life, of individuality, has to choose between.
In the West nothing like sannyas has been in existence. If you become a Christian monk that is again a compromise; you still remain part of the society. Even if you go out of the society you remain part of it. The society goes on controlling you – it has a remote control system. It does not allow you to really go out of it. You remain a Christian, you remain a Catholic, even when you have moved to a monastery. It does not make much difference.
In the East, sannyas has a totally different flavor. The moment you become a sannyasin you are no longer a Hindu, you are no longer a Mohammedan, you are no longer a Christian. The moment you become a sannyasin, you drop out of all collectivities. You become yourself. You will be surprised to know that in the East people don’t commit suicide as much as in the West. And the difference is big – too big to be just accidental. In the East we have created a creative kind of suicide, that is sannyas. You can still live, but you can live in your own way. Then the need for suicide disappears, or becomes very much less.
In the West it always has happened that the unique individuals have to commit suicide. The mediocre go on living, the unique have to commit suicide. A van Gogh, a Hemingway. a Mayakovski, a Nijinsky – these are unique individuals. Either they have to commit suicide or they have to go mad – the society drives them mad. The society puts so much pressure on them that either they have to yield to the society and become just anonymous, or they have to go mad, or they have to commit suicide. And all are destructive alternatives.
Nietzsche went mad; that was his way of committing suicide. Nijinsky committed suicide; that was his way of going mad. Nietzsche had the same quality as a buddha. Had he been in the East he would have become a buddha, but the West does not give that alternative at all. He had to go mad. Van Gogh had a unique quality of tremendous intelligence, creativity. He could have moved on the path of sannyas and samadhi, but there was no door open. He got tired; just going on living a compromise was hurting too much. It was not worth it. One day he completed his painting – the painting that he had always wanted to do – and that day he felt, “Now there is no need to make any compromise with anybody for any reason. I have done my paintings, I have done my best. It is time to disappear.”
He had always wanted to paint a sunrise. He had painted sunrises for years, but still something was missing and lacking and he would paint again and again. The day his painting was complete and he was fulfilled and satisfied and contented that it had happened – that very moment it was absolutely clear to him that now there was no need – “I was only waiting for this painting. I am fulfilled in it, I have bloomed. Now why make compromises? For what?” He committed suicide.
He was not mad, he was simply not mediocre. His suicide was not a crime, his suicide was simply a condemnation of your so-called society which asks for so many compromises. Mediocre people are ready to compromise; they have nothing to lose. In fact they feel very good being part of a crowd, of a mob, because in the crowd they need not think about themselves as mediocre; all are just like them. They can lose themselves in the crowd. They can lose themselves and forget themselves in the mass mind, and in the mass mind they have no responsibility. They need not bother whether they are intelligent or unintelligent; they need not bother whether they are asleep or awakened.
But a man who has some soul in him will find it continuously heavy to go on degrading himself, to go on compromising for small ordinary trivia, meaningless things – for bread and butter, for a house, a shelter, for clothes.
Van Gogh was very poor because his paintings wouldn’t sell. His paintings were at least a hundred years ahead of his time. That is always so. The greater a man’s intelligence, the bigger is the distance between the people that exist by his side and the people for whom his painting, his poetry, his assertions, will be meaningful. He comes before his time.
That’s why Buddha’s assertions are still relevant, still fresh; not rotten, not old. His time is coming now. It is as if he came two thousand five hundred years before his time.
Vincent van Gogh’s paintings are now becoming great paintings; great appreciation has arisen for him. He came a little early. They always do. His brother used to give him enough money just to keep his body and soul together, because his paintings wouldn’t sell. So just enough money…. And van Gogh would eat for half the week and for half the week he would fast to save money to paint.
Just think how difficult it was for him to live. Nobody would appreciate his painting. Once it happened that his brother made an arrangement. He told a friend, “You go and purchase at least one painting. At least once in his life he should have the joy of somebody purchasing his painting. You take money from me. Go and purchase a painting.”
The friend went. Van Gogh was very happy. This was the first man who had come to appreciate his painting. But soon he recognized the fact that the man was not interested…. Van Gogh was thrilled! He was dancing and he was showing his paintings, all the paintings that he had done. But the man was not interested, he was just fulfilling a duty. He said, “Anyone will do. You just give me any painting and take this money.”
It hurt van Gogh even more. He threw the man out with his money and he said, “I suspect it is my brother behind it. He always wanted somebody to purchase my painting and it seems he has sent you. You get out from here! I am not going to sell. I wanted somebody to love my painting, to see what I have done, but you are not the person. You don’t have any perception, you don’t have any aesthetic sense, you don’t know what paintings mean. You simply get out!”
So not a single painting was sold. Starving, fasting, he was painting three days, four days a week. And for three, four days he would be able to eat. The day he completed the painting that he always wanted to complete….
He was madly in love with the sun. The sun is the source of life. Maybe the sun was his symbol for God, maybe through the sun he was searching for God. The day he painted his sunrise, he committed suicide. This suicide is not a crime, it is simply a shout against the mediocre society that we have created in the world. It is simply a protest that for those who have life. this society is not worth living in. This society is only for the mediocre. This society is only for those who really don’t want to love, who just want to drag.
But each suicide will have a different quality to it.
You ask why Hemingway committed suicide. Hemingway’s suicide has another flavor, different from van Gogh’s. Hemingway’s whole search was the search for freedom. Birth happened; it was not your choice. You were thrown into life – as the existentialists say. You were thrown into it, it was not your choice. Nobody ever asked you whether you wanted to be born or not. So birth is not freedom. It has already happened.
The next most important thing is love, but that is also not possible to do. When it happens, it happens; you cannot manage it, you cannot will it. If you want to love a person just through will, it is impossible. It happens when it happens – -suddenly you are in love, That’s why we use the phrase “falling in love.” You “fall” into it. But you cannot will it; it comes from the unknown. It is just like birth. It is as if God manages that you fall in love with this person; it is as if the decision comes from the blue. You are not the decisive factor, you are more like a victim. You cannot do anything against it. If it happens you have to go into it; if it does not happen you can do whatsoever you want and it will not happen. Nobody can produce love on order.
And the most important three things in life are birth, love, death. Death is the only thing that you can do something about – you can commit suicide.
Hemingway’s search was for freedom. He wanted to do something that he had done. He had not managed birth, he had not managed love, now there was only death. There was only one thing which if you wanted to do, you could do. It would be your act, an individual act, done by you.
Death has a mysterious quality about it; it is a very strange paradox. If you are standing by the side of a small baby, just born, and if somebody asks you to say something absolutely certain about the baby – the baby is in his crib, asleep, relaxing – what can you say absolutely certainly? You can say only one thing: that he will die.
This is a very strange thing to say. Anything else is uncertain. He may love, he may not love. He may succeed, he may fail. He may be a sinner, he may be a saint. All are “maybes,” there is nothing certain about anything. It is not possible to predict anything. There is only one thing you can say – and it looks very absurd at the side of a baby who has just been born – only one thing is absolutely certain: that he will die. This prediction can be made, and your prediction is never going to be wrong.
So death has a certain quality of certainty about it – it is going to happen. And at the same time it has something absolutely uncertain about it too. One never knows when it is going to happen. There is certainty that it is going to happen and uncertainty about when it is going to happen. Both this certainty and uncertainty about death make it a mystery, a paradox. If you go on living, it will happen – but then again it will come from out of the blue. You will not be the decisive factor. Birth happened, love happened – was death also to happen? That made Hemingway uneasy. He wanted to do at least one thing in life to which he could have his own signature, about which he could say “This I did.” That’s why he committed suicide. Suicide was an exercise in freedom.
You cannot know anything about death unless you go into it. Hemingway’s attitude was that if it is going to happen then why be dragged into it? Why not go into it on your own? It is going to happen. His whole life’s concern was death, that’s why he became so interested in bullfights. Death was very close by. He was constantly. attracted by the theme of death – what it was. But you cannot know. Even if somebody is dying in front of you, you don’t know anything about death. You simply know that the breathing has disappeared, that this man’s eyes won’t open again, that this man will never speak again, that his heart is no longer beating – that’s all. But this is nothing. How can you know about death from these things? The mystery remains a mystery, you have not even touched it.
You can know it only by going into it. But if you are dragged into it there are more possibilities of your becoming unconscious – because you are being dragged into it. Almost always people die unconsciously. Before death happens they become so afraid, so very afraid, that a kind of coma surrounds them and protects them. It is a natural anesthetic. When you go for an operation, you need an anesthetic – and death is the greatest operation there is: the soul and body will be torn apart. So nature has some built-in mechanism – before you start dying you go into a coma; all consciousness disappears. In the first place your consciousness was not very much. Even while you were alive, it was just a tiny flicker. When the wind of death comes, that flicker is gone – there is complete darkness.
Hemingway wanted to go into death fully conscious. It was a conscious exercise in dying. But that is possible only through suicide or through samadhi. These are the only two possibilities. You can die consciously in only two ways. You can commit suicide; you can manage your own death. You can have your revolver ready, contemplate it, put it to your chest or your head, pull the trigger yourself consciously, see the explosion and see death. This is one possibility. It is a very destructive possibility.
Another possibility is to go more and more into meditation, to attain to a state of awareness that cannot be drowned by death. Then there is no need to commit suicide. Then whenever death comes, let it come. You will be dying fully alert, aware, watchful.
So it is suicide or sannyas, suicide or samadhi.
And in the West, sannyas and samadhi have not been available. That’s why these two very rare people committed suicide. And they have not been understood. People think that they were kind of ill, neurotic, mad, morbid, unhealthy. They were not. I am not saying that all people who commit suicide are the same. There are neurotic people who will commit suicide. There are morbid people who are more concerned with death than they are concerned with life, who enjoy destructiveness. They are self-destructive mechanisms who go on poisoning themselves.
I’m not talking about all suicides – but you have asked about these two. And there are as many as people commit suicide. But these two are very rare. These two are very potential. If Vincent van Gogh or Hemingway had been in the East or had had the Eastern attitude, they would have flowered as great sannyasins.
And then you ask: “Why do they poison their rivers, their air and their own food?” That is again creating a mass suicide very slowly.
When you live unintelligently, insensitively, you live such a dull kind of life that your interest naturally starts moving towards death. That’s why there are constant wars. And the periods that you call days of peace are not much concerned with peace, they are only preparations for a new war. So either you are in war or you prepare for war. There are only two kinds of periods in history: actual fighting and preparation for the fighting. There has never been a period of peace. The peace is absolutely false, pretentious. Underneath the peace, underground, you are preparing for another war.
Why is there so much attraction for war? – because only when people are dying do they become a little alert. When there is danger you become a little alert. You don’t know how to be alert in any other way. That’s why when there is war you will see people’s faces more alive. Something is happening. Otherwise nothing happens. It is the same old tale told by an idiot, full of fury and noise, signifying nothing. Every day you get up and the same life starts in the same rut. Every night you go to bed and you have again ended a repetition of a day. And you can be certain that tomorrow you will do the same again. When war happens, things are no longer a routine; suddenly there is news in the air; something new is happening. So people are destructive – they create war.
And they create many kinds of war. They have been constantly fighting with nature. And nature is our life, nature is our very source. But even a man like Bertrand Russell writes about “the conquest of nature.” Conquest? the very idea is aggressive. It is as if we are against nature or nature is against us. We are one. We are nature. The trees are nature – are people not nature? The air is nature and the sun and moon are nature – are the eyes and the smiles and the tears not nature?
Just as the earth goes on growing into trees, so it goes on growing into people too. It is the same nature, it is the same ecology, it is one whole – and it is interdependent. And everything depends on everything else.
But the Western mind has been very aggressive. Nature has to be conquered. You have to fight amongst yourselves, you have to fight with nature; not only that, you have to fight with yourself. These are the three fights: man fights with other men, man fights with nature, man fights with himself. When man fights with other men it is politics. When man fights with nature it is science. And when man fights with himself it is religion. This is a foolish kind of approach – as if the whole thing depends on fighting.
Whom do you call the religious man? – the one who fights with himself continuously, repressing, cutting his life into fragments, choosing, judging, destroying, becoming split and schizophrenic. This is the same attitude – an aggressive, violent attitude. It shows in politics because it is the same man. It shows in religion because it is the same man. It shows in what you do with nature.
You ask me: “Why do they poison their rivers, their air and their own food?” – because they are poisoned with violence. So whatsoever they do becomes poisonous. They are suicidal because they don’t know what life is and they don’t know how to live it. They don’t know the joy and the celebration. They don’t know that it is a gift, that it is a great gift. They don’t know gratitude. So they go on being destructive in every possible way.
The Western attitude has been growing more and more towards death and every day it is bringing death closer to this planet. Any day this planet can explode into utter annihilation. The whole intelligence – technology, science, politics, everything – is directed towards one thing: how to commit a global suicide.
But it is the same man. I would like you to become just the contrary: the man who loves, who does not fight; the man who loves himself. That’s why my religion is a love for yourself. The man who loves himself loves others. Then there will be a totally different kind of politics; it will be based on love. The man who loves himself and loves other people, loves nature too – because trees are people, birds are people, animals are people. Then there will be a different kind of science in the world. But the science has to come from religion, because religion is the deepest core. Because you hate yourself, you hate others, you hate nature. Those are just reverberations of the original hate that you go on carrying with yourself.
“Why do they justify it all with their reasoning, psychology and laws?” What else can they do? One has to justify everything. In fact, when you are doing something wrong, you have to justify it immediately, otherwise you yourself will become aware of the wrong that you have done. And you will be a criminal in your own eyes. To avoid that, you have to find rationalizations.
Once a scientist was staying with me. I love my garden to be a jungle, so I had a beautiful jungle around my house. The scientist said to me, “Are you aware of what you are doing? If you allow these trees to grow so close to the house they will run over the house. These are dangerous things. There is a constant fight between man and trees. If you don’t keep them away, within years their roots will enter into your walls and they will destroy your house.” He said, “I hate trees.”
That has been the attitude of man: destroy. If you take that attitude then everything becomes inimical – even poor trees, innocent trees. And there is some fact to it, so you can base your reasoning on it. Yes, it is true that if trees are left to grow completely in freedom then they will run over your towns and your houses. That’s true, it is factual. But to base your whole life on that small fact and make it a philosophy, is wrong.
The other thing is as much a fact as this – we exist with the trees. Destroy all the trees and you will die. You breathe oxygen in, trees exhale oxygen. You exhale carbon dioxide, trees inhale carbon dioxide. So when you are surrounded by trees you are more alive. It is not just poetry.When you go into a jungle and a great jubilation comes to your heart, you suddenly feel more alive – as if the greenery makes you also green. It is not just poetry, it is pure science. It is because there is more oxygen, more life throbbing all around, more vitality. And when you breathe that oxygen in, your blood is purified; you can throw the toxins out more easily and you live at the maximum.
So there is a partnership with the trees: they take your poison in and purify it and create oxygen for you; you take oxygen in, you use the oxygen and throw the carbon dioxide outside. Trees use carbon dioxide as their food. So there is an absolute partnership. Man cannot live without trees and trees cannot live without man.
Animals are needed for trees and trees are needed for animals. They are not separate; they are part of one rhythm. This too is a fact. And life should not avoid this. One has to understand the totality of it; and one has to live in such a way that no one fact becomes, or pretends to become, the whole. There is no need to destroy. There is no need to fight. That is the approach of Tao, the approach of Sufism, Zen.

There is a famous Zen story….
A king told his old carpenter that he would like a certain table. The old man said, “I am very old and my son is yet not ready. He is learning by and by. But I will try, I will do my best. Give me time.”
For three days the old man disappeared in the forest. After three days he came back.
The king asked, “It takes three days to bring a little wood for the table?”
The old carpenter said, “Sometimes it takes three days, sometimes three months. And sometimes you may not find wood for three years. It is a difficult art.”
The king was puzzled. He said, “Explain it. What do you mean? Explain in detail.”
And the man said, “First I have to go on a fast – because only when I am on a fast does my mind by and by slow down. When my mind slows down, all thoughts disappear. all aggression disappears. Then I am no longer violent, then there is pure compassion and love – a different vibe. When I feel that vibe of no-mind, then I go into the forest, because only through that vibe can I find the right tree. With aggression, how can you find the right tree?” And I have to ask the trees themselves whether one of them is willing to become a table. I go, I look around, and when I feel that this tree is willing…. That willingness can be felt only when I have no mind. So there is fasting, meditating – and when I become absolutely empty, I simply roam around with the trees to have a feel. “When I feel that this tree fits, I sit by its side and ask its permission – ‘I am going to cut a branch from you. Are you willing?’ If the tree says yes wholeheartedly only then do I cut – otherwise who am I to cut its branch?”

Now this is a totally different approach. There is no fight between the man and the tree, there is a friendship. The man tries to fall en rapport with the trees, and he asks their permission. This is absurd for a Western mind. The Western mind says, “What nonsense are you talking about? Asking a tree? Have you gone crazy? And how can the tree say yes or no?” But now even Western science is gradually becoming aware that the tree can say yes or no. Now sophisticated instruments exist which can detect the moods of a tree – whether the tree is willing, whether the tree is unwilling, whether the tree is happy or unhappy? Now subtle instruments have been developed – just like a cardiogram. You can have a cardiogram of the tree. Electronic instruments can detect the moods of the tree.
When a woodcutter comes around the tree the tree is shaken with fear, is sad, is afraid, clings to her life. No Taoist will cut a tree in that state, no, not at all. If the tree is not willing, then who are we? When the tree on its own is ready to share, then only can it be cut.
Now this table will have a different quality to it. It has been a gift from the tree; it has not been taken away. The tree has not been robbed, it has not been conquered. It will not be difficult to understand that this table will have a different vibe to it. It will have something sacred about it. If you put this table in your room you will create a certain kind of space around the table which will not be possible with other tables. It will be there befriending you because you befriended it. It will be there as part of your family, not as a limb cut from an enemy.
The Western mind has been too aggressive against itself and against nature. It has created schizophrenia against people, it has created politics, war, and it has created the ecological crisis.
But things have gone now to the extreme. Either man has to turn back and drop the Western aggressive attitude or man has to get ready to say good-bye to this planet. This planet cannot tolerate man any more; it has already tolerated him for long enough.
“Why do they come here for a couple of months and why do you have so much compassion for them?”
They need compassion because only through compassion will they learn compassion. There is no other way to learn it. If they can feel my compassion and my love, they will start being compassionate and being loving. It is only in the milieu of love that one learns love. I am just creating a climate here. It is not a teaching, it is a climate.
And I don’t have anything else to give. To whosoever comes I can give my love and my compassion – because that is all that I have.
And Prageet says:“ “I am sick and tired of them.”
If you are sick and tired of them then you are one of them. That very attitude of being sick and tired is violent.
Why this question? Such a long question has arisen in Prageet’s mind, and this is his first question. He has been here for almost two years. Why has such a long question arisen? He has a very violent mind. He is a good group leader, but a very violent one. He runs the gestalt and the bioenergetic groups and he goes on beating people. And he had never asked this question up to now. But just a few days ago one guy beat him really hard. Hence the question.
If you are tired and sick of them, you are one of them. Feel compassion, feel love. Help people through love and compassion. I know that sometimes you have to be hard too, just because of compassion, but that is another quality of hardness. Sometimes you have to push their buttons, but when you push their buttons, naturally they can go to the extreme – they can hit you. A real group leader is always in danger. That is the risk. You provoke people to bring their negativities to the surface, and when those negativities come to the surface, naturally you can be one of the targets. You are in danger.
But a group leader will accept it with gratitude. When somebody hits a group leader, he will bow down to him and say thank you – because that is what he wanted. He was creating a situation in which the anger could bubble up and burst. Once that anger has gone, the man will have a totally different kind of energy. The group process is a catharsis; it is a process of taking the pus out of your system. But when you are taking pus out of a system, sometimes a few drops of pus may fall upon your clothes – that’s natural. When you do surgery your hands will be bloody and you will need a good bath after it.
Don’t be angry. Otherwise you become part of them.
Now Prageet says, “I don’t want to lead any groups nor do I want to Rolf people. Maybe I could work in the garden?” No, not at all. I love my trees!

The second question:
Osho,
In answering my question, you kept referring to me as “she.” So you have found me out. Even growing a beard, I could not deceive you. Only one small request: may I keep the swami in the front of my name?
Sorry, Ma Anand Sucheta. I goofed again.
Yes, it has happened. Just the other day Swami Anand Sucheta asked a question and I continued to refer to him as she.
Now there are two other Suchetas, both are she. One Sucheta is he, two Suchetas are she. They have also written questions to me. But the swami who asked the question has really understood the point of it. “Swami” was clearly there, “swami” was written on the question – but for two reasons I was goofing. One was that Anand Sucheta really has the heart of a woman. By growing a beard it makes no difference.
There is a biological he and she and there is a psychological he and she. Sometimes when I am giving sannyas to a person I have to think twice whether to call him ma or swami. Not to create an embarrassing situation for you I go on giving swami and ma according to your biological body. But sometimes it is very clear that to call this person “swami” seems absolutely wrong. He has such a feminine heart and his path is going to be love. He is so receptive.
Just the other night Prabha was here. Now he has a heart of a woman. He is a very big man physically, but he has a very, very soft vulnerable heart of a woman – a very loving heart. His psychological being is a she. And that is really more important because my work is concerned not with your biology but with your psychology.
But I am happy that Anand Sucheta understood the point. He says: “In answering my question, you kept referring to me as “she.” So you have found me out. Even growing a beard I could not deceive you. Only one small request: may I keep the swami in front of my name?”
That you can go on keeping. But go on knowing that you are feminine. And be joyous about it – because my understanding is that the feminine mind is closer to God than the masculine mind. The masculine mind is the Western mind and the feminine mind is the Eastern mind. The masculine mind is aggressive and the feminine mind is receptive. And God comes easily to those who can receive him – like a womb; to those who can become pregnant with him.
Go on keeping your swami name. That is for others. But for your own self go on remembering. Become more and more feminine. Allow your femininity to take possession of you.
Secondly, although Swami Anand Sucheta asked the question, the question was more relevant to one of the Ma Anand Suchetas. She did not ask it but really she should have asked it. It was more relevant.
So when sometimes I goof, I goof for reasons. Try to find out why. Meditate over it. When I make a mistake, meditate over it and you will always be enriched by it.

The third question:
Osho,
Every time you come and go in the lecture, I am worried you may miss a step and fall.
PS You look so drunk.
That’s true. But I have been drunk for so long that you need not be afraid. For twenty-five years I have been that way. In the beginning it really was difficult to walk. I was very much afraid myself that I might fall any moment. Somehow the body had become so distant and there was such a gap – earth and sky apart. It took time for me to settle down. Although everything has settled down, that drunkenness is still there. This is God-drunkenness. Once you have drunk from the spring of the divine you are never in a state of being undrunk. Once is enough. A drop of it is enough to drown you forever. You need not drink again and again; you will never become thirsty again.
I can understand your question, but don’t be worried. Somehow…. I call it “somehow” because I am not managing it. I cannot manage it because I am not there to manage it; it has managed itself. Somehow I remain drunk and I remain aware.
Sufis have a particular principle about it – it will be meaningful to understand it. They call it an oscillation between the two states, ahwal. The two states are baka and fana: individuality and dissolution of the individuality. Between these two there has to be a kind of rhythm, a synchronization. There are people who are in their baka, but they don’t know anything about fana. Then there are people who are in their fana, but they forget how to come back to baka. Both are lopsided.
A kind of balance is needed between the two – drunkenness and awareness. One has to be drunkenly aware, or alertly drunk. That is the highest alchemy – where opposites meet and they become one. That is the greatest synthesis.

It is said of al-Junnaid, master of al-Hillaj Mansoor, that he used to impose disciplines to establish a rhythm between these two polarities. It is reported that the master once ordered a disciple, al-Shibli…al-Shibli later on became a great master himself. This man, al-Junnaid, created many masters. He had a great creative energy to create masters. He was one of the masters of masters. When al-Shibli attained his satori. his samadhi, his fana, he became incapable of coming back to the baka. He was so drunk, so lost, that the master was very angry with him.
He said, “You listen, Shibli! First you were clinging to your baka state. Now you have moved to the other and now you cling to it. Clinging remains. Clinging has to go. one has to be more liquid. One has to be capable of moving from one to the other easily, smoothly – just like a pendulum that swings from left to right, right to left. Without any hitch, hesitation, without any clinging, one has to attain to that smooth movement.”
But al-Shibli could not follow. Then the master said, “If your self-discipline is not sufficient to restrain your mystic states, ahwal, it is better that you admit yourself to a mad asylum for a time. “
This is strange advice from a master – “Go to a madhouse, admit yourself, and stay there until you attain a discipline by which you can be alert and drunk together.”
This has been one of the greatest problems on the path of the ultimate ecstasy, and you will find this phenomenon in many ways. You see Buddha. Buddha is drunk and alert together. Ramakrishna is not alert. He is drunk. Something of the balance is missing. If you ask me, I cannot tell you to make Ramakrishna a goal. When Ramakrishna would get into his fana state, for days he would remain almost unconscious. Once he remained unconscious in a coma for six days. And when he came out of it he started crying, and he started asking God, “Take me back. Let me go into that again.” He became like a child. It is better than the state of baka – this ecstasy is good – but there is a higher stage to it. That is Buddha’s state. He is drunk and yet alert. One has never seen him unconscious. He has managed the ultimate synthesis.
The way of ecstasy is also the way of sobriety, because it is the science of the knowledge of states. As Sheik ibn Ajiba has said, “A drunkenness with consciousness of the state is higher than drunkenness with forgetfulness. Ecstasy is not the goal but the means; nevertheless an absolutely essential means.”
So you need not be afraid. I am drunk and alert together. My drunkenness takes care that I don’t become so much alert that I am fixed in the baka. My awareness takes care that I don’t become fixed in the state of fana. They help each other like the two wings of a bird – they are opposite and yet complementary. With one wing you cannot fly, you will need both wings.
And that is my teaching. My whole effort here is to make you alert and drunk together. Hence I go on telling you to dance and abandon yourself in dance, and I go on teaching you ways of meditation, awareness, vipassana – so that both can grow together. The day you are drunk, suddenly you will find a light burning in you which keeps you alert. And certainly, as Ajiba says, a drunkenness with awareness is higher than a drunkenness with forgetfulness.

The fourth question:
Osho,
During the day when I am bouncing around, I completely lose myself. I am enjoying, but where does meditation come in?
The very enjoyment is what meditation is all about.
The question is from Vidya. Now she is hankering for some misery. She is enjoying but she cannot enjoy enjoying; she wants to create some trouble for herself. It is very difficult to be really happy and happy with happiness. Once you are happy you start looking for some trouble. You cannot believe that you can be happy, that you can really be happy. Something must be wrong. When you are miserable you are perfectly happy – that is your state, you know it, you are well acquainted with it; that is your identity. When you are miserable you are happy, because you know that this is how you are – but when you are happy then you start becoming miserable. You cannot trust happiness, it is so unknown.
That’s what meditation is: to enjoy, to celebrate.

Hoping to develop his son’s character, a father once gave him a penny and a quarter as he was leaving for Sunday school. “Now, Peter, you put whichever one you want to in the offering plate,” he said.
When the boy returned, his father asked which coin he had given. Peter answered, “Well, just before they sent around the plate the preacher said, ‘The Lord loveth a cheerful giver,’ and I knew I could give the penny a lot more cheerfully than I could give the quarter, so I gave it.”

I perfectly agree with the boy. Whatsoever is cheerful is good. Whatsoever makes you cheerful is religious. Let cheerfulness be your only religion, the only law. Let there be no other law. Just enjoy and enjoy tremendously, totally. Meditation will come like a shadow. It is meditation coming; it is the sound of the footsteps of meditation coming to you.

The fifth question:
Osho,
It is a long, long journey between the preparation and the ultimate; between the state of robopathology and enlightenment. Must one suffer during the period of the “journey” or is there a possibility of peace? Please explain.
It depends on you. It depends on what attitude you take about it. Waiting can become great joy if you trust that it is going to happen, if you trust that it is coming closer every moment. If you trust that it has already started happening because you have started moving towards it, then each moment that passes will make you more and more joyous. The home is coming closer.
But you can be very miserable if you take the. attitude – “How long do I have to wait? How far is the goal? Why have I to wait so long? Why have others reached? Why are others reaching before me?” Then you can create a thousand and one problems for yourself and you can get miserable. And remember, the law is that the more miserable you get in your waiting, the longer the waiting will be – because God cannot happen in a miserable mind. The happier the waiting, the closer you are coming. If your waiting can be your total joy, God will happen this very moment – no time gap is needed. It all depends on your patience.
But when I say patience, I don’t mean a negative quality, I mean a joyous patience – thrilled, expectant. It is going to happen! When it is going to happen is not the point – it is going to happen.
It all depends on how you interpret. Interpretation is a process that has to be understood very deeply. You can see a rosebush and you can start counting the thorns. If you count the thorns, there are millions. And in that very counting you will become incapable of seeing the rose. Counting the thorns, being hurt by the thorns, your hands will be bloody. You will be angry, you will be frustrated, you will be in despair – and your eyes will not be capable of seeing the rose. How can you see the rose with so many thorns? Thorns will be floating in your eyes. Your eyes will be covered by thorns; you will not be able to see the rose. Even if you have a glimpse of the rose you will not be able to trust. How can the rose happen? You know only thorns, you know only the pain of the thorns. The rose seems to be an impossibility. Maybe it is a dream, maybe you have imagined it, maybe it is a hallucination or something. But in the very nature of things it cannot happen – it is so contrary to the experience of thorns. Then it becomes impossible. By and by you will become oblivious of the rose. Then it no longer exists for you.
But if you look at the rose, if you feel the rose, if you become rosy with the rose, if you allow the fragrance to move into your innermost core, if you feel the wetness of the flower, the dewdrops on it, the sunrise dancing, if you see the utter joy of the flower, the incomparable beauty of it – in that very vision of the rose the thorns start receding. They may be on the bush but they don’t exist for you. They can’t exist for you; your eyes are full of the rose. And when your eyes are really full of the rose – not only your eyes but your heart too – then you will be surprised to find that the thorns don’t matter. Even if there are ten thousand thorns for one rose, only the rose matters, the thorns don’t matter. Your whole outlook has changed and you will look at thorns with a new vision. You will see the thorns not as enemies of the rose but as bodyguards of the rose. They are guarding it; they are friends; they protect – otherwise it will not be possible for the rose to survive. Those thorns are a must.
Once you have started seeing the beauty of life, ugliness starts disappearing. It becomes at the most a shadow. If you start looking at life with joy, sadness starts disappearing. You cannot have both heaven and hell together, you can have only one. It is your choice. And you can have it any moment. If you want hell, you can have it right now. If you want the heaven, you can have that too. It is absolutely your responsibility; it is your choice.
It depends how you interpret.

I would like to tell you a few anecdotes….
Thirty nuns arrived in purgatory. “Now girls,” said the angel in charge. “I want every one of you who was ever sexually involved in any kind of relationship on the earth to stand up – and remember, no fibbing. I have ways of checking up on you.”
Sheepishly twenty-nine of the nuns stood up, but the thirtieth remained seated.
The angel nodded and put in a phone call to the devil. “Satan,” he said, “I’m sending down thirty nuns to you – and I advise you to be particularly careful of one. She’s stone deaf!”

Now this is your interpretation. This shows more about the mind of the angel than anything about the woman who has kept silent and has not stood up.

Another scene….
The Pearly Gates. St. Peter interviewing a new arrival.
St. Peter: “Name?”
New Arrival: “Melvin.”
St. Peter: “Did you ever gamble, drink, or smoke when you were on earth?”
Melvin: “No.”
St. Peter: “Did you ever steal, lie, cheat, or swear?”
Melvin: “No.”
St. Peter: “Were you promiscuous?”
Melvin: “No.”
St. Peter: “Tell me what kept you there so long?”

This shows the mind of St. Peter, nothing about Melvin.

The third…. “Rabbi Jacobs, I need fifty dollars to get out of debt,” sobbed Gottlieb. “I keep praying to God to help, but he has not sent it!”
“Don’t lose faith,” said the rabbi. “Keep praying.”
After Gottlieb left his house, the rabbi felt sorry for him. “I don’t make much money” he thought, “but that poor man needs it. I will give him twenty-five dollars out of my own pocket.”
A week later, the rabbi stopped Gottlieb and said, “Here God sent this to you!”
Back in his home, Gottlieb bowed his head, “Thank you, Lord!” he said, “But next time you send money, don’t send it through Rabbi Jacobs – that crook kept half of it!”

It all depends on you, on how you look at things. You can see each day surrounded by two nights or you can see each night surrounded by two days. And it really makes a lot of difference. Let your waiting be joyous. You are waiting for God. Let it be a song in your heart. Let it be prayerful. Let it be a celebration. Only celebration is sacred.
Just the other day I was reading a statement of a German philosopher, Martin Heidegger. He says, “I have not come across anything in the world which can be called sacred.” Now this man must have lived a very poor life, an utterly poor life, if he could not name, could not vouch for, could not be a witness to a single thing that he could call sacred. His life must have been one of utter frustration. He has not known any song, he has not known any joy. He has not seen a smile on a child’s face, he has not seen tears. He has not heard the birds singing and he has not seen roses and lotuses flowering, and he has not looked at the stars. He has missed.
The whole of life is sacred.
Once it happened that Buddha asked one of his disciples, “Can you find anything which is worthless in life? If you can, then bring it.” The disciple thought for many days and Buddha inquired every day, “What is happening? Have you not yet found anything worthless?” And after a month or two the disciple came and he said, “Sorry. I looked all around. I looked very hard. I could not sleep because you had put a question and I had to find the answer. But I could not find anything worthless.”
Then Buddha said, “Now another task. Find anything which has worth. How many days will you take for it? You took months for the first.” And the disciple laughed. He said, “No need to take any time.” He just took a straw from the ground and gave it to Buddha. And he said, “This is enough proof. This has worth.”
Buddha blessed the disciple and he said, “This is how one should look at life. This is the right attitude – samyak drishti, right vision.” And Buddha said, “I am happy with you – that you took months and still you could not find anything worthless. You could not find a single instance of something meaningless. And now for the meaningful, for that which has worth, you have not taken even a single second. Yes, this is how it is. The whole life is sacred.”
Buddha has lived a rich life, spiritually rich. Heidegger must have lived in misery.
How can you say that life has nothing sacred in it? Each moment is sacred. But you need the eyes to see that sacredness. God is not missing from existence; only your vision is not yet tuned to it.
You ask: “It is a long, long journey between the preparation and the ultimate….” The length of that journey depends on you. It can be long, very long; it may not be so long. It may be very short. The goal depends on you – how long is not a fixed phenomenon. It cannot be measured. It becomes long if you look through misery, anguish, anxiety, antagonism. If your eyes are full of sadness, you create a long distance. If your eyes are full of joy, it is here, it is now, it is this.

The sixth question:
Osho,
You are so crazy!!! How does it feel to be totally crazy?
Just far out!!!

And the last question:
Osho,
Has it happened? Has it finally happened? Is that you inside my heart, so clear and constantly with me now?
Yes, it has happened. But don’t grab it – otherwise it can disappear again. Let it be there, but don’t become greedy – otherwise out of your greed you can crush it. Let it be there but don’t take it for granted. The moment you take it for granted, it disappears. It is there, it has happened.
It is going to happen to all as it has happened to you. But remember, it is very fragile, it is very subtle. You cannot keep it in a fist. The moment you close, you kill it. If you remain open, it will be there. Never expect it to be there and it will be there. If you start expecting then you create hindrances.
Yes, it has happened. But now you will have to be even more alert not to destroy it. It is not so hard – when it has not happened it is not so hard, the work is not so hard. The real work starts when it starts happening, because then you have to be very, very careful and very conscious. A single moment of unconsciousness and you can destroy it.
Enough for today.

============================================================

The Sufi master, Ajnabi said, “Write to Mulla Firoz and tell him that I have no time to engage him in correspondence, and therefore have nothing to say to his letter.”
The disciple, Amini, said, “Is it your intention to annoy him with this letter?”
Ajnabi said, “He has been annoyed by some of my writings. This annoyance has caused him to write to me. My purpose in writing the passage which angers him was to anger such as he.”
Amini said, “And this letter will anger him further?”
Ajnabi said, “Yes. When he was enraged at what I wrote, he did not observe his own anger, which was my intention. He thought that he was observing me, whereas he was only feeling angry. Now I write again, to arouse his anger, so that he will see that he is angry. The objective is for the man to realize that my work is a mirror in which he sees himself.”
Amini said, “The people of the ordinary world always regard those who cause anger as ill-intentioned.”
Ajnabi said, “The child may regard the adult who tries to remove a thorn from his hand as ill-intentioned. Is that a justification for trying to prevent the child from growing up?”
Amini said, “And if the child harbors a grudge against the adult who removes the thorn?”
Ajnabi said, “The child does not really harbor that grudge, because something in him knows the truth.”
Amini asked him, “But what happens if he never gets to know himself, and yet continues to imagine that others are motivated by personal feelings?”
Ajnabi said, “If he never gets to know himself, it makes no difference as to what he thinks of other people, because he can never have any appreciation of what others are really like.”
Amini asked, “Is it not possible, instead of arousing anger a second time, to explain that the original writing was composed for this purpose, and to invite Mulla to review his previous feelings?”
Ajnabi said, “It is possible to do this, but it will have no effect. Rather it will have an adverse effect. If you tell the man your reason he will imagine that you are excusing yourself, and this will arouse in him sentiments which are harmful only to him. Thus, by explaining you are actually acting to his detriment.”
Amini said, “Are there no exceptions to this rule – that man must learn through realizing his own state, and that his state cannot be explained to him?”
Ajnabi said, “There are exceptions. But if there were enough exceptions to make any difference to the world, we would not by now have any Mulla Firozes left.”
Man’s being is very simple, but his personality is not. The personality is very complex. The personality is like an onion – there are many layers of conditioning, corruption, poisoning. Hidden behind many layers – what Sufis call filters – is man’s simple being. But that simple being is behind so many filters that you cannot see it. And hidden behind these many filters, you cannot see the world either – because whatsoever reaches you is corrupted by the filters before it reaches you. Nothing ever reaches you as it is; you go on missing it. There are many interpreters in between.
You see something. First your eyes and your senses falsify. Then your ideology, your religion, your society, your church – they falsify. Then your emotions – they falsify. And so on and so forth. By the time it reaches to you it has almost nothing of the original, or so little that it makes no difference. You see something only if your filters allow it, and the filters don’t allow much.
Scientists agree with the Sufis. Scientists say we see only two per cent of reality. Only two per cent! Ninety-eight per cent is missed. When you are listening to me you will hear only two per cent of what has been told, of what has been said. Ninety-eight per cent will be lost. and when the ninety-eight per cent is lost, that two per cent is out of context. It is as if you have taken two pages from a novel, at random – one from here, one from there – and then you start reconstructing the whole novel from these two pages. Ninety-eight pages are missing. You have no inkling what they were; you don’t even know that they were. You have only two pages and you reconstruct the whole novel again. This reconstruction is your invention. It is not discovery of truth, it is your imagination.
And there is an inner necessity to fill the gaps. Whenever you see that two things are unrelated, the mind has an inner urgency to relate them. Otherwise it feels very uneasy. So you invent a link, you fix those loose things with a link, you bridge them. And you go on inventing a world that is not there.
So before we can enter into this small but immensely valuable dialogue between the master and the disciple, you will have to understand these layers, these filters.
Gurdjieff used to call these filters “buffers.” They protect you against reality. They protect your lies, they protect your dreams, they protect your projections. They don’t allow you to come into contact with reality because the very contact is going to be shattering, shocking. Man lives through lies.
Frederick Nietzsche is reported to have said, “Please don’t take the lies away from humanity, otherwise man will not be able to live. Man lives through lies. Don’t take the fictions away, don’t destroy the myths. Don’t tell the truth because man cannot live by truth.” And he is right about ninety-nine point nine per cent of people. But what kind of life can there be through lies? It will be a big lie itself. And what kind of happiness is possible through lies? There is no possibility; hence humanity is in misery. With truth is bliss; with lies there is only misery and nothing else.
But we go on protecting those lies. Those lies are comfortable, but they keep you protected against bliss, against truth, against God.
Sufis say that man is exactly like an onion. And religion is the art of how to peel the onion and come to it’s innermost core. And what is the innermost core of an onion? Have you ever peeled an onion? You go on peeling one layer. another layer, and another, and so on and so forth. Then a point comes when the last layer is taken off and only emptiness is left in your hand. That is fana. If you go on peeling your being, the last layer will be of being – baka – and beyond that will be emptiness – fana.
So you can think in this way: at the very innermost core there is emptiness, pure sky, nothingness, fana. The first layer around fana is that of baka, individuality – what religions call the self, atman, the soul. But the soul is already a step away from your being. The self is already distant from your being. Buddha has the right word for it. He calls it anatta, no-self. Your innermost being is a non-being. Nothing is there, or only nothing is. The first layer, the first fence that surrounds it, is baka, individuality.
This is your true and simple being: non-being surrounded by being, defined by being.
The real core is empty but the emptiness has to be defined by something – otherwise there will be no division between you and anything else. So a thin. a very thin, layer of being divides you. But that being is also a circumference not the center. At the center is fana, dissolution, disappearance. Even at the point of baka, individuality, you don’t meet God, you are still there. Very little is left of you, but there is still just a thin line – even that has to disappear in fana. Then you enter God.
Start from the other end. Start peeling the onion.
The first layer is made of corrupted physical senses. Never for a single moment think that your physical senses are as they should be – they are not. They have been trained. You see things it your society allows you to see them. You hear things if your society allows you to hear them. You touch things if your society allows you to touch them.
Man has lost many of his senses – for example, smell. Man has almost lost smell. Just see a dog and his capacity to smell – how sensitive is his nose! Man seems to be very poor. What has happened to man’s nose? Why can’t he smell so deeply as a dog or as a horse? The horse can smell for miles. The dog has an immense memory of smells. Man has no memory. Something is blocking the nose.
Those who have been working deep into these layers say that it is because of the repression of sex that smell is lost. Physically man is as sensitive as any other animal, but psychologically his nose has been corrupted. Smell is one of the most sexual doors into your body. It is through smell that animals start feeling whether a male is in tune with the female or not. The smell is a subtle hint. When the female is ready to make love to the male she releases a certain kind of smell. Only through that smell does the male understand that he is acceptable. If that smell is not released by the feminine sexual organism, the male moves away; he is not accepted.
Man has destroyed smell because it will be difficult to create a so-called cultured society if your sense of smell remains natural. You are moving on the road and a woman starts smelling and gives you a signal of acceptance. She is somebody else’s wife; her husband is with her. The signal is there that you are acceptable. What will you do? It will be awkward, embarrassing.
Your wife is walking with you and there is no smell from her body, and suddenly a man passes by and she gives the signal. And those are very unconscious signals; you cannot control them suddenly. Then you will become aware that she is interested in the other man, that she is welcoming the other man. That will create trouble. So down the centuries man has destroyed smell completely.
It is not just accidental that in cultured countries much time is wasted in removing all kinds of smell from the body. The body odor has to be completely destroyed by deodorants, deodorant soaps. It has to be covered by layers of perfume, strong perfume. These are all disguises; these are ways to avoid a reality that is still there.
When you make love, both male and female release a certain kind of smell. That smell has to be destroyed because if the man is making love to the woman and the woman is not really into it she will not release the smell. The man will be offended, hurt. He will immediately feel that the woman is not having any orgasm. And the male ego will feel very offended. The smell has to be destroyed completely, so that the man never knows that the woman was simply pretending that she was having an orgasm, just making empty gestures, befooling him, buttressing his ego. And he feels satisfied because the woman looks satisfied. But once the smell is destroyed, there is no way to detect whether she is really satisfied or not.
Smell is very sexual, that’s why we have destroyed the nose, utterly destroyed the nose. Even in language you can see the difference. To see means one thing; to hear, one thing – but to smell means just the opposite. To see means a capacity to see, but to smell does not mean the capacity to smell. It means that you are smelly. Even in language the repression has entered. And the same has happened with other senses.
You don’t see people eye to eye; or, if you do see them, it is only for a few seconds. You don’t see people really; you go on avoiding. If you see, it is thought to be offensive. Just remember, do you really see people? Or do you go on avoiding their eyes? – because if you don’t avoid them then you may be able to see a few things which the person is not willing to show. It is not good manners to see something that he is not willing to show, so it is better to avoid. We listen t,, the words, we don’t see the face – because many times the words and the face are contradictory. A man is saying one thing and he is showing another. Gradually we have completely lost the sense of seeing the face, the eyes, the gestures. We only listen to the words. Just watch this and you will be surprised how people go on saying one thing and showing another. And nobody detects it because you have been trained not to look directly into the face. Or, even if you look, the look is not that of awareness, not that of attention. It is empty; it is almost as if you are not looking.
We hear sounds by choice. We don’t hear all kinds of sounds. We choose. Whatsoever is useful we hear. And to different societies and different countries, different things are valuable. A man who lives in a primitive world, in a forest, in a jungle, has a different kind of receptivity for sounds. He has to be continuously alert and aware of the animals. His life is in danger. You need not be alert. You live in a cultured world where animals don’t exist any more and there is no fear. Your survival is not at stake. Your ears don’t function perfectly because there is no need.
Have you seen a hare or a deer? How attentive they are, how sensitive. Just a small sound – a dead leaf stirred by the wind – and the deer is alert. You would not have noticed it at all. And great music surrounds life, subtle music surrounds life, but we are absolutely unaware of it. There is great rhythm – but to feel it you will need more alert ears, more alert eyes, a more alert touch.
So the first layer is of corrupted physical senses. We see only what we want to see. Our whole body mechanism is poisoned. Our body has been made rigid. We live in a kind of frozenness; we are cold, closed, unavailable. We are so afraid of life that we have killed all kinds of possibilities through which life can make a contact with us.
People don’t touch each other, they don’t hold hands, they don’t hug each other. And when you hold somebody’s hand, you feel embarrassed, he feels embarrassed. Even if you hug somebody, it feels as if something wrong is happening. And you are in a hurry to get away from the other’s body, because the other’s body can open you. The warmth of the other’s body can open you. Even children are not allowed to hug their parents. There is great fear.
And all fear is basically, deep down, rooted in the fear of sex. There is a taboo against sex. A mother cannot hug her son because the son may get sexually aroused – that is the fear. A father cannot hug his daughter. He is afraid he may get physically aroused. Warmth has its own ways of working. Nothing is wrong in being physically aroused or sexually aroused. It is simply a sign that one is alive. that one is immensely alive. But the fear, the sex taboo, says keep away, keep a distance.
Sudha’s father was dying; he was very old. He was my sannyasin. And Sudha was very much puzzled because before he died his hands would go again and again to his genital organs. His hands had to be pulled away. And she was puzzled and worried, naturally. What was happening to her father? Was there some sexual repression? Why did his hands go to the sexual organs, to the genitals, again and again? And he was almost unconscious.
It happens to many people when they are dying. One of the reasons is repression, but only one. They are losing the social consciousness; they are losing the conditioning. This first layer of corrupted senses is disappearing; death is moving in. And they are becoming small children again. Small children play with their genital organs; they have not yet been corrupted. They enjoy their bodies, they love their bodies. They are playful about it, it is fun.
Now the man is no longer old; he is becoming younger again. Death is taking the layer away – that is one thing. Another thing is that when a man dies, for a single moment all his senses become totally alive as they would have been if they had not been corrupted. It is like a flame before a lamp goes out – the flame burns brightly, with intensity, for a single second. Exactly the same happens when life is going out. For a single moment the last effort is made to live, and one burns bright with total sensitivity.
Another reason: when a man is dying the circle is complete – naturally death is very close to birth. Death is very close to life; it is the very crescendo of life. Life comes out of sex energy and life is moving back into sex energy.
But all our senses are corrupted. We have not been allowed to be natural – -hence man has lost dignity, innocence, grace, elegance. This is the first layer. And because of all these repressions the body has become non-orgasmic. There is no joy – it has happened both to man and woman, in almost the same way, but man has gone deeper into corruption than woman – because man is perfectionistic, neurotically perfectionistic. Once he gets an idea, he tries to go to the very extreme of it. Women are more practical, less perfectionistic, less neurotic, more earthly, more balanced, less intellectual, more intuitive. They have not gone to the very end. It is good that women have not become as neurotic as men – that’s why they still retain some dignity, some grace, some roundness of being, some poetry. But both have been corrupted by the society, both have become hard. Men more, women a little less, but the difference is only of degrees.
Because of this layer, everything that enters you has to pass this filter first, and this filter destroys, interprets, manipulates, gives new colors of its own, projects, invents – and the reality becomes very garbed. When this layer disappears…. That is the whole effort of yoga: to make your body alive, sensitive, young again, to give your senses their maximum functioning. Then one functions with no taboos around; then lucidity, grace, beauty flow. Warmth arises again, openness – and growth happens. One is constantly new, young, and one is always on an adventure. The body becomes orgasmic. Joy surrounds you.
Through joy the first corruption disappears. Hence my insistence to be joyous, to be celebrating, to enjoy life, to accept the body – not only to accept it, but to feel grateful that God has given you such a beautiful body, such a sensitive body, with so many doors to relate to reality: eyes and ears and nose and touch. Open all these windows and let life’s breeze flow in, let life’s sun shine in. Learn to be more sensitive. Use every opportunity to be sensitive so that that first filter is dropped.
If you are sitting on the grass, don’t go on pulling it up and destroying it. I had to stop sitting on the lawn – I used to give darshan on the lawn – because people would go on destroying the grass, they would go on pulling on the grass. I had to stop it. People are so violent, so unconsciously violent, they don’t know what they are doing. And they were told again and again, but within minutes they would forget. They were so restless they didn’t know what they were doing. The grass was available to their restlessness so they would start pulling it up and destroying it.
When you are sitting on the grass, close your eyes, become the grass – be grassy. Feel that you are grass, feel the greenness of the grass, feel the wetness of the grass. Feel the subtle smell that goes on being released by the grass. Feel the dewdrops on the grass – that they are on you. Feel the sun rays playing on the grass. For a moment be lost into it and you will have a new sense of your body. And do it in all kinds of situations: in a river, in a swimming pool, lying on the beach in the sun rays, looking at the moon in the night, lying down with closed eyes on the sand and feeling the sand. Millions of opportunities are there to make your body alive again. And only you can do it. Society has done its work of corruption, you will have to undo it.
And once you start hearing, seeing, touching, smelling, then you smell the reality.

The second layer is of conditioning: social, political, religious, ideological – belief systems. Belief systems make you non-communicative. If you are a Hindu and I am a Mohammedan, immediately there is no communication. If you are a man and I am a man, there is communication, but if you are a communist and I am a fascist – communication stops. All belief systems are destructive to communication, and the whole life is nothing but communicating – communicating with trees, communicating with rivers, communicating with sun and moon, communicating with people and animals. It is communication; life is communication.
Dialogue disappears when you are burdened with belief systems. How can you really be in a dialogue! You are already too full of your ideas and you think they are absolutely true. When you are listening to the other, you are just being polite, otherwise you don’t listen. You know what is right, you are simply waiting until this man finishes and then you jump upon him. Yes, there can be a debate and a discussion and argumentation, but there can be no dialogue. Between two beliefs there is no possibility of dialogue. Beliefs destroy friendship, beliefs destroy humanity, beliefs destroy communion.
So if you want to see and hear and listen, then you will have to drop all belief systems. You can’t be a Hindu, you can’t be a Mohammedan, you can’t be a Christian. You can’t afford these kinds of nonsense; you have to be sensible enough to be without beliefs.
Caged in one’s own system you are unavailable, and the other is unavailable to you. People are moving like windowless houses. Yes, you come close, sometimes you clash with each other – but you never meet. Yes, sometimes you touch, but you never meet. You talk, but you never communicate. Everybody is imprisoned in his own conditionings; everybody is carrying his own prison around him. This has to be dropped.
Beliefs create a kind of smugness, and beliefs stop exploration because one becomes afraid. Maybe you come across something which is against your belief – then what? It will disturb your whole system, so it is better not to explore. Remain confined to a dull, dead, defined world; never go beyond it. It gives you an “as if” kind of knowledge – as if one knows. You don’t know anything – you don’t know anything about God, but you have a certain belief about God. You don’t know anything about truth but you have a theory about truth. This “as if” is very dangerous. This is a kind of hypnotized state of the mind.
Males and females, all have been conditioned – although in different ways. Man has been conditioned to be aggressive, to be competitive, to be manipulative, to be egoistic. Man has been prepared for a different kind of work: to be the exploiter, to be the oppressor, and to be the master. Women have been given belief systems to be the slaves. They have been taught how to submit. They have been given a very, very small world, the household. Their whole life has been taken away from them. But once the belief system settles in, the woman accepts it and remains confined to it. And the man accepts his belief system and remains confined to it.
Men have been taught not to cry; tears are not manly so men don’t cry. Now what kind of foolishness is this? Crying and weeping sometimes has such a therapeutic effect – it is needed, it is a must, it unburdens. Man goes on burdening himself because he cannot cry and cannot weep; it is-unmanly. And women have been taught to cry and weep. It is perfectly womanly, so they go on crying and weeping even where it is not needed – it is just a belief system. They use it as a strategy to manipulate. The woman knows that through argument she will not be able to win over the husband, but she can cry – that works. So that becomes her argument.
Man is corrupted in one way: he cannot cry. And the woman is corrupted in another way: she starts crying and uses crying as a strategy to dominate. Crying becomes political – and when your tears are political they lose beauty, they are ugly.
This second conditioning is one of the most difficult things to get rid of, it is very complex. You have a certain political ideology, a certain religious ideology and thousands of other things jumbled together in your mind. They have become so much a part of you that you don’t think they are separate from you. When you say “I am a Hindu,” you don’t say that “I have a belief called Hinduism,” no. You say “I am a Hindu.” You are identified with Hinduism. If Hinduism is in danger you think you are in danger. If somebody burns a temple you think you are in danger. Or, if somebody burns the Koran, you think you are in danger because you are a Mohammedan.
These belief systems have to be dropped. Then under-standing arises; then readiness to explore, then innocence arises. Then you are surrounded by a sense of mystery, awe, wonder. Then life is no longer a known thing, it is an adventure. It is so mysterious that you can go on exploring; there is no end to it. And you never create any belief, you remain in a state of not-knowing. On that state Sufis insist very much, and so do Zen masters – in fact, all great masters of the world insist on that state. If they agree on any one thing, it is the state of not knowing.
Remain constantly in the state of not-knowing. If you happen to know something, don’t make a belief out of it. Go on dropping it, go on throwing it. Don’t let it surround you, otherwise sooner or later it will become a hard crust and you will not be available again to life. Remain always childlike – then communication becomes possible, then dialogue becomes possible. When two people who are in a state of not-knowing talk, there is meeting – they commune. There is nothing to hinder. You will be able to understand me only if you are in a state of not-knowing, because I am in that state continuously.
With me, communion is possible if you drop your belief systems, otherwise they will hinder the path.
The third filter, the third layer, is pseudo reasoning, rationalization, explanations, excuses. All are borrowed. Not a single one is your own authentic experience, but they give a kind of satisfaction. You think you are a very rational being. You cannot become rational by accumulating borrowed arguments and proofs. The real reason arises only when you are intelligent. And remember, there is a difference between an intellectual and the man whom I call intelligent. The intellectual is hidden behind the pseudo reasoning. His reasoning may be very logical but it can never be reasonable. His reason is just pseudo, it appears like reason.

Listen, I have heard….
The man was drowning. “Help, I can’t swim! I can’t swim!” he cried.
“I can’t either,” said the old man sitting on the river bank chewing tobacco. “But I’m not hollerin’ about it!”

Now this is perfectly rational, “Why are you hollerin’ about it? You can’t swim, neither can I. So keep quiet.”
But you are sitting on the bank and he is in the river; the situation is different, the context is different.
When Buddha says something, you can repeat the same thing but the context is different. When Mohammed says something, you can repeat exactly the same thing. but it will not mean the same thing – because the context is different. And the context matters, not what you say. It is not what you say but who you are that matters.

I have heard….
Donnegan sat in the confessional. “Father,” he moaned, “I have done something so bad, you are going to throw me out of the church.”
“What did you do, my son?” asked the priest.
“Yesterday,” said Donnegan, “I saw my wife sashaying in front of me and it got me so excited I grabbed her, ripped off her clothes, threw her down on the floor, and we had sex right then and there.”
“That is a little unusual,” said the priest, “but no reason for excommunication.”
“Are you sure you’re not going to throw me out of the church?”
“Of course not.”
“Well,” said Donnegan, “they threw us out of the super-market!”

It all depends on the context – who you are, where you are. It depends from what point of view, from what experience, you utter. I use the same words that you use, but they don’t mean the same, they can’t mean the same. When I utter them I utter them, when you utter them you utter them. The words are the same but because they come from different spaces they carry a different meaning, a different connotation, different flavors, a different music.
The pseudo reasoning is just apparent reasoning, it is not knowing. It is more for the sake of finding excuses; it is more for the sake of argumentation. In this kind of deceiving, the male mind is very expert. This is the male mind’s expertise. He has learned the art very deeply. This filter is very, very strong in the male mind.
Real reasoning arises only when pseudo reasoning has been dropped. What is real reason?
Karl Jaspers has defined it perfectly. He says: Reason is openness, reason is clarity, reason is the will to unity. Reason uses logic, its methods and categories of understanding, just to transcend them. Reason is the ultimate flowering of wisdom.
But not pseudo reasoning. Beware of the pseudo. The pseudo always creates a filter and the real always becomes a door. The real is always a bridge and the pseudo is always a block.
This third, pseudo reasoning layer is one of the greatest disturbances in your being.
The fourth layer is emotionality, sentimentalism. It is pseudo feeling, much ado about nothing, much fuss. The female mind is very expert at this. It is kind of empty; it is just on the surface. It is impotent sympathy; it does not do a thing. If somebody is ill, you sit by their side and you cry. Your crying is not going to help. The house is on fire and you cry. That is not going to help either. This pseudo kind of feeling has to be detected, otherwise you will never know what real feeling is. The real feeling is involvement, commitment. It is empathy not only sympathy. It is action.
Whenever you really feel something in your heart, it immediately transforms you, it becomes action. That is the criterion – your feeling becomes action. If your feeling just remains a feeling and never becomes an action, then know well it is pseudo. Then you are deceiving yourself or somebody else.
Many times people come to me and they say, “Osho, we feel much love for you. We understand what you say, but….” That “but” destroys all that they have said before. They say, “We feel that what you are saying is right, that what you are doing is right, but we cannot become sannyasins.” If you feel that what I am saying is right, if you feel that what I am saying is truth, then how can you avoid becoming sannyasins? It is impossible. Then your feeling would become action, then your feeling would become commitment – otherwise what is the point?
One can never go against one’s heart. If you are still going against your own heart then you must have a pseudo heart – a pretender. Just as the third is the field for male expertise, the fourth is the field for female expertise.

The fifth layer is corrupted, poisoned instincts, repression, disfiguration.
Gurdjieff used to say that all your centers are overlapping each other, are misplaced, are interfering with each other, are trespassing, and you don’t know what is what. Each center in its own functioning is beautiful, but when it starts interfering into somebody else’s functioning, then there is great difficulty; then the whole system goes neurotic.
For example, if your sex center functions as a sex center, it is perfectly good. But people have been repressing it so much that in many people the sex center does not exist in their genitals, it has moved into their head. This is what overlapping is. Now they make love through their head – hence the great importance of pornography, visualization. Even while making love to your woman you may be thinking of some beautiful actress – that you are making love to her. Then suddenly you become interested in making love to your woman. In fact, your own woman is non-existential. It is a kind of masturbation. You are not making love to her, you are making love to somebody else who is not there. You go on fantasizing in the head.
Religious repression has disturbed all your centers. It is very difficult even to see that your centers are separate. And, functioning in its own field, each center is perfectly right. When it interferes with another field, then problems arise. Then there is a confusion of your totality. Then you don’t know what is what.
Sex can be transformed when it is confined to its own center, it cannot be transformed from the head. It has created a pseudo center in the head.

I have heard….
From time to time, saints are allowed to visit the earth in disguise. Saint Theresa had long wanted to pay a visit to Hollywood, but Gabriel, who was in charge of the roster, thought that even a saint would not be able to come through unscathed after visiting the movie capital.
Eventually, however, Saint Theresa persuaded him that no harm would come to her, and she set off on the first available earth-bound cloud.
The weeks stretched into months without any word from earth, so one day a very worried Gabriel put through a telephone call to Los Angeles.
The connection was made, the phone rang, and finally a voice said, “Terry here – who is this? Gabby-darling! How absolutely marvelous to hear from you….”

Now Saint Theresa is no longer Saint Theresa – she is Terry. And Gabriel is no longer Gabriel – he is Gabby-darling. Hollywood has corrupted Saint Theresa.
Your so-called saints are only avoiding the world; they are repressed beings. If opportunities are made available to them, they will fall far lower than you. They are just somehow holding themselves back because of the fear of hell and the greed for heaven. But whatsoever you have repressed because of fear or greed remains there. It not only remains there, it becomes unnatural, perverted, moves into deeper realms of your consciousness and unconsciousness. And then it becomes very difficult to uproot it.
Gurdjieff was a Sufi. His whole teaching comes from Sufi masters. He introduced methods into the Western world of how to demark each center, and how to allow the center to function in its own field. The head should function as far as reason is concerned, that’s all.
Have you watched? Sometimes people come to me and they say, “I think I love you.” I think I love you! Love has nothing to do with thinking. How can you think that you love me? But they don’t know how to function from the heart directly, even the heart has to go via the head. They cannot simply say, “I love you.”
Just the other night a beautiful Italian woman took sannyas. I gave her the name “Prem Nishanga.” She was a woman of the heart, something rare. She was so happy she almost started dancing. There was no need to say anything, her whole body said it. She went into such ecstasy that you can go on saying in a thousand ways, shouting with joy, and it will not be as deep as just by going into ecstasy. I don’t know what she was saying because she was saying it in Italian, but her face, her eyes, her hands, her whole body was saying it. There was no need to understand her language; the language was irrelevant. When you say from the heart, no language is needed. When you say from the head, only language can say; there is no other way to say it.
Watch and observe. Let the head function as reason, let the heart function as feeling, let the sex center function as sex. Let everything function in its own way. Don’t allow mechanisms to mix into each other, otherwise you will have corrupted instincts.
When instinct is natural, untabooed, spontaneous, without any inhibition, there is a clarity in your body, a harmony in your body. There is a humming sound in your organism.
The fifth layer is also male expertise.
The sixth layer is corrupted intuition.
There is a phenomenon called intuition of which we have become almost unaware. We don’t know that anything like intuition exists – because intuition is the sixth layer. Those five layers are so thick that one never comes to feel the sixth.
Intuition is a totally different kind of phenomenon from reason. Reason argues; reason uses a process to reach a conclusion. Intuition jumps – it is a quantum leap. It knows no process. It simply reaches to the conclusion without any process.
There have been many mathematicians who could do any kind of mathematical problem without going into its process. Their functioning was intuitive. You just say the problem and before you have even said it, the conclusion will come. There has not been a time-gap at all. You were saying it, and the moment you finished, or even before you finished, the conclusion has come. Mathematicians have always been puzzled by these freak phenomena. These people – how do they do it? If a mathematician were going to do this problem it might take three hours or two hours or one hour. Even a computer will take at least a few minutes to do it, but these people don’t take a single moment. You say it, and instantly….
So in mathematics, intuition is now a recognized fact. When reason fails, only intuition can work. And all the great scientists have become aware of it: that all their great discoveries are made not by reason but by intuition.
Madame Curie was working for three years upon a certain problem and was trying to solve it from many directions. Every direction failed. One night, utterly exhausted, she went to sleep, and she decided…. The incident is almost like Buddha. That night she decided, “Now it is enough. I have wasted three years. It seems to be a futile search. I have to drop it.” That night she dropped it, and went to sleep.
In the night she got up in her sleep, she went to her table and wrote the answer. Then she went back, and fell into sleep. In the morning she could not even remember, but the answer was there on the table. And there was nobody in the room, and even if there had been somebody, the answer would not have been possible. She had been working for three years – one of the greatest minds of this age. But there was nobody and the answer was there. Then she looked more minutely: it was her handwriting! Then suddenly the dream surfaced. She remembered it as if she had seen a dream in the night in which she was sitting at the table and writing something. Then by and by everything surfaced. She had come to the conclusion from some other door which was not reason. It was intuition.
Buddha struggled for six years to attain samadhi, but could not. One day he dropped the whole idea of attaining. He rested under a tree and by the morning it had happened. When he opened his eyes he was in samadhi.
But first the reason had to be exhausted. Intuition functions only when reason is exhausted. Intuition has no process; it simply jumps from the problem to the conclusion. It is a shortcut. It is a flash.
We have corrupted intuition. Man’s intuition is almost absolutely corrupted. Woman’s intuition is not corrupted as much – that’s why women have something called a “hunch.” A hunch is just a fragment of intuition. It cannot be proved. You are going to take a flight and your woman simply says that she is not going and she will not allow you to go either. She feels as if something is going to happen. Now this is nonsense. You have much work to do, everything is planned, and you have to go – but your woman won’t allow it. And the next day you read in the newspapers that the airplane was hijacked, or it crashed and all the passengers died.
Now the woman cannot say how she knows. There is no way. It is just a hunch, just a feeling in the guts. But that too is very corrupted, that’s why it is just a flash. When all the five other layers have disappeared and you have dropped fixed ideas – because you have been taught that reason is the only door to reach to any conclusion – when you have dropped this fixation, this reason fixation, intuition starts flowering. Then it is not just like a flash, it is a constantly available source. You can close your eyes and you can go into it and always you can get the right direction from it.
That’s what Fischer-Hoffman people think of as the guide. If the process really goes in…. It is very difficult, because those five layers have to be crossed first. And I don’t think many people are capable of it, even those who are in Fisher-Hoffman therapy. But the idea is perfectly right – if those five layers are broken then something arises in you which can be called the guide. You can always go into your intuition energy and you will always find the right advice. In the East that is what they have called the inner guru, your inner master. Once your intuition has started functioning, you need not go and ask any outer guru for any advice.
Intuition is to be in tune with oneself, totally in tune with oneself. And out of that tuning, solutions arise from nowhere.
And the seventh and the last layer of falsity is the pseudo self, the ego; the notions of being unique, special, exceptional; the notions of doing one’s own thing…and you don’t know who you are, you don’t know what your thing is.
Notions of the ego go on corrupting you. Then you cannot listen to the truth. And this becomes a problem every day.
Just the other day I was talking about Hannah. Rather than understanding what I said, rather than understanding, rather than feeling my compassion – because why else should I say it? – she immediately went to the office and canceled the darshan appointment which she had. She became very angry. Now I was talking about her ego, but rather than seeing it, she acted out of it again. She missed the point again.
And the other day I was also talking about Prageet. He was better than Hannah. He asked for an appointment, he took it more rightly. Of course he was very much shaken; it was hard to digest, hard to swallow. But he tried his best to see the point of it. He made every effort that he could.
Or, for example, I go on hammering on Chinmaya, again and again. I never hammer anybody else as much as I hammer Chinmaya, but he takes it absolutely rightly, in the exact way as it should be taken. And each hammering has become a growth in him; each hammering has helped him – he is moving.
Hannah got stopped there. She may lose contact with me.
This is the last layer: a very subtle pseudo sense of self.
When these seven are broken, you come to the state of baka, real individuality, And when you have real individuality then there is a possibility of having a real non being. From real individuality, baka, you can have the jump into fana. Then you can offer yourself to God. This is the whole process.

Now this beautiful dialogue between a master and his disciple. Now you will be able to understand.
The Sufi master, Ajnabi, said, “Write to Mulla Firoz and tell him that I have no time to engage him in correspondence, and therefore have nothing to say to his letter.”
Mulla Firoz must have been a very learned man of those days. “Mulla” means a pundit, a scholar, a learned man. He must have been offended and annoyed by Ajnabi’s assertions. Masters are there to shock. And when there is a man of knowing, the greatest shock is to those who think they know and don’t know. The knowledgeable man immediately feels offended, because the man of knowing has his own source of knowing. He talks from there. And the man of knowledge looks into the scripture. He has no source to check upon, he has no authentic experience of his own. He lives in pseudo reason, pseudo ego, argumentation, verbal knowledge, belief systems and all that.
The Sufi master, Ajnabi, said, “Write to Mulla Firoz and tell him that I have no time to engage him in correspondence, and therefore have nothing to say to his letter.”
The disciple, Amini, said, “Is it your intention to annoy him with this letter?”
That is the intention always of all the masters: to annoy you, because only if you are annoyed can you be changed. If you are annoyed then there is a possibility, then you start moving.
Ajnabi said, “He has been annoyed by some of my writings. This annoyance has caused him to write to me. My purpose in writing the passage which angers him was to anger such as he.”
That was his purpose and it was fulfilled. He wanted to anger people such as Mulla – the knowledgeable people.
Amini said, “And this letter will anger him further?”
Ajnabi said, “Yes. When he was enraged at what I wrote, he did not observe his own anger, which was my intention. He thought that he was observing me, whereas he was only feeling angry. Now I write again, to arouse anger, so that he will see that he is angry. The objective is for the man to realize that my work is a mirror in which he sees himself.”
This you have to keep in your mind constantly, because this Is happening here every day. If I say something, never be bothered about me. don’t think why I have said this, rather, on the contrary, just look inside yourself at what it has done to you. I said something about Hannah. Now there are two possibilities. She can think, “This man is wrong, he is offending me, he is insulting me, humiliating me, degrading me’”– something like that. Then she has missed the point. But if she starts watching and observing, “Why am I angered? Why is there this annoyance in me? Why am I disturbed?” then she is on the right track. Then she will come closer to me than she ever was before.
Always remember this. What I say, how I say it, why I say it – there is no way for you to decide. There is no way for you even to understand. All that you can do in your situation right now is see what happens to you. If I slap your face, don’t be worried why I slapped you – whether I am an angry man or an aggressive man or violent – don’t be worried about that. Just close your eyes, and go into meditation and see why you are feeling offended. Why? Watch your mind. That is going to help.
That’s why I don’t want mediocre people here who have just come out of curiosity to listen to me. This is not a school; nothing is being taught here. This is just an alchemical-lab; something is happening here. It is a process of transformation. If you remember this you will be benefited immensely.
“Yes, when he was enraged at what I wrote, he did not observe his own anger, which was my intention. He thought that he was observing me, whereas he was only feeling angry. Now I write again, to arouse his anger…” The master is saying, “Out of compassion I will give him another opportunity.”
…So that he will see that he is angry. The objective is for the man to realize that my work is a mirror in which he sees himself.
That’s what a master is: a mirror in which you see yourself. If sometimes you see that your face is ugly, don’t try to destroy the mirror – change your face. By destroying the mirror you will not become beautiful; by escaping from the mirror you will not become beautiful.
Yesterday, the whole day, continuously, Prageet thought about escaping: “How to escape from here?” But again and again he remembered that he had not to escape, he had to face it. Again and again he remembered and cooled down, and again and again the idea was there pulling him to escape from here. That is natural, it is understandable. But if you can remember for even a few single moments and you can remain with me and can go on facing the mirror, sooner or later you will have to change.
There are only two possibilities: either escape from the mirror – then you will never see your face and you can believe that you are beautiful – or go on facing the mirror, go on seeing your ugliness. And all kinds of methods and processes are being made available to you so that you can change your face.
Just a few days before there was a man who took sannyas. He said he was a beautician. I told him, “I am also a beautician. I do the same work. I change people’s faces – not the faces that you can see from the outside but the faces, the original faces, that are hidden deep behind all kinds of facades, all kinds of layers.”
Amini said, “the people of the ordinary world always regard those who cause anger as ill-intentioned.”
That’s what Hannah thought. That’s what for a few moments even Prageet thought. That’s what Chinmaya used to think in the beginning. But now he has crossed that point. I have been hammering him so much – how long can you go on thinking? One day or other one has to become aware that something is wrong somewhere inside oneself, and that it has to be dropped.
Ajnabi said, “The child may regard the adult who tries to remove a thorn from his hand as ill-intentioned. Is that a justification for trying to prevent the child from growing up?”
Amini said, “And if the child harbors a grudge against the adult who removes the thorn?”
Ajnabi said, “The child does not really harbor that grudge, because something in him knows the truth.”
This is of immense value, this statement. Yes, something in you always knows the truth. Something in Hannah knows the truth. It is impossible not to know the truth. Maybe it is not very clear, it is hazy – but something in you always knows the truth…that it is because of compassion, because of love, that you have been hammered upon. Otherwise there is no need.
Amini asked him, “But what happens if he never gets to know himself, and yet continues to imagine that others are motivated by personal feelings?”
Ajnabi said, “If he never gets to know himself, it makes no difference as to what he thinks of other people, because he can never have any appreciation of what other people are really like.”
Amini asked, “Is it not possible, instead of arousing anger a second time, to explain that the original writing was composed for this purpose, and to invite Mulla to review his previous feelings?”
A very reasonable standpoint of the disciple, but remember that sometimes reasonable things are not very useful. They don’t work. You will agree with the disciple, with what he is saying. This seems to be very, very reasonable – “What is the point of angering him, annoying him twice? Will it not be better to explain to him why in the first place you said things to annoy him? Would it not be better to explain?”
Ajnabi said, “It is possible to do this, but it will have no effect.”
A master is not interested in being polite, in following the rules of etiquette, manners, et cetera. A master is interested only in creating an effect, in creating an action, in creating a response. Yes, he could explain to the Mulla what had happened. That may satisfy him, that may cool him down. His anger may disappear, he may no longer feel annoyed – but that is not the point. That is not going to create the effect that the master wants. The master wants the Mulla to see that he is only a man of knowledge, not yet a man of knowing; that he was not wise. Explanation will make the Mulla more knowledgeable. He will have one more explanation. That is not going to shatter his ego.
‘”t is possible to do this, but it will have no effect. Rather it will have an adverse effect. If you tell the man your reason he will imagine that you are excusing yourself, and this will arouse in him sentiments which are harmful only to him. Thus, by explaining you are actually acting to his detriment.”
Amini said, “Are there no exceptions to this rule – that man must learn through realizing his own state, and that his state cannot be explained to him?”
Ajnabi said, “There are exceptions. But if there were enough exceptions to make any difference to the world, we would not by now have any Mulla Firozes left.”
There are not many. There are some exceptions but there are not many – that’s why they are exceptions. They are few and far between. They can be counted out; they need not be reckoned.
A master has to function in such a way that the rule is fulfilled, not the exception – because ninety-nine point nine per cent of people follow the rule. Sometimes there is a rare person but that rare person need not have any help from anybody; he will come to his realization sooner or later. It may be only a question of time. That exceptional intelligence need not be worried about. The master has to function in such a way that the common mind, the normal mind, the usual mind, the non-exceptional mind, starts moving and changing.
This small discussion between the master and the disciple is of immense significance for you. That’s why I have chosen it. Remember those seven layers of the onion. Unless you drop them you cannot see things as they are, you cannot see that which is. And from your very childhood you have been corrupted. Your whole life up to now has been a life of poisoning, and only you can drop it. I can show you the way but I cannot take it away from you. If I start taking it away you will snatch it and escape, you will think that you are being robbed. I can only show you the way. You have to follow it.
Meditate over this small dialogue. It is especially for you.
Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
Recently, mind almost stopping, I have suddenly felt myself and everything around me to be existing exactly as in Jesus' time. And there has been a very strong sense of Jesus himself. Could you say something about this kind of phenomenon?
The question is from Somendra.
It is the same drama enacted again and again; the script remains the same, only the actors change. Friedrich Nietzsche has a very beautiful theory about it: the theory of eternal recurrence. It may not be true in the details, but the idea is significant and profound.
It is like seasons – summer comes, followed by the rains, and then comes winter and again summer. In summer there will be summer flowers; in the rains there will be rain flowers; in winter there will be winter flowers. No single flower will ever be repeated, but the essential idea will be repeated again and again. It is an eternal recurrence.
The story is the same. In its basics it is never different. It may be Krishna or Christ, Mahavira or Mohammed…actors change, different players participate, but the essential core of it is eternally the same. So when you move deeply in meditation – as Somendra is doing every day – and when the mind is almost stopping – as he says in his question – you become aware of many things which were already there, but of which you were not aware.
Jesus is very deep in the Western consciousness. He is an archetype. Whenever you see something closely resembling it, your unconscious will release the archetype to your conscious. Because Somendra has lived as a Christian for many lives, Christ has gone very deep into his consciousness. He cannot remember Krishna, he has no relationship with Krishna. That symbol, that metaphor, does not exist in his unconscious mind. If he had been a Hindu for many lives, then he would have felt as if it was the time of Krishna. Or if he had been a Buddhist for many lives, then he would have felt the presence of Buddha. But it is the same. Buddha’s body is different from Jesus’ body, but what is hidden behind the body is not different – that inner purity, that inner innocence, that primal innocence is the same.
In Somendra’s unconscious, Jesus is very deep. And Jesus will be felt by many of you for another reason also. Although Somendra was not there in Jesus’ time, there are many people here who were. The greater number of my sannyasins are Jews. It is not accidental, it can’t be accidental. Jews don’t exist in India – not at all. So many Jews reaching me – there must be something profound in it. They have missed Jesus and an unconscious search continues. And in a very unconscious way they are smelling something here. This time they don’t want to miss. More and more Jews will be coming. That time they missed; it was difficult to accept Jesus in those days.
In these two thousand years much has happened. Jesus is more relevant now, more in tune with human consciousness now. Because Jesus was a Jew it was very difficult for Jews to accept him – as it is difficult for Hindus to accept me. Mind plays strange games. It somebody is born into your religion it becomes very difficult for your ego to accept him as enlightened. Or if somebody is born in the same village as you, it becomes even more difficult. Or if you have been studying with somebody in the same school and suddenly the rumor arises that he has become enlightened or has been chosen by God as his prophet. you will reject the idea outright. You know the man from his childhood, you know him in and out – how can he become the chosen one of God? While you are there, how can God choose him? How can God dare? If he was going to choose. he would have chosen you. It becomes very difficult for the ego.
India is going to miss me for the simple reason that I have been born here. This accident is going to be a calamity for India. You don’t see many Indians here. You may not have looked at it in this way. Why are they not here? It is very difficult for their egos to accept me, particularly Jainas – the small religious group of Jainas in India. It was an accident that I was born a Jaina. You will not find them here. Sometimes you will find a few Hindus here, but the number of Jainas will be smaller. And even smaller will be the number of that particular sect – in the Jaina sect there is this smaller sect – to which I belonged in this accidental birth.
The number of Jainas is very small – thirty lakhs in India – and among Jainas there are many sects. One sect, a very small sect, is samhiya – the word comes from samadhi – those who only believe in samadhi. It is the same word that has become sanmi in Japanese, and later on satori. You will rarely find a samahiya here, impossible. There are only a few thousand. They all know me, they are well-acquainted with me, but that is the problem – because of that they cannot come here.
India is going to miss. Apart from India, nobody is going to miss; everybody else will be more in tune with me.
Jews have come in great numbers. They have the feeling that something is happening here. The same drama is being enacted again in the twentieth century – something of Christ’s consciousness. And they can accept me more easily than they could ever have accepted Jesus. He was a Jew, a carpenter’s son – it was almost impossible to accept him.
More of you by and by will start feeling a kind of deja vu, as if this is no longer the twentieth century, as if these twenty centuries have suddenly disappeared from your consciousness, as if you are again in the days of Jesus in Jerusalem walking with him, or by Galilee moving with him, or in Bethlehem. To many of you that dream will unfold, because to understand me, that will be the closest metaphor for the Western consciousness.
No Hindu will ever feel that something of Christ is happening here. It he ever comes to feel anything, he will feel Krishna. No Buddhist will feel something about Christ. If he ever feels anything, he will feel something about Buddha. These are archetypes, metaphors in the unconscious, and when you come closer to your depth you start releasing the poetry of your soul.
So Somendra is right. He says: “Recently, mind almost stopping, I have suddenly felt myself and everything around me to be existing exactly in Jesus’ time. And there has been a very strong sense of Jesus himself. Could you say something about this phenomenon?”
It is tremendously significant. Go deeper into it. Don’t give any resistance to it. This will also disappear. Just as the conscious disappears, one day the unconscious also disappears. But to live in unconscious metaphors is better than to live in the conscious, because they are deeper. And he is perfectly right in saying “mind almost stopping,” because if it stops absolutely then even Jesus will disappear. These are all mind things ultimately; all words, all metaphors, are mind things. Just a little of the mind is left – be ready, Somendra, to drop that too. But there is no hurry, and don’t be impatient, and don’t fight with it. It is going on its own, it is on its deathbed.

The second question:
Osho,
After today's discourse I met Satya on the stairs. She was laughing. I wanted to sob, but felt I must lighten up and laugh, that she was positive and I was negative. I laughed a lie. Could I be true to myself and meet her in that moment?
The question is from Vandana.
This is something to be understood by everybody.
Satya is in a laughing space. Something is stirring in her. She is not the laughing type, she is the crying type. When she came here, whenever she would come to me she would start crying. Tears were easier for her. Now suddenly tears have disappeared and laughter has arisen – and such a mad laughter that she goes on laughing for hours. It has almost become painful to her. The whole night she goes on laughing.
Naturally one becomes afraid. What is happening? For no reason at all? She has not been the laughing type, so her whole life she has repressed her laughter. Her type was the crying one, the sad. Now suddenly the type is changing, swinging from one polarity to another polarity. Before it stops in the middle and a balance arises, it has to go to the other polarity.
Her whole life she repressed laughter, unknowingly. Now the repression has disappeared, the lid has been taken off. Now she cannot cry, the tears are there no more. The whole life’s laughter is coming up with a vengeance! It is almost hysterical. But it is a beautiful space because it is an indication of a great change, a transformation, an alchemical change. Tears are becoming laughter. Soon laughter will also disappear. As tears have disappeared, laughter will disappear. Then she will come to the exact middle; then there will be great balance, an equilibrium. That equilibrium is the goal.
Neither the negative nor the positive is the goal, because both are half. Yes, if you have to choose between the negative and the positive, choose the positive. That is a lesser kind of evil, that’s all. But if you have a choice between tranquillity and the positive, then choose tranquillity. Then the positive is nothing, then the positive is almost negative in comparison to tranquillity. If there is only one choice – tears or laughter – then laughter is good. But if there is a choice of being silent, then tears and laughter both have to be dropped. One becomes silent.
She will soon come to that silence. After this storm of laughter, there will be a great silence. It always comes after the storm. This is a release, a release of repressed laughter. It has to be taken off her consciousness. It is being taken off, and she is pouring like anything.
Now Vandana says: “After today’s discourse I met Satya on the stairs. She was laughing. I wanted to sob, but felt I must lighten up and laugh, that she was positive and I was negative. I laughed a lie. Could I be true to myself and meet her in that moment?”
Yes, there is no other way to meet anybody. Meeting is possible only if you are true, because only two true persons meet. Satya is laughing, and logically Vandana thought, “If I also laugh there will be a kind of dialogue. We will be both in the same space.”
But how can you be both in the same space? Her laughter is true, your laughter is a lie. These are not the same thing. A true laughter and a laughter that is not true are poles apart. How can you meet? Truth and falsity can never meet. If Vandana had sobbed, as she was feeling, there would have been a meeting. But that looks illogical – somebody is laughing and you start crying? That looks illogical. It looks like you are going in a different direction. Then how will there be a meeting? But let me tell you, you are not going in a different direction. It you are being true and she is being true, you are going in the same direction. It does not matter what kind of truth is happening to you.
If Vandana had cried great tears, if she had wept as she was feeling, if she had been true to her feeling, there would have been a meeting; then the laughter and the crying are not opposite because both are true. Only two truths can meet; only two truths can have a dialogue.
But she missed the point, as many of you would have missed. The logical mind says, “She is laughing, and if I cry then we will fall apart. Then how will there ever be a communion between us?” And then the mind said, “She is positive and you are negative.” That doesn’t matter. You can meet a positive person through your negativity. The only thing needed is the same earth of truth, the same ground of truth.
Positive and negative can meet. In fact, they meet beautifully. In fact, it happens sometimes that positive and positive cannot meet and negative and negative cannot meet, because they don’t have the pull of the opposite. There is a kind of homosexuality when positive and positive are there and when negative and negative are there. Meeting is more easy and more enriching when it is heterosexual. Laughter and crying can meet very beautifully. That is the meeting of man and woman, day and night, life and death.
You can ask the scientist, the physicist…he will say, “Only opposite poles meet. The positive repels the positive; the negative repels the negative. Only negative and positive meet.” If you bring two positive magnets close they will repel each other; if you bring one negative and one positive together they will join together in a marriage.
So the only thing needed is truth. Don’t be worried about the positive and the negative. Don’t listen to the logical mind, because the logical mind is absurd. Life is bigger than logic.
Just see…Vandana feeling like crying and crying and Satya laughing – both are true. Then there is a common ground, then they are moving in the same direction, then they can hold hands. Satya may go on laughing and Vandana may go on crying, but there will be a kind of marriage in that moment, there will be great communion in that moment – both are being true. Remember, it is only truth that connects. It is only truth that bridges.
Don’t be worried about the negative and the positive. The only thing that has to be remembered always is authenticity. All falsehood creates barriers.

The third question:
Osho,
Why are people so fake?
People are so fake because it pays, it is a good policy. If you are true, you will be in danger. You can be true only in a true society where truth is respected, loved. This society exists through lies. Here truth is not respected, here truth is crucified, here truth is killed. Lies are enthroned. That’s why politics becomes so important in this world – because politics is the game of lies. And the politicians become the most important people in the world. They should be the last. They become the first because this world – this whole society – is based on lies. And if you live with liars and you will live with this falsehood all around you, you have to be fake. It pays, it is economical, it is safe. It protects you – otherwise people will be against you. If you are true and they are all living through lies, they cannot tolerate you.
From the very beginning a child starts learning that lies pay. If the child tells the truth, he is beaten; if the child tells the truth, it creates a kind of embarrassment for the parents. If the child is being truthful, nobody is for him, everybody is against him. If he is Lying, then he can protect himself. A lie becomes a kind of umbrella. And if he is Lying in tune with the parents’ lies, then there is no problem at all. He can exist very smoothly. And children are very perceptive, sensitive; they learn whatsoever they see around.

I have heard….
Returning after a lengthy absence to his family’s spot on the beach, the youngster found them preparing to leave.
“Come along,” said the mother, “we are going to a restaurant for a good dinner.”
“I am not hungry,” said the boy. “I have eaten seven ice cream cones and three frankfurters.”
“Where on earth did you get seven ice cream cones and three frankfurters?” asked his astounded mother. “You didn’t have any money.”
“I didn’t need money. I just wandered all around the beach crying as if I was lost.”

“Crying as if I was lost…. ” Now the child has learned a great trick. If the child pretends that he is lost, it pays. And that is the whole secret of why people are fake – it pays. Whenever you are true, it harms you. And who is there to harm himself, and for what? The lie is a survival measure.

I have heard….
An art collector chanced upon a painting bearing the signature “Picasso.” He purchased it immediately, hoping that it would prove to be very valuable. But a nagging doubt about the possibility of its being a forgery compelled him to seek out Picasso’s home.
After much waiting he finally gained a moment of Picasso’s time, and showed him the painting.
“It is a fake!” snapped the great painter, and slammed the door shut.
The collector was crestfallen and determined not to be taken in again. However, some time later, he came across a different painting, also bearing the signature “Picasso.” He carefully researched the history of this painting and purchased it only after fully documenting its authenticity. However, even with legal proof that this was a genuine Picasso, he still felt a twinge of doubt, and resolved to satisfy his doubts by again visiting him.
When he finally gained a moment of Picasso’s time, the great painter took one look at the painting, and said, “It is a fake!”
“But, Picasso,” pleaded the art collector, “I researched this painting thoroughly. I can prove that you yourself painted it.”
To this Picasso replied, “I often paint fakes.”

It happens. Even a painter starts learning what sells. Not all Picasso’s paintings are originals. More of them are fake, although they have been painted by him. Then what does he mean by saying that it is a fake? He is simply saying that he is just copying it from his other paintings; it is not original, it is a copy. It does not matter who is copying – somebody else or Picasso himself.
It almost always happens that when a person gets a Nobel Prize he never produces anything original afterwards. He goes on repeating his old story in new ways. Because it has paid so much, he is stuck. He thinks it sells so he goes on writing the same thing again and again. It has never happened, up to now, that after getting a Nobel Prize, a poet or a novelist has been able to do anything original again. The Nobel Prize is a kind of death knell, the person is finished – because now he knows what pays, now he has found the secret of success, now he has the key, so why bother trying other keys? They may not be so successful. Why bother about other directions and dimensions of creativity? One knows the right way to do a thing, so one goes on doing the right thing again and again and again, and becomes fake.
People are false because they have found a key. They know what makes life secure, comfortable, convenient, safe – although convenience, comfort, safety, security, don’t bring any kind of blessing. They bring all kinds of miseries, they don’t bring any happiness in life. Happiness comes only through being original. Unless you have your original face you will never be blessed.
But to have your original face you will have to pass through many inconveniences, discomforts. The path is arduous. Keep it in mind that whenever you face a choice between convenience and joy, always choose joy, otherwise you will become fake. Whenever you have a choice between comfort and some adventure, choose the adventure, howsoever arduous, otherwise you will become a fake. Whenever you have a choice between security and insecurity, let insecurity be your love. Never choose security. Security makes people dead and dull. A perfectly secure person is already in his grave, he is no longer alive. If you are alive there is bound to be insecurity – the more alive, the more insecure.
A really totally alive person lives moment to moment in insecurity. But then there is great thrill. And he is always on the verge of the unknown and he is always moving into something mysterious. The mysterious cannot be secure. Don’t depend on bank balances, don’t depend on marriage, don’t depend on a comfortable and well-paying job, don’t depend on family, society and state. People who have depended on those things are all around. You can see them – how dead they are, how dragging is their life, how sad are their eyes. Not a single song is in their heart and you will never feel any dance in their feet. Impossible. You can go on searching in their life and you will find desert and more desert, not a single oasis. Love does not bloom; celebration they have not known.

I have heard….
An Indian died – a very religious man, ritualistic, formal. He had been doing all the kinds of things that the scriptures commanded. So he was very, very certain of reaching paradise. When he reached there he looked through the door and he was surprised. The paradise looked almost like India, no difference, none at all.
So he asked the angel standing at the gate, “What is the matter? It looks almost like India, I don’t see any difference. Paradise is almost like our land, our country.”
And the man standing on the door said, “What are you talking about? And why do you go on bowing down to me? This is not paradise and I am not an angel!”

This story is beautiful…. It is hell and the man standing on the door is not an angel but the devil! But hell will look like India. Hell will look like anything that you have become accustomed to. If you are a German then hell will look like Germany, if you are Japanese then hell will look like Japan, if you are English then hell will look exactly like England.
Hell is that which you know. Meditate over it: hell is that which you are acquainted with; hell is the past, the known, the well-trodden path. Heaven is something unknown, something that you cannot compare with your past, cannot compare with your experience, there is no comparison. It is utterly new! Utterly! Absolutely! It is discontinuous. You have never known anything like it.
But if you live a life of comfort and convenience and ritual and formality and lies, if you live a fake life, a pseudo life, you live in hell. And you will be living in hell in the future too. You are creating it around yourself. Shake yourself up and get out of your dull and dead so-called life. Start living again. And don’t think about what pays! It is always the wrong thing that pays in this world. The right thing never pays because there are no more people who can pay for the right thing. If you do something wrong you will be paid very much.
Just think, a poet is not paid, but a general is. And the general is doing the wrong thing – killing people. He is a murderer. The soldier is paid, not a painter. Those who bring death into the world, they are paid. Can’t you see it? The army people are the well-paid people. They are the butchers and murderers, but they are the most well-paid, well-fed. They live in good houses, have all the facilities of life. Look at the poet who goes on singing songs of love – he will be a beggar. Think of the musician who brings music to your door – he is a beggar. All that is right is not paid; it cannot be paid. The world is so wrong. The politicians are highly paid, highly respected. The newspapers are continuously full of their news. Have you ever seen anything else than politics in the newspapers? And these are the most mischievous people in the world. These are the people who make the earth a hell. But they are the well-paid people.
Remember, if you think in terms of payment, you will be fake. If you want to be paid in this world with comfort, luxury, you will have to be fake. If you really want to be alive, then don’t bother whether it pays or not. If it pays, good; if it doesn’t pay, good.
But then you will be living a life of great enrichment. You may not be rich, but your life will be enriched. You may not have fame, but you will have joy; you may not be known in the world, but you will be known to God. And that is all that is worth anything.
And I am not saying that you all have to carry your crosses on your shoulders continuously. No, I am not saying that. I never demand the impossible. When you live with false people there is no need to create unnecessary conflict either. Avoid. Go on searching for your life, your original face, but there is no need to be in conflict every day, every moment – otherwise it becomes a problem, an unnecessary wastage of energy. Follow the rules of ordinary life, just as one follows the rules of a game. On the roads in India they say: Keep to the left – so keep to the left. It is nothing of any importance. In America they keep to the right. That too is perfectly okay. When in America keep to the right, when in India keep to the left. And if some mad country exists somewhere where you have to keep in the center, keep in the center. Don’t be worried.
But always know that this is nothing fundamental. It has nothing to do with any truth. It is a convenience. And when there are so many people…. You need not create inconvenience for others. You are at freedom to create all kinds of inconveniences for yourself – that is your freedom – but you need not create inconveniences for others.

I have heard….
The great maestro, Toscanini, was as well-known for his ferocious temper as for his outstanding musicianship. When members of his orchestra played badly, he would pick up anything in sight and hurl it to the floor. During one rehearsal a flat note caused the genius to grab his valuable watch and smash it beyond repair.
Shortly afterwards, he received from his devoted musicians a luxurious, velvet lined box containing two watches – one a beautiful gold timepiece, the other a cheap one on which was inscribed: For rehearsals only.

So keep that in mind. When you are moving in the world, moving with people, there is no need to carry your cross. There is no need to go on shouting loudly that you are a martyr or a Jesus or a Mansoor, there is no need. Follow the rules of the game. It is just a game.
But remember always that the game should not become your whole life. That’s all I would like my sannyasins to remember. That’s why I don’t take you out of society. Never has it been done before. For a single reason it has never been done before – the reason was that Buddha would not allow his sannyasins to live in the world. The problem was that if the sannyasin was to be true, it would be difficult to live in the world – because with people you have to be polite, formal, many times. In life you cannot continuously remember that you have to be true; people are so false. Just out of compassion, out of politeness, sometimes you may have to keep yourself quiet, not to say a word – because if you say something it is going to hurt people unnecessarily. Or sometimes you will have to do something which is not true. You can’t be absolutely yourself when you are living with so many people. So Buddha said to his sannyasins, “Leave the world. Sacrifice your relationships to be true.” Others who decided to live in the world sacrificed their truth to live in relationship.
Both are lopsided. You can leave the world, but then you will be leaving many opportunities to grow. You can go to a Himalayan cave and sit there. Of course there will be no need to lie because there will be nobody to lie to, nobody to talk to, nobody to relate to. You will be alone in the cave, you will be perfectly true, you can have your original face – but then you don’t have any opportunities as challenges to provoke you into growth. You are out of life, and only in life do people grow.
Life is a great opportunity. In the cave you will be secluded, all alone, dull and dead. You will again become dead because you will not have any possibility of responding. Yes, you will not be telling any untruth, but to whom are you going to say the truth? You will not be angry, right, but you will not be loving either. So this is something meaningless. Anger is dropped but love also disappears. So the old kind of sannyasin becomes cold. They don’t have any anger – a good thing – but they don’t have any love. And that can’t be praised.
It is as if a person was afraid of illness so he committed suicide. Now he will never be ill, that’s true, but he will never be alive either. This is throwing the baby out with the bath water. I am not in support of it.
But up to now these have been the two alternatives given to humanity. One is to leave the world, to shrink into yourself – that is a kind of dull life again. Or, to live in the world and be false, because it is too troublesome to be true.
I am giving you the golden mean: live in the world and don’t be of the world. You will need to be very, very alert – more alert than Buddha’s sannyasins. They did not need to be alert, they could go to sleep in their caves. You will have to be very, very alert, and you will have to keep two watches – one for rehearsals only, and one, the real one, for yourself. You will have to become a great actor. But when you act consciously you are not fake. When a conscious act is there and you know that it is just an act, then it is not going to destroy your life. But when you forget that this is an act and you become identified with it, then you become worldly.
So the old definition of the worldly is to live in the world, and the definition of the non-worldly is to not live in the world to get out of it. My definition is different. The worldly is one who gets into his act and becomes unconscious and forgets that this is an act. It is as if you are playing on the stage, acting some role. For example, you are in a drama playing the role of Jesus or Pontius Pilate and you forget that it is a role, and when the curtains fall and you come home you come as Pontius Pilate or Jesus Christ. Then you will be in trouble.
It has happened sometimes. Once it happened to an actor who was playing Abraham Lincoln continuously for one year around the United States. Every day the party traveled from one town to another town, and he was Abraham Lincoln. One year is a long time. He got mixed up. After one year he forgot his real identity, who he was, and he started saying that he was Abraham Lincoln. At first people thought he was joking, but then it became serious. He came home but he came as Abraham Lincoln. His wife tried to persuade him to get out of his role, his father tried to convince him that he was not Abraham Lincoln, but he wouldn’t listen. And he wouldn’t wear ordinary clothes either, he would wear the clothes that he had been wearing on the stage. And he would walk like Abraham, he would stutter like Abraham, and his face had also become like Abraham’s. For one year he was pretending and pretending and pretending. It became so difficult that they had to bring him to a psychiatrist. The psychiatrist tried hard, from one direction and another, but he wouldn’t say anything else except “What are you saying? Have you gone mad? I am Abraham Lincoln!” There was no way….
They have a lie-detector mechanism in America which they use in the courts. The person concerned stands on the mechanism unaware that there is a mechanism underneath. It is like a cardiogram-type thing. It makes a graph of your heartbeats. When you are speaking the truth there are smooth lines, when you are suddenly ready to speak an untruth there is a gap – because the heart knows something else. And the graph is broken. So when you lie it can be seen in the graph. The graph becomes shaken or broken.
For example, if somebody asks you, “What is the time on your watch?” you look and you say, “Nine o’clock.” There is no need to lie. The graph is running smoothly. And if somebody asks, “How many people are here?” you count and you say, “Ten.” There is no need to lie. The graph is going smoothly. Then the person asks, “Are you the murderer of this man?” Your heart says, “Yes!” because it knows, and you say “No.” So there is a conflict between the heart and you, and that conflict shakes the graph. Then it can be shown where you lied.
So the psychiatrist suggested that this Abraham Lincoln be put on the lie detector. There only would they be able to see whether he was lying or not. Now the man who was Abraham Lincoln had got fed up with all kinds of treatments and psychiatry and medicine and tranquilizers, and all kinds of suggestions and everybody pretending to be wise and patronizing him. So he decided that day that although he was Abraham Lincoln it was better to say he was not. “Be finished with it! Inside I know that I am, but for the outside I will just tell them and be finished with it. Otherwise life will become a problem”
Standing on the lie detector, they asked him different questions and he answered. Then they came to the real question – they asked, “Are you Abraham Lincoln?”
He said, “No!” And the detector said he was lying.
He had got so much in tune with the idea, that in his deepest core he knew that he was Abraham Lincoln. Now just on the surface he was lying.
If this happens, then you are a worldly man. That is my definition of a worldly man – one who gets into his act and forgets to come out; one who remains hooked there. This is the worldly man. And the sannyasin, the other-worldly, is the man who goes on playing acts, who knows they are acts, who never gets hooked by any act. When he comes home, he plays the act of being the husband and the father and the wife. These are all games. Play beautiful, play artistically, play aesthetically, but there is no need to get hooked – that you are a father, that you are a mother, that you are this or that. Or you are a doctor, you are an engineer, you are this and that – these are functions. When you are treating a patient, be in the role of being a doctor, but when there is no patient and you are sitting alone in your room, there is no need to be a doctor. Otherwise you are doing the same stupid thing as that man who became Abraham Lincoln.
I used to stay at a friend’s house in Calcutta. He was a Justice of the High Court in those days, now he is a Chief Justice somewhere. His wife told me, “My husband respects you so much, he loves you so much, that you are the only person who can be of some help to me.” I said, “What is the matter?” She said, “He is always the Justice – even at home, even with children. He never comes out of that role. Not only that, even in bed with me, while he is making love, he is the Justice. And I have to treat him as “Your Majesty,” “Your Honor.” He expects that. And I feel as if I am a criminal standing before him always to be judged. And the whole house becomes sad when he comes in. When he goes out there is joy that the Justice has gone.”
This is happening to almost everybody, more or less. I call the man worldly who does not know how to play a game and gets too serious about it.
My sannyasin is a new entry into the world of religion. He will live in the world, he will play all kinds of games, and he will know that these are all games and he will never be hooked by any game. And he will always be able to get out of any act easily, and he will go on searching for his original face. He will not be lost in the acts that he has to put up with.
This is of immense importance. If he lives in the world in a worldly way, he becomes dead. If he becomes an old traditional kind of sannyasin, he shrinks and becomes dead. Both are ways of death. Life is where opposites meet. Life is where day and night meet. Life is in the world and yet only for those who can remain beyond it. Be a lotus flower – in the water and yet untouched by it.

The fourth question:
Osho,
I am much confused about the following question. I am trained as a physician and I have always felt deeply that it is a good thing. But intrinsic in my work, in my activity, is a refusal to accept illness and death, disease and human suffering. Very deep, therefore, is a refusal to accept life or existence as it is. Very deep is a desire to correct some of these mechanisms of nature. All my professional activity is goaded by a fear, a deep personal fear, of sickness, suffering and death. I do not know how to view my work in the light of the whole. Please show the light of existence on this area of confusion for me.
This is a significant question, but the question arises because of a wrong attitude in Western medicine.
In the East we have a totally different outlook. The polar opposite to Western medicine is the Taoist attitude about medicine. You will have to understand a few things.
First, the questioner says: “I am much confused about the following question. I am trained as a physician, and I have always felt deeply that it is a good thing. But intrinsic in my work, in my activity, is a refusal to accept illness and death, disease and human suffering.”
Now, a distinction has to be made. Illness, disease and suffering are one thing; death is totally different. In the Western mind, illness, disease, suffering and death are all together – packed in one package. From there problems arise.
Death is beautiful; illness is not, suffering is not, disease is not. Death is beautiful. Death is not a sword that cuts your life, it is like a flower – an ultimate flower – that blooms at the last moment. It is the peak. Death is the flower on the tree of life. It is not the end of life but the crescendo. It is the ultimate orgasm. There is nothing wrong in death; it is beautiful – but one needs to know how to live and how to die.
There is an art of living and there is an art of dying, and the second art is of more value than the first art. But the second can be known only when you have known the first. Only those who know how to live rightly know how to die rightly. And then death is a door into the divine.
So, the first thing: please keep death apart. Only think of illness, disease and suffering. You need not fight against death. That is creating trouble in the Western mind, in the Western hospitals, in Western medicine. People are fighting against death. People are almost vegetating in the hospitals, just alive on drugs. They are forced to live unnecessarily when they would have died naturally. Through medical support their death is being postponed. They are of no use, life is of no use for them; the game is over, they are finished. Now to keep them alive is just to make them suffer more. Sometimes they may be in a coma, and a person can be in a coma for months and years. But because there is an antagonism against death it has become a great problem in the Western mind: what to do when a person is in a coma and will never recover, but can be kept alive for years? He will be a corpse, just a breathing corpse, that’s all. He will simply vegetate; there will be no life.
What is the point? Why not allow him to die? There is the fear of death. Death is the enemy – how to surrender to the enemy, to death?
So there is great controversy in the Western medical mind. What to do? Should a person be allowed to die? Should a person be allowed to decide whether he wants to die? Should the family be allowed to decide whether they would like him to die? – because sometimes the person may be unconscious and cannot decide.
But is it right to help somebody to die? Great fear arises in the Western mind. To die? That means you are murdering the person! The whole of science exists to keep him alive.
Now this is stupid! Life in itself has no value unless there is joy, unless there is dance, unless there is some creativity, unless there is love – life in itself is meaningless. Just to live is meaningless. A point comes when one has lived, a point comes when it is natural to die, when it is beautiful to die. Just as when you have been doing work the whole day, a point comes when you fall asleep. Death is a kind of sleep – a deeper sleep. You will be born again in a newer body with a newer mechanism, with new facilities, with new opportunities, new challenges. This body is old and one has to leave it; it is just a dwelling.
But there are people who-are even afraid of sleep. Just a few days ago I was reading a book in which the author says, “There is no need to sleep. It is a wastage of time.” A person lives almost one-third of his life in sleep – and that is not living at all, because he creates nothing, he does not work. What is the point of keeping a man asleep? Sooner or later they will start finding drugs so that a man can avoid sleep completely. Just think of the world where sleep will become impossible, they won’t allow you even to sleep.
In Russia they have invented instruments to teach children while they are asleep. Now will you not leave even sleep alone. It is called hypno-teaching. A tape recorder is connected and the whole night the tape recorder goes on teaching mathematics, history, geography. The child has been tortured the whole day in the school, now you cannot even allow him rest. The Western mind is too utilitarian. It does not believe in rest, it believes in work. Its whole ethos is that of work, not of relaxation. And in the morning the child has to go to school again. You will create more neurotic people in the world if you don’t even allow sleep.
And this author suggests that there is a possibility that through some drugs sleep can be completely removed and a man can live awake for seventy years. Just think of the nightmare! These people who are against sleep are against death too. They are against any kind of relaxation, let-go. Just go on fighting.
In the East we have a different outlook: death is not the enemy but the friend. Death gives you rest. You have become tired, you have lived your life, you have known all the joys that can be known in life, you have burnt your candle totally. Now go into darkness, rest for a while and then you can be born again. Death will revive you again in a fresher way.
So the first thing: death is not the enemy.
The second thing: death is the greatest experience in life if you can die consciously. And you can die consciously only if you are not against it. If you are against it you become very panicky, very afraid. When you are so afraid that you cannot tolerate that fear there is a natural mechanism in the body which releases drugs into the body and you become unconscious. There is a point beyond which endurance will not be possible; you become unconscious So millions of people die unconsciously and miss a great moment, the greatest of all. It is samadhi, it is satori, it is meditation happening to you. It is a natural gift.
If you can be alert and you can see that you are not the body…. You will have to see, because the body will disappear. Soon you will be able to see that you are not the body, you are separate. Then you will see you are separating from the mind too. Then the mind will disappear. And then you will be just a flame of awareness, and that is the greatest benediction there is.
So the first thing: don’t think of death as illness, disease and human suffering.
The second thing: illness, disease and suffering are bad because they happen only when you are not natural. Something has gone wrong. Health is natural, death is natural, but disease is not natural. Disease is simply an indication that something is going wrong in your nature. For example, you have eaten too much and there is pain in your stomach. This pain is not natural, you have done something unnatural. You have not slept for two, three days, because you were running after money and it was not possible for you to sleep. Or you were fighting an election and it was not possible to sleep, or to afford that much time for sleep. You were on an election campaign, so you have not slept for three days and now the head is becoming neurotic, bursting; there is great pain in the head. This is just a symptom. Nature is saying to you. “Come back to me. You have gone too far away.”
Man is free and he can be unnatural. Many kinds of diseases happen only when we go somewhere astray from nature. If man lives naturally there will be no disease.
But man cannot live naturally continuously because man also has freedom. Sometimes you can eat a little too much – that is your freedom. And sometimes you can go on a fast – that too is your freedom. Man is the only animal in the world who has freedom: that is his dignity. But freedom brings dangers. The first danger is that you can go against nature. And nature is so polite that it does not shout, it whispers. Nature is very silent; its voice is very still and small. It goes on saying, “Don’t do it, don’t do it, don’t do it,” and it goes on tolerating. There is a point beyond which it cannot tolerate and the disease erupts.
Now, what is the physician meant to do? In the East the physician does not fight disease, the physician is not meant to destroy the disease. The physician is simply meant to bring the man back to nature.
The questioner asks: “But intrinsic in my work, in my activity, is a refusal to accept illness, disease and human suffering. Very deep therefore, is a refusal to accept life or existence as it is. Very deep is a desire to correct some of these mechanisms of nature.”
Yes, the desire is perfectly right. But it is not to correct some mechanisms of nature, it is to correct some mechanism which has gone against nature.
The physician is not correcting nature, he is only correcting man. This is a totally different vision. The physician is not correcting nature. Nature is always correct. Sometimes man can be wrong, because he has freedom. The physician corrects man.
You will be surprised to know that in China there has been a traditional concept – a very ancient tradition – that when a person falls ill he stops paying his physician. Otherwise he has to pay, if the person remains healthy he has to pay; if he falls ill then he stops paying. That means that the physician has not been looking at nature and has not been helping nature and has not been helping him to keep “right,” in tune with nature. The physician has failed.
This is a very strange outlook. When you are ill you go to the doctor and you pay. In China, for centuries they have been paying when they are healthy. They go to their doctor and pay because they are healthy – the doctor keeps them healthy. When they are ill, they stop paying. Why should they pay? The doctor has not been doing his job. His job is to keep people natural. This will be the vision of the future. Sooner or later, this vision has to come.
The doctor is not against nature, the doctor is only putting people right because people have the freedom to go wrong. They can.
So there is no need to keep yourself miserable – that you are doing something good, but then there is a refusal to accept disease and illness. Yes, there is a refusal to accept disease and illness, but disease and illness are not natural, they are a going astray. Put man right. You are not fighting against the whole, you are fighting for the whole against man. Let it be looked at in this way.
The questioner says that he is afraid – it is as if he is fighting against the whole. If the whole wants disease then let it be there. If this is the will of the whole then let it be there, he should surrender.
You are not fighting the whole when you are fighting the disease, you are fighting a part which is going against the whole. If the part is in tune with the whole, in harmony, there will be no disease, no illness.
But man has freedom. And with freedom many dangers enter.
If you go into the forest, into the jungle, you will be surprised to see that animals are almost never ill. I am not talking about the animals who live in a zoo – they are ill. They have become human imitators. To live with humans is very dangerous. But in a jungle, living in a wild situation, animals live and die – they are never ill. They never eat too much because they don’t have that much freedom. They never fast, they don’t have that much freedom, they don’t have that much consciousness. They don’t do anything that is unnatural. They go on doing the natural thing, and they keep healthy.
Once I went into a reserve forest with a few of my friends. One lady was with me who was really fat, exceptionally fat. She was just sitting by my side in the jeep when we went into the forest. That forest has thousands of deer, and a row of deer was passing and we were watching. I told the lady, “Just watch for one thing. See if you find any deer that is fat.” Thousands of deer passed and the lady became very, very embarrassed because she could not find a single deer that was fat. They were all alike, there was not a single fat deer – because deer can’t eat too much. And when deer don’t eat too much they never have to diet, there is no need. A physician is not needed.
Illnesses like tuberculosis or cancer don’t happen in nature. Cancer-happens only in a very higher kind of civilization.
In India the ancient name for tuberculosis is “the royal disease.” It used to happen only to kings. It is called raj yakshma – only to the kings. It never happened to poor people. It couldn’t happen. A poor person can’t suffer that much for tuberculosis to happen. Then by and by poor people became rich, then the tuberculosis became more and more available to everybody.
Cancer is a new phenomenon. It is absolutely new. It is not mentioned in any ancient medicine manual – Taoist or Hindu – it is absolutely new. It had to wait for the twentieth century to happen. A great tension is needed for it to happen. So much unnatural tension is needed for it to happen that it was not possible before. Only we can afford cancer; we have become affluent enough to have it. And our minds are becoming neurotic with desires – we are running in all directions, we are falling apart.
You need not be worried that you are fighting against nature or against the whole. You are not fighting against nature, you are fighting against the stupidity of the part which has gone against the whole. You are bringing the person back to the whole.
And remember always, a physician never heals, he cannot heal. He can only make the healing force of the whole available to the patient. It is the whole that heals. It is not the physician and it is not the medicine either that heals. The medicine and the physician and the hospital all bring the part back closer to the whole, where healing happens. the physician and the medicine were just instrumental.
You need not be worried. You are in the service of nature. You can be happy that you are doing something beautiful.

The last question:
There are two questions connected. First:
Osho,
A couple of years ago, I had all the symptoms of a heart attack and was taken to hospital for five days, but there was no heart attack. And lately I hear that other people have had the same feeling. What does it mean?
The question is from Sheela.

And the second question is from Satya:
Osho,
So many people at the ashram seem to be having something happening to their heart recently: pain in the heart, burning in the heart, feeling like their heart is about to break with love, with gratitude. I have a tickle in my heart. Sheela says that when your long arm hit her in the lecture the other day, she felt it in her heart. What is happening?
First: the physical heart is not your real heart. The real heart exists just behind the physical heart. The real heart is not part of your physical mechanism at all. The real heart exists in the soul – it is the center of the soul.
The physical heart is the center of the body and the spiritual heart is the center of the soul. They both exist together, side by side. Just behind the physical is the spiritual heart. And it is going to happen to many people, this misunderstanding.
When the spiritual heart starts opening, you will have ripples in your physical heart too. They correspond, they are very close together. When something vibrates in the spiritual heart, you will feel echoes in the physical heart too. In fact, you will first feel it only in the physical heart because you don’t know anything about the spiritual heart. Your first awareness of it will be of the physical heart getting some strange feelings. Sometimes it can be that of burning, sometimes it can be that of throbbing, sometimes it can be that of bursting, sometimes it can be almost like a heart attack.
It has been happening down the ages to all meditators. Whenever people go deep into meditation this is bound to happen. The spiritual heart starts trembling, opening, the petals bloom, and the physical heart starts catching the vibrations, the echoes. But this is a beautiful sign. Don’t be afraid of it. Soon you will become aware of the spiritual heart, then all symptoms from the physical will disappear.
The first symptoms will be of uneasiness, restlessness. It is so because something new is happening and you are not accustomed to it. When you become a little more accustomed to it, more harmonious with it, you will see that it is not restlessness, it was just a new taste that you had not known before. It disturbs you. When it becomes well-acquainted, well-known, it will give you a new kind of peace, silence. And great love will arise out of it.
Just a few days before one old sannyasin came to me, and he said, “A strange thing has happened” – and he is very old, seventy or seventy-five – “I had the feeling of a heart attack, so I went to the doctor and they examined me and they said there was nothing wrong. I was absolutely healthy and normal. So what is happening to me?”
I told him jokingly that it was not a heart attack, it was a love attack.
Yes, when your spiritual centers start opening you will have love attacks. Your body will feel the trembling, the restlessness. Soon it will settle, and when it settles you will have a new being – a new plane of being. You have moved from the physical to the spiritual.
Between the physical heart and the spiritual heart is the mind. That is the only barrier. The whole effort of meditation is to disperse the mind. Once the mind is dispersed, the physical heart and the spiritual heart both start dancing together. Then a great beauty arises. And it is not only spiritual, it will be seen in your physical face too. A grace, a new quality of energy will be around you. And not only will you feel it, others will feel it too. You will have a new vibe.
This is going to happen to many people because many people are meditating and they are really working hard. But I am not saying that if sometimes you start feeling something going wrong in the heart you are not to go to the physician. You have to go! Sometimes it may be a heart attack. You have to go. If it is not a heart attack the physician will tell you that it is not. But you have to check it.
This question is important because it is relevant to many of you. To many it has happened, and to many it is going to happen, and to many more. But always, when you have something happening in the body, go to the physician and be checked. If it is nothing, there is no problem. If there is something, you can take medicine.
So don’t think that it is always the spiritual heart because sometimes it may not be. Sometimes it may be the physical heart and if you don’t go to the physician you can be in danger.
Enough for today.

============================================================

This interchange between the Sufi mystic, Simab, and a nobleman named Mulakab, is preserved in oral transmission as a dialogue often staged by wandering dervishes.
Mulakab: “Tell me something of your philosophy so that I may understand.”
The mystic replied: “You cannot understand unless you have experience.”
Mulakab: “I do not have to understand a cake to know whether it is bad.”
Simab: “If you are looking at good fish and you think that it is a bad cake, you need to understand less, and to understand it better, more than you need anything else.”
Mulakab: “Then why do you not abandon books and lectures if experience is the necessity?”
Simab: “Because the outward is the conductor to the inward. Books will teach you something of the outward aspects of the inward, and so will lectures. Without them you would make no progress.”
Mulakab: “But why should we not be able to do without books?”
Simab: “For the same reason that you cannot think without words. You have been reared on books; and your mind is so altered by books and lectures, by hearing and speaking, that the inward can only speak to you through the outward. Whatever you pretend you can perceive.”
“Does this apply to everyone?”
Simab: “It applies to whom it applies. It applies above all to those who think it does not apply to them!”
Sufism is an alchemy. It is the science to transform lead into gold, the lower into the higher, the outer into the inner. It is the science to transform the world into God.
Remember, Sufism is not a philosophy, it is a science. It does not believe in speculation, it believes in experience. It does not believe in logical thinking, it believes in experimentation. Only experiment decides what is true; nothing else can be decisive. Only when you know do you know – there is no other way to know.
Sufism does not trust in beliefs. It wants you to drop all kinds of beliefs because they will be the barriers to knowing. A belief is a pseudo kind of knowing – you really don’t know but because you believe, because you have believed so long, you start feeling as if you know. All your beliefs have to be taken away from you. You have to be left in ignorance and innocence. Only from there is experimentation possible.
Science presupposes nothing – no belief, no a priori belief. There is no presupposition at all. Science starts with a blank mind.
These are the three things you will have to understand deeply. The first is art. Art does not bother much about the object. it has its own projections. Art uses the object as a screen on which to project its subjectivity. When you see a woman’s face or a child’s face or a flower, art is not concerned with the objective – with what is there – art is concerned with what you make of it, what you project onto it. Beauty is not part of the objective, beauty is your dream that you bring to the object – then the object looks beautiful.
Art invents, art does not discover. It is not interested in discovery, it is inventive, it is imaginative, it is projective. That is the basic meaning of the word poet. The original root comes from poietes – poietes means one who creates. Art is creative.
But what can you create? Whatsoever you create will be your mind projection. Art creates beauty. Science is not creative in that sense. Science is discovery. Whatsoever is there, science only uncovers it. It does not invent, it has no idea to project. Science is objective; art is subjective. With art you have some projections, some ideas as a requirement. Before you come to the rose-flower you have to come with some dreams in your mind, you have to nourish dreams. When those dreams are overflowing they will overflow onto the roseflower, they will surround the roseflower with a glory, with an aura, and you will see something which is not there. You will see something which is really inside you and is only reflected from the outside back to you. Art is a dream; it is dream stuff.
Science is objective. The basic requirement of science is to go nude, naked; to go without any prejudice; to go without any idea of what the case is; just to be there, impartial, objective, with no thoughts in the mind – so that you can watch whatsoever is there. Reality reveals itself if you can be a witness. A pure witnessing is what science is.
And then there is philosophy. Art at least projects onto something outside. Science does not project at all; it allows the outside to reveal its truth. And philosophy? It is pure subjectivity. It does not even bother about the screen. Art at least bothers about the screen – the screen has to be there, then it can project. Philosophy is pure speculation. You close your eyes and you go into your thoughts and you can go on and on forever. It is an endless procession of thoughts.
Philosophy is pure subjectivity, science is pure objectivity, art is just in the middle of the two – a little of philosophy and a little of science, a little of objectivity and a little of subjectivity. Art is a mixture.
Religion can be of three types. It can either be philosophic or it can be artistic or it can be scientific. Sufism is the third kind of religion. It believes in experiment, in experience; it does not believe in beliefs. It trusts only the truth that is already there. You have only to uncover it.
To start with, Sufism says that you have to prepare yourself so that no prejudices, no conditionings, come in between you and the truth. The journey starts with you dropping beliefs, theories, philosophies, systems. Only when you are empty of all thought are your eyes ready, receptive. Then you can see.
The state in which human beings ordinarily exist is called nafs by Sufis. The word means: desire-nature – what Hindus call vasana and what Buddhists call tanha – the desire to have more, the desire to possess, the desire to be powerful, the desire to be this or that. You are full of these desires, nafs, and because of these desires you cannot see what truth is. Your desires go on overcrowding your consciousness and if the consciousness is too overcrowded by desires there is no possibility of seeing the truth.
When you are full of lust, you start seeing things according to your lust. When you are full of desire you start projecting, you start seeing things which are not there. According to your desire you start coloring things.
One day just go into the marketplace. Well-fed, satisfied with your food, go, have a stroll on the street. And then another day fast and go again on the same street. you will be surprised – it is not the same street. When you are well-fed you see certain things; on the same street, when you are hungry, you see totally different things. When you are on a fast, hungry, you will see restaurants, hotels, things like that. You will go on missing the shoe-store and other things. When you are well-fed you will not see the restaurants and the hotels at all. You may not have any idea that they exist there.
You constantly choose according to your desire. When you are full of sexuality you will see women, if you are a man; or if you are a woman, you will see men. When sexuality disappears you stop seeing man and woman, you stop dividing that way. It simply does not matter. It is pointless.
The first thing that you see in the other is whether he is man or woman. Have you watched it. You never forget it. You can forget everything – you can forget the name of the person, the face of the person – but you never forget whether the person is man or woman. Why? Have you ever forgotten that about anybody? Have you ever wondered whether he is man or woman? “I knew him twenty years ago. I don’t remember his name, I don’t remember his face, I don’t remember anything about him….” but have you ever wondered whether he was man or woman? No that you remember. That goes deep in you – because of nafs. The first thing you look into is whether the person is man or woman.
Just a few days ago it happened that a Japanese man took sannyas and Mukta told me that he was a she – some mistake from the office on her chart. So I gave him sannyas and gave him a “Ma” name, but he was a man. And you know the Japanese, they are so polite they will not say no. I have heard that the Japanese have no equivalent word to no, they always say yes – hai. They are just being polite.
So he accepted even that. He didn’t say, “I am a man. I am not a woman.” Only later on was it known that he was a man and I had given him a “Ma” name.
What happened? When you don’t have nafs you don’t look into another’s sexuality. That doesn’t matter. That does not matter at all. You are not concerned with the form of his body – whether he has breasts or not, whether he has a beard or not. You don’t see it that way. Once nafs has disappeared, once the desire-nature has disappeared, the other is a person, a pure person. Maleness, femaleness are irrelevant facts. Who bothers? Otherwise those are the most pertinent and relevant facts. The first thing that you see in the other is a reflection of your nafs.
Sufis say nafs is the state where man exists, and through nafs there is no possibility of seeing God – because nafs can only see sexuality, money, power. Nafs is blind to God. Unless you drop nafs you will not see God – and God is everywhere. Only God is. All is God. Nothing else is. But you will not see God, you cannot see God. To see God you will have to drop nafs.
Why does nafs become such a barrier? What exactly is nafs? Nafs is a neurotic hunger which cannot be satisfied. That’s why it is neurotic – because there is no way to fulfill it. The more you fulfill it, the more it grows. Nafs is a constant hankering to have more – of whatsoever. If you have money you want to have more money, if you have a beautiful woman you want to have a more beautiful woman, if you have power you want to have more power – always more and more and more. Now this more cannot be satisfied. In the very nature of things the desire for more cannot be satisfied – because whatsoever you have, your desire for more remains.
You have ten thousand rupees – your desire for more says, “Have one thousand more. Eleven thousand will be okay.” When you have eleven thousand the desire-nature says, “Have twelve thousand.” And so on, so forth. You can have millions, it will not make a bit of difference. Ten thousand rupees or ten million rupees, it will not make a bit of difference, not even an iota – because the desiring-nature always goes on asking for more. You have ten million rupees, the desiring-nature says, “Have eleven million rupees.” It is the same mind. When you had ten thousand it was saying, “Have eleven thousand,” now you have ten million it says, “Have eleven million.” The proportion remains the same.
The desire nature, nafs, is like the horizon – it always looks as if it is just there, maybe ten miles away. If you rush you can reach it within two hours. But you will never reach it. After two hours, when you look, you will find that it has again receded back, and the distance is the same.
This goes on – that’s why all the religions have called this desire-nature the source of all kinds of mirages, illusions. It creates an illusion, an illusory line, there – the horizon. The horizon does not exist because the earth and the heaven never meet anywhere. And the earth is round. It just appears that somewhere the earth and sky are meeting – just yonder, there. And it seems so close that it seems worthwhile to try. It remains always so close and always so distant. Between you and the horizon the distance is constant. It is the same distance.
The desire for more cannot be satisfied. And because the desire for more cannot be satisfied, you cannot see that which is. You always hanker for that which is not, so your mind is somewhere else and you cannot see that which is very obvious and surrounds you. You see the horizon; you don’t see yourself. You see the distant; you don’t see the close-by. And God is your neighbor, God is really inside you, you are God. But that is very close and you don’t have any time or energy to look for the close. You will have time and energy only when your desire for the distant has disappeared.
Nafs is a neurotic state of mind. Just look inside yourself and you will always find nafs. Why does this nafs exist at all? What is the reason for its existence in the first place?
Man is afraid of his inner emptiness – so much so that the inner seems almost a kind of death. Look within and there is emptiness and nothing else – a silence, an eternal silence, never disturbed, not even a ripple arises there. Not even you are there – because you are noisy, you are the crowd. At the innermost core of your being there is pure emptiness, and that creates fear. One wants to fill it with something, one wants to stuff it with something, one wants to become something so that this emptiness can be dropped. That’s the reason why nafs exists. It is because of the fear of inner emptiness that you go on stuffing yourself.
You may have watched it. When you are feeling very empty, you start eating, when you are feeling very lonely you start eating, when you are missing your beloved or lover you start eating too much. You stuff yourself. You just want to have a feeling of fullness. But no food goes into your inner emptiness, it only stuffs your stomach. It is destructive to your body if you eat too much. And you remain empty.
Somebody becomes a food addict, somebody becomes a power addict, somebody becomes a money addict – they are all addictions. These are the real drugs. LSD or marijuana are nothing compared to money, compared to power. These are the really destructive elements. And I am not saying that LSD or marijuana are not destructive; they are destructive, but they are nothing compared to money or power.
Whenever you are trying to fill your inner emptiness with anything, you are going against God – because that inner emptiness is the face of God. When you stop stuffing yourself with food, money, power, et cetera, et cetera, then suddenly you become aware of who you are.
Sufis say that the first thing to be understood, experienced, is nafs, and by understanding it there is a dropping. It is not that you have to drop it – just to see it is to drop it, just to realize the fact and the absurdity and the neurosis of it is to drop it. That dropping has a beautiful name – Sufis call it tambah.
Tambah means turning; tambah means exactly what Jesus says when he says “repent.” The original root word from which “repent” comes has nothing to do with repentance. It means “return to the source.” Return – that is the meaning of repent. It has no idea of guilt in it, just return to your source. Sufis call it tambah, Patanjali calls it pratyahar – turning towards oneself – and Mahavira calls it prankramana – coming back home. It is the same process.
First understand the nature of nafs, desire, desire for more, that mad, neurotic desire for more – understand it, and tambah happens. Seeing the futility of it you turn back. Then you don’t rush towards the horizon, you start moving towards yourself. A one-hundred-and-eighty-degree turn, an about-turn, that s what tambah is.
Through this turning the third thing starts happening – Sufis call it hal. Hal means a state of being, but a temporary one; an altered state, a changed state of being; a state of no-mind, but for single moments, like flashes. For a single moment you are rooted in your being and again you are uprooted. It comes like lightning. Hal means a state of consciousness, but temporary.
In the beginning it will happen only in a momentary way – sometimes it will be there and sometimes it will not be there. It will be like a ray of light in your darkness, or a single star in the dark sky, clouded sky. And sometimes you will be able to see it and sometimes you will not be able to see it. This is called hal, what in America they now call “altered states of consciousness.” In fact, I have heard a suggestion from somebody that now they should be told to change the name of the United States of America. Jimmy Carter should be told to change the name to Altered States of America. That will be more relevant. The consciousness is changing. Man is more interested in consciousness now than ever.
Nafs is interested in the content – the content that you can fill your consciousness with. The content may be money or food or knowledge or something else, but nafs is interested in the content. After tambah, after the turning in, one becomes interested, not in the content, but in consciousness itself. What is this inner emptiness that you want to fill? First see it, know it, first become acquainted with it, first have a real taste of it, have a bite of it and chew it and see whether it is something to be filled or something to be enjoyed. And the moment you have a taste of it, then everything you have tasted before will look worthless. This emptiness is fullness itself; this inner emptiness is the greatest joy there is; it is a benediction.
First you will have hals, states – sometimes like a flash you will be enlightened – but then it is gone and you have fallen into misery again, deeper than before. If you don’t create a nafs for the hals…. There is a possibility that you may start hankering for more – then you have fallen back. Then you have turned back again. Again you have created a horizon, again the mind has come in, again there is the desire-nature.
Remember it – to many people here, hals happen. When the hal happens, when you have a taste of that state, naturally you start desiring more. You become very, very desirous. A great longing arises – how to have it every day? And how to have it again and again – morning, afternoon, evening, night – how to have it more?
I can understand. It is so beautiful, it is such a benediction, that one would like to have it. But if you start expecting, desiring, you will miss even the hals. Even these flash-like lightnings will disappear, even these moments will be no more – because they can happen only when nafs is not there. If you enjoy the hal and you don’t become desirous of it – when it is there you feel grateful, when it is gone you don’t hanker for it, you wait without desiring, you wait patiently, without demanding – it will come more and more.
Then comes the fourth state – hals become permanent. That is called magama. Magama means that one has arrived. Then it is always there. Then- it is not that it happens to you – now you are it. From nafs to magama, this is the journey of a Sufi. And the whole journey consists of experiment, experience. It is existential.
You will have to go a little deeper into the details of the state of nafs because the more you are acquainted with it, the more is the possibility for tambah, for conversion, for repentance, for pratyahar, for that great leap and change of direction.
There are three states of nafs, there are three kinds of sleepy people in the world. Just the other day there was a question: You say, Man is asleep, but are all men asleep in the same way? No, they are not. Everybody is asleep but there are differences in sleep too, very significant differences.
The first are called the hostiles. They are asleep. They are asleep in their rage, in their anger, in their hostility, hatred, in their violence, in their aggressiveness, in their ambition. The first kind of sleep is that of the hostile.
You can see people. The hostile person is very apparent. He is always angry about everything. He is destructive. He wants to destroy everything. The hostiles become the revolutionaries – Mao, Stalin, Lenin. They want to destroy. They want to destroy the whole past, they want to destroy the whole society. Of course, when you want to destroy, you cannot destroy as a pure act – you have to give a utopia to peoples’ minds, like an opium. All utopias are opiums. You have to tell them, “We are going to change the society for a better state, that’s why we are destroying’ – otherwise nobody will support it. You have to create a dream. When you create the dream and people become infatuated with the dream, then you can destroy.
That beautiful society never comes; it has never come, it is never going to come. That’s why a man like Buddha never talks about the society. No social revolution is going to happen. Who is going to do it? The hostiles do it. They are really interested in destruction. The idea of creating a better society is just a strategy to destroy, to destroy without guilt.
This hostile person is one extreme. His anger is not particularly directed towards something, he is simply angry about everything. He is angry. He has no object of anger – everything and everybody seems to be inimical to him. Not only persons but things look inimical towards him. He is inimical, that’s why the whole existence looks inimical. His basic attitude is negative. His sleep is a very, very angry sleep.
One thing is good about him – he is hot. He is not cold. He is really burning, boiling. He can be changed more easily than the other two kinds because he is hot. His fire is alive – wrongly directed, but the direction can be changed. He has power. If his direction is changed, if his anger becomes a fuel for inner transformation, he can become a buddha easily.
It is not just a coincidence that all the great masters in India came from the warrior race – kshatriyas. Brahmins have not produced so many enlightened people. One would have expected that Brahmins would have produced more enlightened people because they are well-versed people – logically, philosophically, in every way. They are good people but they have not produced many enlightened people. Buddha was a warrior, so was Mahavira, so was Neminatha, so was Adinatha, and so on, so forth. The twenty-four tirthankaras of the Jainas, Buddha, Ram, Krishna, Nanak – they are all kshatriyas, they all come from the warrior race. It is not accidental. If the hostile person changes, he can become a buddha very easily. So this is the best kind of sleep – the hostile sleep.
That’s why my work here consists first of making you hot through encounter, through other cathartic groups, through Dynamic meditation, Kundalini. The whole point is to create more fire in you, to bring your hostility to the surface – because from there, there is a possibility of change.
The second kind of sleep and the second kind of people are the phonies. This is the other extreme. One extreme is the hostile, the other extreme is the phony. These are the goody-goody people – always smiling, false and pseudo, always deceptive, never true. The hostile is true. He shows his face – whatsoever it is. It is ugly, certainly ugly, but he shows it. The phony has an ugly face but he has a mask. You never see his real face.
The politician and the priests, these are the phonies. The Brahmins could not produce so many enlightened people – they are the phonies. They are always trying to be sweet. This is a trick to protect themselves. These are the people who are very repressed. They go on repressing all hostility. The hostility remains but goes into the basement, hides in the unconscious.
The hostile is a simple person. You can always trust an angry person, remember. Never trust a person who is always smiling. I have heard about people who even smile in their sleep. They are so phony that the smile has become almost a fixed state of affairs. The lips have become paralyzed in a smile. The lips cannot do anything else. The smile has become material, concrete. It is not a thing that comes from the heart, it is a painted thing.
This is the person who is very orthodox. The first kind becomes revolutionary, the second kind is orthodox. He always believes in the rule; he is very obedient to society. In whatsoever society he is, he is obedient to it. He does not bother about what he is obedient to; he is simply obedient. These people become very respectable, naturally – because they obey the society. They never do anything wrong, they are always right. Their ego trip is for the right. They ride on the right – they are the righteous people. They always do the right thing, they never do the wrong thing. Naturally they get all kinds of respect and honor from the society. These are the respectable people.
The second kind is more difficult because the sleep of the second kind has more sweet dreams in it. The first kind is suffering from nightmares. Remember, when you suffer from a nightmare there is every possibility for you to awake. It always happens. When you really go into a nightmare and when the nightmare becomes too much, you are suddenly awake, your sleep is broken. The nightmare itself automatically works against the sleep. But when you are sleeping a sweet sleep and you are seeing beautiful dreams of paradise and heaven, then there is no problem – the sleep can continue. A sweet dream defends the sleep, a nightmare is against the sleep.
So the second kind, the respectable person, is the least religious person in the world. And, naturally, he is very cold. He cannot afford to he hot. These are the people who, if they come to this ashram, they immediately escape.
There is one woman – she has been here for one month – she only listens to me and then she escapes. She goes on writing letters to me: “I want to see you, Osho, but I can’t do your meditations. They are dangerous. And I can’t go to any group because they are dangerous too. I can only listen to you. I love what you say.”
But what kind of love is this? If you love what I say, then that love will lead you naturally into what I am saying to do. If you avoid the meditations, if you avoid the groups that go on here, then what kind of love is this?
With words you know that no change is going to happen. You can absorb words – you have become very, very expert at absorbing words. And with words you are free. You can interpret in your own way. You can drop a few words, you can add a few words, you can change the very quality of what I say. But you cannot change the meditation and you cannot change a group process like encounter. You will have to go into it. And one is afraid.
Now this woman is a phony. She is in a deeper kind of sleep than a hostile person. A hostile person can be changed because he is hot. This woman is phony. She is cold, ice cold. When the water is hot it is very close to evaporation – just a little more heat and it will evaporate. When you have ice cubes, first you have to melt them, then you have to heat them. The process is longer.
The third kind, the most difficult kind, are the zombies – the hostiles, the phonies and the zombies. The zombie is just in the middle – he is neither hostile nor phony. He is just in the middle, he is both. He is dead. He is neither hot nor cold, he is impotent. He has not taken any side, he is afraid. He just hangs in the middle. He cannot decide. So he has decided to be just a machine.
These people – the zombies – are just dead. They are walking, talking corpses. They are mechanical. They only know life as a rut, as a routine. They are ritualistic. The zombies become great saints and mahatmas; the hostiles can become revolutionaries, criminals, sinners; the phonies are very respectable people, the gentleman and the lady.
Just yesterday I was reading about a court decision in the United States of America. In some American state there was a case for a divorce and the magistrate ruled that a person who is divorcing his wife and a woman who is divorcing her husband should not be called gentleman and lady – they are simply man and woman.
I was surprised. In the twentieth century? And in America, out of all other lands! The magistrate ruled that a person who is divorcing is no longer a gentleman, he is just an ordinary man. He cannot be addressed as “gentleman.” And the lady who is divorcing – of course, how can she be a lady? Impossible. No respect should be shown to them, that’s what the magistrate was saying.
These phonies get all the respect. They are the gentlemen and the ladies. They become the priests, the politicians; they are the powerful people. And the zombies become the saints and the mahatmas. Only they can, only they can afford to. They are so dead. They sit just like dead statues.

It is said that once a seeker came to Rinzai, the great Zen master. And the seeker said, “I have been to other monasteries, I have learned much. Now I come to you, the greatest master of this age.”
Rinzai looked at the man. He must have seen that he seemed to be a zombie. Rinzai said, “What have you learned? Just show me.”
Now this was a rare question. He had been to other masters, other teachers, other monasteries – they never asked, “Show me.” Yes, they asked questions and he answered perfectly well because he was very well-versed. For thirty years he had been in the profession of seeking, so he knew all the trade secrets – but, “Show it!” How do you show your philosophy?
He could not think of anything else so he just closed his eyes and sat in a Buddha asana, absolutely like a statue. And Rinzai laughed, hit him hard on the head and said, “You fool! Get out from here! We have enough buddhas. Can’t you see in the temple?” Rinzai used to live in a temple which was known as the Ten Thousand Buddha Temple. There were ten thousand statues. He said, “Look, we have ten thousand fools like you. Marble statues. We don’t need any more. Get out! Simply don’t show your face again!”

Zombies can become great mahatmas because they are so dead. Life has shrunken in them. It is not that they have become desireless, no. they have become lifeless. When there is no life there is no desire – but that is not the point. A real sage is one who has no desire and absolute life. The false saint is one who has killed his life because that is the simplest way to kill his desire. But he is dead.
These are the three kinds of sleepy people and these are the three kinds of nafs. You have to watch your own – what kind of nafs do you have? If you are a hostile, be happy, things are easier. If you are a phony, be happy, things are a little more difficult but still possible. If you are a zombie then still be happy that you have understood that you are a zombie – some possibility is there!

Now this beautiful dialogue.
This interchange between the Sufi mystic, Simab, and a nobleman named Mulakab, is preserved in oral transmission as a dialogue often staged by wandering dervishes.
Mulakab: “Tell me something of your philosophy so that I may understand.”
It looks like a very relevant question. “Tell me something of your philosophy so that I may understand” – as if by telling something one can understand.
We believe too much in words – as if the word itself is the truth, as if the letter is the spirit. It is not, but we have been brought up on words. All that we know is words. So naturally the seeker comes to the master, the mystic, Simab, and asks, “Tell me something of your philosophy.”
Now Sufism has no philosophy. Sufism cannot be told. It can be lived, it can be experienced, but it can’t be told. And it is not that Sufis have not tried to tell it, they have tried to tell it, but it goes on slipping. That’s what I go on doing. I go on telling it but it goes on slipping. No word ever does any justice to truth; all words falsify. Sufis agree perfectly with Lao Tzu when he says, “The Tao that can be said is Tao no more. The truth that can be uttered has already become a lie.”

You will have to experience it on your own. But man is imitative, so entirely imitative, that he just imitates other peoples’ words, their philosophies, their beliefs.

I have heard….
Two men and a young lady were on the Pullman going to California and decided they had better get acquainted.
One man said, “My name is Paul, but I’m not an apostle.”
The other said, “My name is Peter, but I’m not a saint.”
The girl muttered, “My name is Mary, and I don’t know what the hell to say.”

That’s how it goes. We just see what is happening, what people are doing, and we do it. We imitate.
In sleep, man remains a monkey, and as far as sleepers are concerned Darwin is perfectly right that man is born out of the monkey. Otherwise how can you explain so much monkeyish-ness, imitativeness?

The new minister stood at the church door greeting parishioners as they departed after the close of the service. The people were generous in complimenting the clergyman for his sermon, except for one fellow who said to him, “Pretty dull sermon, Reverend.”
And in a minute or two the same man appeared again in line and said, “Pretty dull sermon, Reverend.”
Once again the man appeared, this time muttering, “You really didn’t say anything at all, Reverend.”
When he got the opportunity, the minister pointed out the triple-threat pest to one of the deacons and inquired about him.
“Oh, don’t let that guy bother you,” said the deacon. “He’s a poor soul who goes around repeating whatever he hears other people saying.”

Just watch your mind. What have you got there? Anything original? Anything authentically yours? Or do you just go on repeating what other people are saying? Drop that repetitiveness, then the door opens to experience. Philosophy is not going to help – only insight into your being will help.

An elderly lady had a parrot that was using offensive language. Every time the lady would come into the room it would say, “I wish she was dead, I wish she was dead.”
She told her pastor about it and he said, “I have a parrot, too, but it is never rude. You bring your parrot over and leave it for several weeks, and maybe it will take up my parrot’s good behavior.”
So she did. Returning for it after a time, she opened the door and walked in. Her parrot saw her and said, “I wish she was dead.” Then the minister’s parrot chimed in and said, “Amen, Lord, grant her request.”

Even parrots are not as parrot-like as man. Man is more of a parrot than the so-called parrots. And if parrots repeat and imitate, they can be pardoned, forgiven, but man cannot be forgiven. Never forgive yourself for imitativeness otherwise you will remain an imitator. Stop forgiving yourself for imitativeness. Let imitativeness be the original sin. And when I say original sin, I mean it.
The word sin is very beautiful. It means separation. If you are imitative you will remain separate from your real self; if you are imitative you will remain separate from God – because only your original self can have a meeting with God. This false, this pseudo mask cannot have any encounter with God. The false cannot encounter the real, only the real can encounter the real.
Mulakab: “Tell me something of your philosophy so that I may understand.”
The mystic replied: “You cannot understand unless you have experience.”
Understanding is a by-product of experience, a shadow of experience, a consequence of experience. It is not a pre-requirement. You need not have understanding to experience – just the reverse is the case. You need experience to understand a thing. You cannot understand unless you have experienced. And God is not a hypothesis, God is not speculation, it is not that we think God is – God is, whether we think or not. We can go on denying God, that doesn’t make any difference – God still is. God is existential. Whether you believe or disbelieve has no effect on reality. Your belief, your disbelief, is not going to change that which is. So what is the point of belief, disbelief? Drop them and try to see whatsoever is the case. When that has been looked into, understanding arises.
Mulakab: “I do not have to understand a cake to know whether it is bad.”
Very logical. In life you need not experience many things – still you feel that you know. But the same logic cannot be extended towards God.
In life you are living with sleepy people who function through belief. If you follow their belief you will have a convenient life. Your belief will help you to remain comfortable and convenient. But with God you are not searching for convenience or security or safety, with God you are hankering for truth.
Just the other day I was reading about a college in America. Suddenly it got a great donation, a great endowment, and it decided to become a university. So they wanted a motto for the university door. They decided that the motto should be in Sanskrit, not in Latin, not in Greek, and they decided that the motto should mean something like this: Truth unfolding like a flower.
So they searched in America for the greatest Sanskrit scholar and they approached a professor who was a world-renowned authority on Sanskrit. And they said, “This is what we want as a motto on the university door: Truth unfolding as a flower. Please translate it into Sanskrit. We want to put it in Sanskrit.”
The professor refused. He said, “It cannot be translated into Sanskrit because the Eastern mind says that truth has no unfolding, truth simply is. It does not grow. It is not an unfolding. You discover it, you grow towards it, but truth never grows. You come close or you go away, but truth remains the same. Growth happens in you, not in truth. So truth is not unfolding, and truth is not a flower – because the flower is sometimes in the seed and sometimes in the tree and sometimes in the bud. And then it flowers. It has a temporal procession. Truth simply is; it is not evolution. It is simply there. It has no past, no present, no future. It is eternally the same.”
I agree with that Sanskrit scholar. He was right. It is not that it cannot be translated into Sanskrit, it can be translated into the Sanskrit language – but it will not be the spirit of the East. The translation will be false. It will not show the right understanding about truth.
If you believe or you disbelieve, you remain distant. There is something between you and truth – your belief or your disbelief.
If you want to know the truth, you need not have anything between you and the truth, you have to remove all furniture – the furniture of the mind. You have just to see. Your eyes have to be completely unclouded.
Simab: “If you are looking at good fish and you think that it is a bad cake, you need to understand less…”
– because your understanding is wrong, upside-down. It is a fish and you think it is a bad cake. Your knowledge is not going to help you. It is better that you have less knowledge. No knowledge will be the most perfect thing, then there will be nothing to distract you from the truth. All knowledge distracts. When you know, it interferes – hence one has to be innocent. Only innocents know – because those who think they know are already corrupted by knowledge.
“…you need to understand less, and to understand it better…”
Now the word understanding is being used in two different senses: one in the sense of knowledge and the other in the sense of meditation; one in the sense of intellectuality, the other in the sense of intelligence.
The English word meditation comes from a Sanskrit root medha. Medha means intelligence. In fact, it would be more correct to call it medha-tation rather than meditation – because meditation has a wrong connotation in the Western mind. It appears as if you are thinking about something, meditating upon it. No, to bring it closer to home it will be medha-tation. Medha means intelligence – not thinking about something, just being intelligent, alert, aware, pure, innocent.
When you don’t have any knowledge, you know; when you have knowledge, your eyes are covered and you cannot know.
“If you are looking at good fish and you think that it is a bad cake, you need to understand less, and to understand it better, more than you need anything else.”
Now the seeker wants to know more about the Sufi philosophy, and the mystic says, “If you really want to understand more about the Sufi philosophy it will be good if you don’t know anything at all. Come with that state of mind we call not-knowing.”
Mulakab: “Then why do you not abandon books and lectures if experience is the necessity?”
That’s how the logical mind goes – either or. The logical mind is always divided into either or. It does not know how to connect opposite polarities. It does not know how to use the words and and both.
First Mulakab wants to know about Simab’s philosophy, the Sufi philosophy; then, because he is saying there is no philosophy, there is only experience, Mulakab moves the other extreme – if not this, then the other. Then he says, Then why do you not abandon books and lectures if experience is the necessity?
Many people come to me and they say to me too, “You go on saying that it cannot be said, but why do you go on talking then? You go on repeating again and again that theories and philosophies and systems are of no help, they are barriers, but you still go on talking to us. Then why, why do you talk at all?”
That is the logical mind: either talk with the condition that through talk truth can be understood, or don’t talk at all. But both will be absurd positions.
The master has to talk in such a way that he makes you aware that talk is not going to help. The master has to use words in such a way that you don’t get entangled with words. The master has to explain many things to you and to simultaneously keep you alert so you don’t get caught in explanation. The master has to use the mind to relate to you because you exist in mind and there is no other way to relate to you. But he has to keep you alert, he has to remind you again and again that this is not the whole thing, that this is just the beginning, that this is not even the real thing. the real is to come. He has to keep you alert so that you can move – move from words to wordlessness, from theories to truth, from philosophies to experience.
A moment comes when the master can be silent, but that is possible only when the disciple has come to relate to the master in a totally different way – from the heart.
Even when Buddha was alive, and when thousands of disciples were there, when he kept silent one day only one disciple, Mahakashyap, understood it – out of those thousands of disciples.
It is said of a Zen master, Huen Shah, that one day he was about to preach a sermon when a bird began to sing nearby. He remained silent, pointed to the bird, and left. Later on he said he could not have improved upon the bird, that’s why he remained silent. The bird was saying the same truth that he was going to say and in a far superior way. But I don’t know what happened to the disciples – whether anybody understood it, whether anybody got the message.
Even with Buddha only Mahakashyap smiled when Buddha kept silent and looked at a lotus flower in his hand. All were anxious to hear the words and he was not speaking and not speaking. And then Mahakashyap laughed and Buddha called him and gave the lotus flower to him and said to the other disciples, “That which can be said through words I have said to you, and that which cannot be said through words I have given to Mahakashyap.”
Yes, there is something beyond the words, but you have to be prepared through words for the beyond.
But this logical fallacy happens. The logical mind believes that either everything is possible through words or nothing is possible through words.

A disciple of the Holy Yehudi had taken upon himself the discipline of silence, and for three years had spoken no words save those of the Torah and prayer. The Yehudi sent for him and said, “Young man, how is it that I do not see a single word of yours in the world of truth?”

Yehudi was one of the Hassid masters.

When the young man justified himself by speaking of “the vanity of speech” the Yehudi replied, “He who only learns and prays is murdering the word of his own soul. Whatever you have to say can be vanity or it can be truth.”

Listen to it again.

Yehudi said, “Whatever you have to say can be vanity or it can be truth. Come to me after the Evening Prayer and I shall teach you how to talk. Real words are not vain; vain words are not real.”

Yes, there is a reality to words too. It is not ultimate, it is only indicative. It is like a gesture. When I am pointing to the moon with my finger, my finger is not the moon. Don’t mistake it. And don’t start clinging to my finger, that is not the moon. But don’t move to the other extreme – if the finger is not the moon then how can you indicate the moon by the finger? That is absurdity again. Either you cling to the finger because you say, “You are showing the finger,” or you say, “Then don’t show the finger – the finger is not the moon.”
But the moon can be indicated by the finger and the finger is not the moon. The words can become indicative; they are gestures.
Mulakab: “Then why do you not abandon books and lectures if experience is the necessity?”
Simab: “Because the outward is the conductor to the inward. Books will teach you something of the outward aspects of the inward, and so will lectures. Without them you will make no progress.”
The outward and the inward are not so different. The outward is also part of the inward, the outermost part, of course. And the inward is also part of the outward, the innermost part of the outward, of course. But they are not separate, they are together. Never separate them. They are one reality, just like the circumference and the center. The center cannot exist without the circumference, and the circumference cannot exist without the center. If the circumference is there without the center it cannot be called the circumference, and if the center is there without the circumference of which it is the center, it is not the center any more. Of what? The center depends on the circumference as much as the circumference depends on the center. The surface is part of the depth as the depth is part of the surface. This is the right understanding.
Simab: “Because the outward is the conductor to the inward.” Many times it happens that people come to me and they say, “We want to be sannyasins but what is the use of the outward: the dress and mala and things like that?” A woman wrote to me, “Osho, I love you and I want to surrender to you but I cannot surrender to the orange dress and I hate your mala.”
This is the logical mind. The logical mind says, “The inner is the inner and the outer is the outer, so love Osho from the inner. What is the need of any outward show?” But when you are hungry, you eat something from the outside. You don’t say, “Hunger is inside and I cannot go to Vrindavan and I don’t care a bit about food. What is the need of food? Hunger is inside.”
But the inside hunger is fulfilled, satisfied, by outside food – because the outside is constantly changing into the inside. When you eat, you chew, you digest; it becomes the inside. And what is inside is constantly becoming your outside. Life is changing always – moving from the inside to the outside, from the outside to the inside. It is a tremendous movement between polarities.
So don’t create such logical problems for yourself. Don’t divide. You are one. In and out, you are both. Hence sannyas has to be both together – inner and outer.
Just look at the absurdity. You say, “I love you, Osho, but I hate your mala.” This is not possible. One thing must be wrong: either you don’t love me or you can’t hate the mala. If you hate the mala you can’t love me; if you love me you can’t hate the mala. But I can understand why the statement is possible. You divide the outer and the inner.
When you love a man or a woman you divide the outer and the inner. You say, “I will not touch your body because I love you from the inside and what is the point of touching your body? I love you but I hate your body.” Have you said that to any woman some time? – “I love you but I hate your, body.” She will never forgive you. Have you said that to any man, “I love you tremendously but don’t touch me, don’t make any outward show. What is the point of hugging and kissing and embracing? No need. We can love as inner centers.” But is that love going to grow? Is that love going to fulfill? Is that love going to become a contentment? It is not possible.
Simab: “Because the outward is the conductor to the inward. Books will teach you something of the outward aspects of the inward, and so will lectures. Without them you will make not progress.”
Mulakab: “But why should we not be able to do so without books?”
Logic wants to be consistent and life is not consistent. Logic says that if books are not needed then they are not needed. Then why can’t we do without them? Then why don’t you be consistent? Why are you not consistent? Either say books are useless and burn them or say they are useful and worship them.
But a man who understands life is not an extremist. He says, “Books can be used, but there is no need to worship them. Books can be used, but there is no need to burn them.” Both are extremist, partial standpoints.
Sufis will not agree with the Zen masters burning scriptures, because when you burn the scriptures it shows that you are still too much attached to them – otherwise why burn them? Why take so much trouble? You have some attachment, some obsession – either you can worship or you can burn but you cannot just use them. Sufis are more down to earth.
People simply jump from one extreme to another the logic always can deceive you because it pretends a kind of consistency.
A little man tip-toes up M.G. Road, stopping at intervals to scatter some kind of powder here and there on the street from a bag in his hand. His behavior is so odd that he soon attracts a crowd of followers. A policeman decides to investigate and approaches the man.
“What’s in that bag?” says the policeman.
“Woffle dust,” says the little man.
“What’s that?” asks the policeman.
“Woffle dust is my own discovery,” says the man, “and is for the eradication of most varieties of poisonous snakes, lions, tigers, elephants, et cetera, et cetera.”
“But there are no snakes, no lions, no tigers, no elephants on M.G. Road,” explains the policeman.
“I know,” says the little man. “This is pretty powerful stuff.”

This is very consistent. It is because of this stuff that you will not see any elephants, tigers, lions. This is pretty powerful stuff.
Logic is very self-fulfilling. It creates a very consistent world of concepts. If you decide that the scriptures are useful then logic says: “Worship them. Put them on a high pedestal. They are truth, embodied truth.” Or if you say: “Truth is not in the words,” then scriptures are meaningless, then throw them away, burn them. Either worship them or insult them.
But the really practical man, the pragmatic man, will use them. He will neither worship nor insult them – because both are emotional attitudes. You don’t worship a timetable and you don’t burn a timetable either – you simply use it. All scriptures are timetables for the inner journey. They are not the inner journey, remember, they are maps. The map of India is not India. Seeing the map of India you have not visited India, but there is no need to burn it because it is not India. It can be helpful. It can be helpful. It can be of tremendous help. It can bring you to the real India.
And a road map is a must when you are traveling in a strange land. A road map contains many things – except one thing: how to fold it! It can be used. That is the pragmatic standpoint.
Mulakab: “But why should we not be able to do so without books?”
Simab: “For the same reason that you cannot think without words. You have been reared on books; your mind is so altered by books and lectures, by hearing and speaking, that the inward can only speak to you through the outward. Whatever you pretend you can perceive.”
We have been reared on books. Our mind is nothing but words, logic, philosophy. If this mind has to be converted then it has to be approached in a way it can understand. Hence masters use words, masters even use logic. Masters use all that is of any help to you.
But their whole effort is to take you beyond yourself. They use words to go beyond words and they use your mind to drop it, to become mindless, to become a no-mind.
Mulakab: “Does this apply to everyone?”
Again this is logic trying to find consistency. “Does it apply to everyone?” Logic always generalizes, and reality is not a generalization. Unique individuals are here, there are no generalizations. Have you ever seen a human being? You see Teertha, you see Maneesha, you see Sudha, you see Sheela, you see Madhuri – you see many people. but you never see a human being. A human being is a generalization. You will never come across a human being. You will always come across concrete men, women, not human beings. Concrete. Logic lives in generalizations.
Mulakab asked: “Does this apply to everyone?”
Simab: “It applies to whom it applies. It applies above all to those who think it does not apply to them!”
This is of tremendous importance. Keep it always in your consciousness.
“It applies above all to those who think it does not apply to them!”
Because that is the last deception the mind can play. That is the last trick, strategy, of the mind to protect itself – “It does not apply to me.” You always become a victim of that trick – “It does not apply to me.”
Here people write to me: “Osho, what you said was perfectly beautiful. Many people will be benefited by it, many – but not me.”

I have heard about a man who used to come to a church to listen to a priest, and every day, whenever he was leaving, he would say to the priest, “You did well. You hammered well. All those people needed it.”
By and by it became a kind of drag to the priest. This man was so egoistic. It was an everyday thing. Whenever the priest would speak, in the end the man was waiting and he would say, “You did well. You hammered well. These people needed it. They deserved it. You put them right. That is going to help them.”
And the priest was waiting for the right opportunity to talk to this man. Then one day it happened. It was raining hard and only this man turned up. Nobody else was there. So the priest thought, “Now, let us see what he says.” And the man was waiting.
When the priest finished and the man was going out he said, “You did well. They would have been benefited very much if they had been here. Poor fellows. They missed. I feel sorry for them!”

Remember that all that is being said by masters is said to you, to you in particular. Don’t bring others in. And if you feel that it does not apply to you then it applies to you certainly and absolutely. Whenever you want to make an exception for yourself, beware. You are being befooled by your mind. Beware, and escape from the trap. And if you are aware and you escape from the trap you can become the exception. By not thinking you are the exception, you can become the exception. By not thinking you are great, you can become great. By not thinking you are very humble, you can become humble. All that is good is unselfconscious, it is innocent.
Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
Every time I fall in love, things start to crash all around me. I guess that I lose my center but in this state I don't know if I have a center or not. Things get confused and crazy.
The question is from Krishna Priya.
The first thing: you don’t yet have a center. That which you feel as a center is just the ego. It is not your true center. It is a pseudo feeling, very illusory. So when you fall in love, ego has to disappear. In love, the ego cannot exist. Love is something far more true, far more authentic than you are. That’s why you will always feel that things start getting a little bit crazy – because you cannot control them. The controller is no more. When the ego is not there, who is there to control or to discipline? Then you are in a chaos.
But that chaos is far more beautiful than the ugly ego. Out of that chaos all the stars are born. Out of that chaos you are born anew. It is a rebirth. Each love affair is a new birth.
So don’t take it negatively. Don’t think that you are losing something in love – you have nothing to lose. If you have something then there is no way to lose it. If you have the real center then love supports that center, integrates it, makes it more crystallized. Truth helps truth.
For example, if there is darkness in the room and you bring a lamp, the darkness is destroyed. But if there is light – there is a lamp – then the room has more light than before. The light is doubled.
The ego is like darkness, a false entity. It only appears to be there, it has no positive reality. When the light of love comes, darkness goes out. If you have the real center – what Gurdjieff calls crystallization or what Hindus call atman or what Sufis call rooh, spirit – if you really have it then each love will make it more and more clear, more and more transparent, more and more available. Each love affair will be a step – and you will be moving higher in crystallization.
So this is the first thing to be understood: don’t choose the ego, always choose love. When it is a question between the real and the unreal, choose the real, even if sometimes the real brings inconvenience. It does bring inconvenience. We have chosen the unreal because it is convenient – for no other reason have we chosen it. There is just one reason: it is convenient. You will have to go through inconvenience. That inconvenience is what I call tapascharya, austerity, sadhana. That’s what it means to be initiated into a path.
Always choose the real, howsoever bad and howsoever painful and howsoever destructive it looks. Even if it feels like death, choose it – and you will be benefited by it. Never choose the comfortable the convenient, the bourgeois, other-wise you will live the life of a hostile – if you are fortunate – or the life of a phony if you are not so fortunate, or, if you are not fortunate at all, the life of a zombie.
Love brings you out of your ego, out of your past, out of your patterned life. Hence it appears to be a confusion.
Priya’s observation is right. She says: every time I fall in love, things start to crash all around me. She really falls in love. I have been watching her love affairs. When she falls, she really falls! It is never so-so, it is never lukewarm. She really goes mad, berserk. And it is happening again, that’s why she has put this question.
But that’s good. There is nothing to be worried about. Lose the ego. Sometimes to be mad is a basic necessity to remain sane. If you are always sane then your sanity is suspect. Then you must be carrying a great neurosis hidden behind you, and any day it can explode, it can erupt. You are sitting on a volcano. It is good to have a few holidays from sanity. Sunday is good. Sometimes forget all about your sanity, all about your rules, discipline, controlled behavior, and all that nonsense. Sometimes be on a holiday, relax, and go berserk.
If you go berserk deliberately, consciously, fully aware, it is going to be an incredible experience. and you are never in danger. When you go berserk consciously you can come back. You know how you entered into it and you know how to get out of it.
When you don’t go consciously, when you are thrown by a volcano inside you, when it is not your choice, but just an accident, when it is not that you have chosen the holiday but you have been forced to go on a holiday, then it is not within your capacity to come back. That’s what happens to mad people. They become mad only when they have accumulated so much madness that now it is not possible for them to control it. It overwhelms them. And then they cannot come back.
Here, living with me, I am teaching you one basic principle of remaining sane – that is, deliberately, consciously, with effort, to sometimes go mad. It is a good experience. You remain available to both polarities – sanity/insanity. You swing. You have freedom.
The person who is always sane is not free and the person who is always insane is not free either. But the person who can swing from sanity to insanity, and can easily swing, smoothly, with no barrier, has great freedom. These are the people who have known what life is. All the mystics are mad and all the mad people could have become mystics, but they missed. And when you go on your own you can come back. That is my basic teaching here. I teach you to be mad consciously.
So go into it. Don’t be afraid. All that you lose is not worth keeping.
The second thing. She says: I guess I lose my center but in that state I don’t know if I have a center or not. That too is good observation. You don’t have one yet. The ego has to go utterly, only then will the real center be seen. When the clouds have disappeared you will see the sun.
Only after you have moved in deep love and the ego has really been dropped – there is something very valuable which can be got only if you drop the ego, and that price has to be paid – when you have really loved deeply, then a new kind of integration will arise in you.
Love does two things: first it takes the ego away, then it gives you the center. Love is a great alchemy.
There are three kinds of love – I call them love one, love two, love three. The first love is object-oriented; there is an object of love. You see a beautiful woman, really graceful, with a proportionate body. You are thrilled. You think you are falling in love. Love has arisen in you because the woman is beautiful, because the woman is nice, because the woman is good. Something from the object has stirred love in you. You are not really the master of it; the love is coming from the outside. You may be a very unloving person, you may not have the quality, you may not have that benediction, but because the woman is beautiful you think love is arising in you. It is object-oriented.
This is the ordinary love. This is what is known as eros. It is lust. How to possess this beautiful object? How to exploit this beautiful object? How to make her your own? But remember, if the woman is beautiful she is not only beautiful for you, she is beautiful for many. So there will be many people falling in love with her. And there is going to be great jealousy, competition, and all kinds of uglinesses that come in love, in so called love.

Mulla Nasruddin married a very ugly woman, the ugliest possible. Naturally the friends were puzzled and they asked Mulla, “You have money, you have prestige, you could have got any beautiful woman that you wanted, why have you chosen this ugly woman?”
He said, “There is a reason for it. I will never suffer from jealousy. This woman will always be faithful to me. I cannot believe anybody falling in love with her. In fact, even I am not in love with her. It is impossible. So I know nobody can love her.”

With Mohammedans it is a tradition that when the wife comes for the first time she asks the husband – because the Mohammedan woman has to remain behind a purdah, behind a curtain, she cannot show her face to everybody – so the woman asks the husband, “To whom can I show my face and to whom am I not allowed to show my face?”
So when the woman asked Mulla, “To whom can I show my face and to whom am I not allowed to show it?” Mulla said, “You can show it to everybody except me!”

If you are falling in love with a beautiful woman or a beautiful man, you are getting into trouble. There is going to be jealousy, there is going to be murder, there is going to be something. You are in trouble. And from the very beginning you will start possessing so that there is no possibility of anything going wrong or beyond your control. You will start destroying the woman or the man. You will stop giving freedom. You will encroach on the woman from all sides and close all the doors.
Now the woman was beautiful because she was free. Freedom is such an ingredient in beauty that when you see a bird on the wing in the sky, it is one kind of bird, but if you see the same bird in a cage, it is no longer the same. The bird on the wing in the sky has a beauty of its own. It is alive. It is free. The whole sky is his. The same bird in a cage is ugly. The freedom is gone, the sky is gone. Those wings are just meaningless now, a kind of burden. They remain from the past and they create misery. Now this is not the same bird.
When you fell in love with the woman, she was free; you fell in love with freedom. When you bring her home you destroy all possibilities of being free, but in that very destruction you are destroying the beauty. Then one day suddenly you find that you don’t love the woman at all – because she is beautiful no more. This happens every time. Then you start searching for another woman and you don’t see what has happened; you don’t look at the mechanism, at how you destroyed the beauty of the woman.
This is the first kind of love – love one. Beware of it. It is not of much value, it is not very significant, it has no value. And if you are not aware you will remain trapped in love one.
Love two is: the object is not important, your subjectivity is. You are loving so you bestow your love on somebody. But love is your quality, it is not object-oriented. The subject is overflowing with the quality of love, the very being is loving. Even if you are alone you are loving. Love is a kind of flavor to your being.
When you fall in love, the second kind of love, there is going to be greater joy than the first. And you will know – because this love will know – how to keep the other free. Love means to give all that is beautiful to the beloved. Freedom is the most beautiful, the most cherished goal of human consciousness, how can you take it away? If you love a woman really, or a man, the first present, the first gift, will be the gift of freedom. How can you take it away? You are not the enemy, you are the friend.
This the second kind of love will not be against freedom, it will not be possessive. And you will not be worried very much that somebody else also appreciates your woman or your man. In fact, you will be happy that you have a woman whom others also appreciate, that you have chosen a woman whom others also desire. Their desire simply proves that you have chosen a diamond, a valuable being, who has intrinsic value. You will not be jealous. Each time you see someone looking at your woman with loving eyes you will be thrilled again. You will fall in love with your woman again through those eyes.
This second kind of love will be more a friendship than a lust and it will be more enriching to your soul.
And this second kind of love will have one more difference. In the first kind of love, the object-oriented, there will be many lovers surrounding the object, and there will be fear. In the second kind of love there will be no fear and you will be free not to bestow your love only on your beloved, you will be free to bestow your love on others too.
In the first, the object will be one and many will be the lovers. In the second, the subject will be one and it will be flowing in many directions, bestowing its love in many ways on many people – because the more you love, the more love grows. If you love one person then naturally your love is not very rich; if you love two, it is doubly rich; if you love many, or if you can love the whole humanity, or you can love even the animal kingdom, or you can love even trees, the vegetable kingdom – then your love goes on growing. And as your love grows, you grow, you expand. This is real expansion of consciousness. Drugs only give you a false idea of expansion; love is the basic ultimate drug that gives you the real idea of expansion.
And there is a possibility…. Albert Schweitzer has said “reverence for life” – all that lives has to be loved. Mahavira in India has said the same thing. His philosophy of ahimsa, non-violence, says love all that lives. But one man, one contemporary in America, Bugbee, has gone even one step further than Mahavira and Schweitzer. He says, “Have reverence for things too.” That is the ultimate in love. You don’t only love that which lives, you love even that which is. You love the chair, you love the pillars, you love things too – because they are also there. They also have a kind of being.
When one has come to this point – that you love the whole existence irrespective of what it is, that love becomes unconditional – it is turning into prayer, it is becoming a meditation.
The first love is good in the sense that if you have lived a loveless life it is better than no love. But the second love is far better than the first and will have less anxiety, less anguish, less turmoil, conflict, aggression, violence. The second kind of love will be more of a love than the first kind, it will be more pure. In the first, the lust is too much and spoils the whole game – but even the second love is not the last. There is love three – when subject and object disappear. In the first the object is important, in the second the subject is important, in the third there is transcendence – one is neither a subject nor an object and one is not dividing reality in any way: subject, object, knower, known, lover, loved. All division has disappeared. One is simply love.
Up to the second you are a lover. When you are a lover something will hang around you like a boundary, like a definition. With the third, all definition disappears. There is only love; you are not. This is what Jesus means when he says. “God is love”: – love three. If you misunderstand the first, you will never be able to interpret rightly what Jesus’ meaning is. It is not even the second, it is the third. God is love. One is simply Love. It is not that one loves, it is not an act, it is one’s very quality.
It is not that in the morning you are loving and in the afternoon you are not loving – you are love, it is your state. It is not a hal, it is a magama. You have arrived home. You have become love. Now there is no division. All duality has disappeared.
The first kind of love is “I-it”; the other is taken as a thing. That’s what Martin Buber says “I-it.” The other is like a thing. You have to possess. My wife, my husband, my child…and in that very possession you kill the spirit of the other.
The second kind of love Martin Buber calls “I-thou.” The other is a person. You have respect for the other. How can you possess somebody you respect? But Martin Buber stops at the second; he has no understanding about the third love. Martin Buber cannot understand Jesus. He remains a Jew. He goes up to “I-thou.” It is a great step from “I-it” to “I-thou” but it is nothing compared to the step that happens from “I-thou” to no dualism, to advait, to oneness, where only love remains.
Even “I-thou” is a bit of a tension-creating phenomenon – you are separate and the beloved is separate. And all separation brings misery. Unless one becomes totally one with the beloved, with the loved one, some kind of misery is bound to remain lurking by the side. In the first the misery is very clear, in the second the misery is not so clear; in the first it is very close, in the second it is not so close, it is far away – but it is there. In the third it is no more.
So I would like you to learn more of love. Move from the first to the second and keep it in your consciousness that the third is the goal. And don’t be worried about losing yourself. Lose yourself – because that is the only way to find yourself.

The second question:
Osho,
It has been said: “You live only once, but if you live it right, once is enough.”
Once is more than enough!

The third question:
Osho,
Why do you tell women sannyasins not to have babies?
Because I cannot tell it to men sannyasins!

The fourth question:
Osho,
When a man lives with two women at the same time does it make any difference to his energy?
Are you mad or masochistic or something? Is not one woman enough for you?

I have overheard….
Mulla Nasruddin’s son was asking, “Mulla, why does the law not allow men to marry two women or more?”
And Mulla said, “If a man cannot protect himself the law protects him!”

Even to manage one will be difficult for you right now. The question is unsigned. The person must have been afraid to ask it. The very fear shows that you have a kind of alertness about what you are asking.
If you are still in love one then you will be in great trouble. You will be disrupted, torn apart between two women. With love one, one woman is more than enough.
With love two there is no problem – but then it is not a question of two women. Then the question about the object of love is not relevant. Then it depends on you – how much love you have and how much you can share.
But the questioner must be somewhere in the first kind of love where one wants to grab as many women as possible because it is an “I-it” relationship. Just as you would like to have two houses, three houses, just as you would like to have more money in the bank, so you want to have many more women. In the ancient days it was the only way to know whether a man was rich or not – to see how many women he had. Kings used to have hundreds. Just thirty years ago the Nizam of Hyderabad had five hundred women. In fact, he was not capable of recognizing all of the women. But it was a kind of prestige. He could afford them.
But women are not things, they are persons. They are souls as much as you are.
The question must have been asked by a man. You would like to possess as many women as you can. This very possessiveness shows an unloving heart. You must be somewhere in the first kind of love, where love is an “I-it” relationship. Move from there. Even one woman will be enough of a misery to you. Two will be too much.
But you may be a masochist. Then it will be a different matter altogether. A masochist is one who wants to suffer, who loves being miserable, who is happy only when he is miserable. A masochist is one who wants to torture himself. If you are a masochist then it is okay. But to be a masochist is not a good thing, it is a neurosis. You will need psychiatric treatment.
But if your love has moved from the first then the question will not be relevant at all. Then it is not a question of having two women or one – it is not a question of having at all. With the second kind of love it is a question of being. You love. You love as many people as are available. And you love in different ways: somebody you love as your wife, somebody you love as your friend, somebody you love as your daughter, somebody you love as your sister, somebody as your mother. and it is possible also that you can share one kind of love with many people. But first attain to the second kind of love. Then it is not a problem at all.
And problems utterly disappear with the third kind of love – you are simply love. Then you can go on loving, there is no end to it. You have infinite energy. But right now you will not be able to go on loving, and never do anything beyond your capacity otherwise you will become more miserable. First learn how to love one woman – at least learn how to love one woman. Let it become an “I-thou” relationship. If you create a conflict with two women around you, you will not be able to move smoothly from “I-it” to “I-thou.”

The fifth question:
Osho,
The Bible says: “Wait and everything shall be given to you.” Osho, what do you say?
I say, “Wait, and if you receive, it shall surely be a miracle.” Just because you wait there is no obligation on existence’s part to give it to you – because you may be asking for the wrong thing.
As I know people, out of a hundred, ninety-nine point nine per cent of them ask for the wrong thing. If God is compassionate he cannot give those things to you. Your desire is your desire; it is part of your mind, it is part of your ego. God cannot fulfill it, should not fulfill it. If he fulfills it you will be going more and more astray, far away. You will be moving in the dark night and you will be losing all possibilities of re-entering the source of light.
No, all your desires cannot be fulfilled. In fact, your desire as such cannot be fulfilled. Your desire is going to be a wrong desire. You are wrong, how can your desire become right? There are no right desires and wrong desires, there are only right persons and wrong persons. The wrong person is the one who has desires and the right person is the one who has no desires. When there are no desires everything is fulfilled.
Now this will look like a paradox. When you don’t have any desire, everything is fulfilled. Then you get that which is needed, then you get that which is beneficial. And you are always happy because it is always a gift.

The sixth question:
Osho,
Why do you call men monkeys? Isn't it insulting to the dignity of man?
Monkeys think otherwise. They don’t like to be compared with men; they think it is against the dignity of monkeys. When Darwin said that man has come out of the monkeys, has evolved out of the monkeys, monkeys were very angry. Great treatises have been written by the monkeys proving that man is a fall and not an evolution.
And there are arguments for it. Man has fallen from the tree to the earth. It is a fall. And man has become less than he was. Ask any monkey. Just try to follow a monkey and it will be impossible. How strong a monkey is! Man is no longer strong. Man is almost impotent in comparison to the monkey. See the joy of the monkeys. Man is so sad.
In the first place why should man think that his dignity is insulted or he is humiliated? Monkeys are beautiful people. Yes, I know they have not produced Buddha, Rumi, Junnaid – that’s true – but they have not produced Genghis Khan, Tamerlane, Alexander, Adolf Hitler, either. They have not been creating wars and killing and murdering. Monkeys are vegetarians. Monkeys are very good people. And they are always happy and always in the mood of fun and always celebrating.
Yes, man can rise very high – beyond humanity – but man can fall very low – below animals. And up to now, the record of going higher than humanity is not great. Once in a while, out of millions, one person rises to become a Buddha, a Junnaid, or a Mohammed. But the others remain lurking in the darkest, muddiest consciousness.
I am reminded of a beautiful story. It happened just a few months ago. It happened in the election days. A few things sell very well in the election days. One of those things is the white hand-spun Gandhi cap. It sells only when there are elections. Everybody becomes a Gandhian. Once the election is over, people forget all about Gandhi – and it is good that they forget all about Gandhi because whatsoever he has taught is almost nonsensical. But when there is an election, everybody is a Gandhian; even those who are suspected of murdering him, even they become Gandhians.
So Gandhi caps were in great demand and a man was doing great business. He was rushing from one town to another selling Gandhi caps. One day he was coming home from another neighboring town. He was very tired; business had been really great. He had sold almost one thousand caps. Just a few – fifty, sixty – caps were left in his bag. And he was very tired.
So underneath a Banyan tree he rested for a while. He fell asleep. When he woke up he saw that the bag was empty and all the caps were gone. He could not believe it because he could not see anybody around. Then he looked up – and it was really a beautiful scene! All t he monkeys were sitting and enjoying the Gandhi caps. You could have found Morarji Desai and Charan Singh and Jagjivan Ram – all kinds of people were there. And they were really grinning and smiling. It was a trip!
At first the man also enjoyed. But then he thought, “Sixty caps are gone. What to do now? How to get these sixty caps back?” Then he remembered that monkeys are imitators. Only one cap was left on his head. So he shouted, “Abracadabra!” just to catch the attention of the monkeys. And they all looked at what was going on. Then he threw away his cap. The moment he threw away his cap, all the monkeys threw away their caps. They are imitators.
He collected the caps, laughed loudly, and came home. The next day he had a fever and could not go selling. So he sent his young son. He told him the story – “If by chance, something like this happens, remember: first shout the mantra ‘Abracadabra!’ and then throw away your cap and you will get all your caps back. In case something like this happens, I am telling you – just to be safe.”
So the son went and it was a good day and he sold many, many caps. When he was coming back, by a coincidence it happened that as he came near the Banyan tree he also felt very tired. And it was so shady, with such beautiful foliage, and it was such a beautiful place to rest. So he put down his bag and went to sleep. When he opened his eyes exactly the same thing had happened. It was a miracle! The bag was empty. He looked up – Morarji Desai, Charan Singh, Jagjivan Ram were, all sitting there, all the great Gandhians with their Gandhi caps. And they were really enjoying and thumping and they looked more hilarious than the father had told in the story.
But the son was not puzzled. He knew the secret. So he shouted, “Abracadabra!” and threw his cap. And monkeys almost went crazy. They went crazy with laughter and shook the tree as if it was an earthquake. And do you know what happened? One monkey who had not got a cap came down and took the son’s cap. They had learned a lesson!
Monkeys are intelligent people. Now even the cap that was left had gone.
Man learns more slowly than monkeys. Man goes on repeating the same mistakes again and again. What kind of dignity are you talking about? If you look at the history of man it is the same mistakes being repeated again and again. It is almost mechanical – the same wars, the same violence, the same rape on nature, the same destructiveness. Down the ages it is the same story.
Only once in a while is there an oasis in this desert of so-called humanity – a Buddha, a Mansoor. But they are so rare and so exceptional they can be counted out. They need not be counted in. They are so exceptional that we cannot believe they really existed – they look like metaphors, they look like myths, maybe inventions of the human mind. Just to keep his dignity, just to keep the idea of his dignity, man has created buddhas and mahaviras and krishnas and christs. Many people suspect that they ever existed.
And their suspicion has a reason. If you look around, you see man in such a state, in such an ugly and neurotic state, it is impossible to believe that a buddha is possible. Buddha is such an exception and the ordinary neurotic man is the rule. That’s why people suspect that they may be wish-fulfillments. That’s what Sigmund Freud says – that all these great people are just wish fulfillments. Man wants to be like that so he creates mythologies.
What dignity are you talking about? Without man the earth will be far more beautiful. It will be less poisoned. The rivers will be again pure, the air will be again unpolluted, trees will again grow, animals will again start roaming, birds will again fly. Do you think that without man the earth will miss much? Yes, it will miss your poisoning, your pollution, your destruction, your wars, your blood. It will miss these things but it will be far more beautiful. Things will be far more silent and musical; in more harmony.
And I am not saying that man has no dignity. I never agree with people like B. F. Skinner. Skinner has written a book, Beyond Freedom and Dignity, in which he says man is not free and has no dignity either. No, I am not saying that. Man can have dignity, but one should not accept it as a given fact. It has to be created. It is potential but not actual. It is possible, but that possibility is only a perhaps. It has not already happened; you cannot take it for granted. Just by being born as a man you don’t have any dignity; you just have the face of a man and all kinds of animality inside.
You will be surprised to know that the English word beast comes from a Sanskrit word pashu. On the surface they don’t seem to be related at all – pashu, beast. But in Egypt pashu became pasht, and then it became bast, and then it became “beast.” And your English word bastard also comes from pashu – pasht, bast, “bastard.” Bastard means not knowing your father. That is the situation with animals. Who the father is no animal can say. When a man cannot show his father, cannot identify his father, we call him a bastard.
“Beast” and “bastard” come from a Sanskrit word pashu, and pashu is tremendously important. Pashu comes from another root pash – pash means bondage. One who is in bondage is a pashu, is an animal. One who is still in the bondage of the ego, still in the bondage of the mind, still in the bondage of desire, lust, thoughts, is a pashu, is an animal.
So man is man only on the surface. Only a buddha is a real man in the depth. If Buddha is standing by your side, you will both look alike – but only on the surface. Your faces resemble each other but deep down you are utterly different, radically different. You live at the lowest rung and he lives at the highest rung. The difference is vast, almost infinite.
Man has dignity in the sense that man can become a buddha, but not just by being a man. Nobody is born as a man. Humanity has to be searched for, discovered, created. So don’t think that because you are born like a human animal you are a man. No, not yet. You can become one, that is your dignity, but you are not it already. It is your dignity, it is your freedom, to choose to become or not to become – and millions choose not to become. Very rarely, few and far between, does somebody choose to become. So millions live in a kind of disgrace, in a kind of state of sin, a state of fallen consciousness. People live at the minimum.
And unless you live at the maximum you don’t have any dignity. You can have it, but you don’t have it. Strive for it, make effort for it. Before death comes become really a man.

The seventh question:
Osho,
Brown has said: “The ultimate problem is not guilt but the incapacity to live. The illusion of guilt is necessary for an animal that cannot enjoy life, in order to organize a life of non-enjoyment.”
I will not agree – because man is born with the capacity to live. Everybody is born with the capacity to live – that’s what birth means: the capacity to live. Then somewhere on the way man loses the capacity to live, becomes non-orgasmic, becomes sad, serious, dull, stupid.
Each child is born intelligent, full of joy, wonder, adventure, inquiry; each child is born open-ended. But somewhere, some where near the age of three or four, between three and four, the child is distracted by the society, loses all contact with his original capacities, and becomes a false entity. Up to the age of three the child remains a part of nature, flowing, happy about nothing at all, happy for no reason, just happy. Just watch a child. What has he got to be happy about? But he looks like he is on the top of the world. With small things he can be so happy – just collecting pebbles on the seashore and he can be more happy than you are ever going to be. Even if you collect “kohinoors” you will not be as happy. Just with pebbles, colored stones, or rushing after a butterfly, a child seems to be so joyous.
Somewhere near the age of three the child becomes civilized. We force him. We initiate him into civilization – and civilization up to now has been a kind of insanity, a madhouse. We force the child to become more and more intellectual and less and less intelligent. We force the child to be more and more prosaic and less and less poetic. We force the child to become more and more concerned about the non-essential – money, prestige, power, ambition – and more and more uninterested in the real joys of life. We turn the child from a playful being into a worker. The work ethic enters. Now duty becomes more important than love; formality becomes more important than informal flow; manners become more important than truth; policy becomes more important than authenticity.
Once the child has learned these strategies he is no longer happy, and when a child is no longer happy then he needs some reason for why he is unhappy. First we make him unhappy, then naturally one day he is going to ask, “Why am I unhappy?” Then you have to find reasons. Hindus say it is because in your past lives you have committed bad karmas. Christians say it is because of the original sin – because Adam committed a sin of disobedience to God: that’s why. And so on, so forth.
Now look at the whole stupidity of it. First you destroy the capacity to enjoy, then naturally, when the child becomes non-enjoying, when he asks, “Why am I miserable? Why am I unhappy? Why can’t I be happy? What has gone wrong?” Naturally you cannot say what has gone wrong. You may not even be aware of it. You cannot say that you have put him on the wrong track. You may not have put him on the wrong track knowingly, you may have simply given it as a heritage. Your fathers, your mothers, your society, have given it to you; you have given it to your children. Each generation gives its neurosis to the new generation. Madnesses go on living. People go on changing, madnesses go on living.
You may not be aware that each child is born with infinite potentiality to be happy. Each child is orgasmic. But one day or other he is going to ask and you have to provide answers. So you create guilt. You say, “Because you have committed sins in your past life.” You or Adam and Eve, that doesn’t matter, anybody, xyz, will do – you just have to give an explanation that something has gone wrong in the past. And the past is beyond your capacity, you cannot do anything. What can I or you do about Adam and Eve? How can we manage him not eating the apple? It is impossible. He has eaten it. It has already happened. We cannot undo it. And it is not a drama that is happening right now.

One day I heard two small children – a boy and a girl, a brother and a sister – playing. The boy hit the girl very hard and she started screaming. The mother came and asked, “What is the matter? Why have you hit your sister?” And the boy said, “We were playing Adam and Eve and rather than giving me the apple she ate it herself.”

Now this is not a drama. We cannot change it any more. It has already happened. Adam has eaten the fruit of knowledge. You cannot do anything; you simply feel guilty.
Hindus look more rational. They are. But that doesn’t make much difference. Hindus say it looks absurd that you should suffer for Adam’s sin. They make it more rational. They are rational people; they have been philosophizing for centuries. They say it is your past karmas. In your past life you have done wrong. Now who is going to suffer? You are the one to suffer for your wrong. It looks more logical.
But it is not. You go on asking a Hindu pundit, “Then okay, in my previous life I did wrong. What about if I was also suffering in my previous life? How far back can you go? There must be a first life somewhere. Why did I do something wrong in my first life? There is no other life to precede it so you cannot throw the responsibility on the previous life. Why did it happen in the first place?” It is absurd. Nobody has the answer.
In fact, it has not happened in the Garden of Eden and it has not happened in your past life; It has happened in your present life and it has happened in your parents’ house and it has happened in your school and it has happened in your society, in your country, and it has been done by the parents and the priests and the politicians. These are the culprits, these are the criminals.
They have taken your joy and they have given you wrong things. They have taken real, nutritious food from you and they have given you lollipops. Even if it tastes good, it does not satisfy hunger. Even if it tastes good, it does not fulfill, it does not make you strong. Yes, ambition tastes good. It is a lollipop. Fame, success, taste good, but deep down you remain poor.
Look at your so-called rich people, look a little deeper into them, and they are beggars, worse than beggars. Sometimes it is possible that a beggar may have something inside him – a luminous being. Buddha was a beggar, so was Mahavira. But look at your kings and your rich people – dull and dead. No joy surrounds them. They just go on dragging somehow.
And you have been put on the same track. Somebody is needed to take you out of this conditioning. That’s the function of a master – to uncondition you, to take all the conditioning that your parents have given you. The master is basically against your parents and against your society and against your politicians, hence it is not accidental that the politicians and the parents and the society and the priests are always against a real master whenever he happens. That is where the conflict is.
That’s what I am doing here – taking your wrong conditioning so that your joy can erupt again. It is there, that spring is there, nobody can destroy it. It is existential, it is part of your being, nobody can take it away – it has just been blocked. The spring is there and the fresh water is still running there – but rocks have been put around you. You have been blocked. Once those rocks have been taken away again you will become a child. It will be a rebirth. Again you will start flowing. Again your eyes will have luster and your face will have joy. Again you will become luminous. That’s what Jesus means when he goes on saying, “Only those who are like children will be able to enter into the kingdom of my God.”
You ask: “Brown has said: ‘The ultimate problem is not guilt but the incapacity to live. The illusion of guilt is necessary for an animal that cannot enjoy life, in order to organize a life of non-enjoyment.”
How have you been destroyed in your childhood? That has to be looked into. You were born capable of living – everybody is – then your capacity to live was taken away. And the way, the trick, that was used to take it away was to give you false ideals, pseudo ideals; to move you in directions which are futile, meaningless; to put you on tracks which go nowhere, which always end in a cul-de-sac. And naturally when you are in a cul-de-sac and your life is not going anywhere – or running in circles – an explanation is needed. “Why has this happened to me? Why has this happened to me and not to others?”
That too is in the mind of everybody – “Everybody else is happy, only I am miserable” – because you look only at the faces. And people manage their faces. They have masks. They don’t want to show their misery – what is the point? They keep it hidden. So when you look around you may see that everybody seems to be happy – only you are miserable. And that’s how everybody is thinking – “Everybody else seems to be happy, only I am miserable.” All are miserable.
Misery is there because the society has distracted you. It is not that man is born with an incapacity to live, no, that is not the problem. That’s why I don’t agree. The problem is not that man has no capacity for joy – man has – the problem is that man is not allowed to grow in a natural way.
There are vested interests which don’t allow man to go into joyous ways. They need a miserable man. For their own purposes the miserable man is more suitable than a happy man, because a happy man is a rebel and a miserable man is never a rebel. A miserable man is always ready to obey, always ready to submit. A miserable man is so miserable that he cannot stand on his own; he knows that on his own he is just miserable. So he is ready to fall into anybody’s trap.
Any politician can become the leader if people are miserable. Then any stupid person can become your leader, your prime minister, your president – because he can promise you things, he can promise you great things. And you are so miserable that you trust the promises. If you are happy, nobody can deceive you by promising – because you need not have any promise, you are already happy. With a happy world politicians will disappear.
When you are unhappy you start thinking, “Maybe this life is wasted, maybe I could not manage this life, but if I can manage the next one, the coming one, that is more than enough to ask.” You go to the priest. The priest promises you good in the other life. The politician promises something good in the future in this life, and the priest promises you something good in the other life beyond death. Both go on promising. Promises are needed by miserable people. If you are happy, you will not go to the politician and you will not go to the priest. For what? You are already happy, you are already in paradise. Then the whole profession of the priest and the politician disappears.
These are the exploiters. These are the people who are sitting on your heart and blocking your energies. They can remain in power only if you are miserable. Remember it. By being miserable you are helping a gang of exploiters. Be happy and you bring the greatest revolution in the world.
Sometimes people come to me and they ask, “Why don’t you teach something so that the society can be changed?” That’s what I am doing – but I am doing it very fundamentally. I don’t teach you any social revolution. I don’t say to you, “Go and overthrow this government.” That is meaningless because those who will overthrow the government will become your exploiters. It never changes anything. Down the ages man has been changing the government and the social structure and the economic structure but basically nothing ever changes. Again and again the same thing happens. Man is caught. All hopes are hopeless.
But I am doing something really revolutionary. radical – I am trying to make you happy. It may not be very obvious to you how it is concerned with the revolution of the society – it is. A happy person is beyond being oppressed, exploited, because a happy person needs no promises. A happy person is already happy so he is not worried about paradise or after-life. That is all nonsense A happy person is not worried about tomorrow; the morrow takes care of itself. Jesus says: Look at the lilies in the field They don’t think of the morrow, they don’t toil, they don’t labor. They live an unworried existence. They are just there. But I say unto you that even Solomon attired in all his beautiful, valuable dresses was not so beautiful as these lily-flowers.
That’s what sannyas is all about. I would like you to become a lily, a flower, unconcerned about the future, unconcerned about the past. The past is no more and the future is not yet. Only the present is there. Bloom in it, be happy in it, rejoice in it, celebrate in it, and you bring a great revolution in the world – because you will be getting out of all the traps of the priests and the politicians.
The priests and politicians create guilt in you. They do the harm and then they make you feel guilty. They destroy your capacity to live, to love, to delight, and then they throw the responsibility on you – “It is your sin, it is your wrong-doing that has made you so miserable.” Then they create guilt.
But the basic problem is conditioning. Man should be helped to live a natural life, man should not be conditioned to live an unnatural life. The basic problem is not an incapacity to live – you are born with the capacity to live – the basic problem is how not to allow others to destroy that capacity. Once they destroy, they bring guilt in also. Guilt is their protection. They protect themselves behind the garb of guilt. First they kill you and then they make you guilty that you have committed suicide.

The eighth question:
Osho,
Why do I always act out of fear?
It is the same thing. Fear has been put very deep down into you. You have been made afraid, you have been frightened, you have been put into a very, very fearful state of consciousness.
The child is born helpless but the child is not fearful, remember. He is helpless but not fearful. The child can go and play with a snake and the child can go and try to ride on a lion. The child is not fearful. The child is helpless, that is true. He is delicate, vulnerable. He needs your help to grow. But you exploit his helplessness; you start changing the color of his helplessness you make it, you turn it into fearfulness; you reduce it to fearfulness. And it is very easy to change helplessness into fearfulness.
Because the child is helpless you can always make him feel fear. You can say to him, “We are not going to give you food today,” or “We are going to lock you in the bathroom,” or “We will give you a good beating if you do this.” Or the mother can say, “I am going to leave,” or “I am going to renounce you.” Or the father can say, “I will never come home if you do this again.” You can make the child very afraid. He is so helpless he cannot live without you. He does not even know how to survive without you. And it is not possible for him to survive without you.
Because of this you can exploit him, you can make him afraid. When he is afraid you are powerful. When he is afraid, you know his buttons. Then you can manage whatsoever you want him to do and whatsoever you don’t want him to do. Then you can force your ideas, your religions, your ideologies, your patterns, on him. You have been miserable and you know that you have been miserable; now you will be forcing the same thing on him and you will make him miserable. If you really love your child there is one thing you will never do – you will never make him like you. But every father and every mother always wants the child to be just like him. People feel very happy.
Once a child was born. The father was my colleague in the university. He invited me to see the child. He was thrilled. And on the way to his home he said, “Somebody has said that the child looks like me and many people are saying that the child looks exactly like me.”
When I went to see I told the father, “He looks like you but please remember not to make him like you.” He said, “What are you saying? What else can I do? My child has to be like me.”
Now this father is on an ego trip – as all fathers are. Why does the child have to be like you? Maybe the face looks like you, that is okay. The face does not matter. What matters is his spirit. He has his own spirit. If you try to make it like you it will be a good ego trip for you. People try to be immortal in this way. They will die but their child will live – and he will be just like them, just as fucked-up as they are, just as miserable as they are, just as neurotic as they are.
I told the father, “As far as I know, you have been coming to me many times, for many years, and you have been coming to me because you are miserable. And you want this small child to be just like you? Then he will be miserable. If you really love the child then make a decision, an absolute decision and commitment, that you will avoid one thing – that is that the child should be like you. He can be anybody else – in being somebody else there is some chance of being happy – but at least one thing is certain: if he is like you he will be as miserable as you are.”
But that’s what goes on. You ask me: “why do I always act out of fear?” Because you are still not free of your parents. All fear is from your parents. You may have grown in age but you have not grown in consciousness. Drop your parents.
And I am not saying anything against your parents. I have all compassion for them. Their parents have done the same thing to them. They have suffered a lot. I am not saying be angry with them, I am saying just get rid of them. Drop the conditioning that they have unknowingly put into you. Be free of them, and then you will also have a great compassion and love for them. You will feel sorry for them.

This new collection box has some new features. When you drop in a quarter or more it doesn’t make a sound. Drop in a dime and it tinkles a bell. A nickel blows a whistle and a penny fires a shot, arid when you don’t drop anything in, the box takes your picture.

Now that’s how religion creates fear in you.

I have heard….
A minister went hunting up in the mountains. Suddenly a big bear went for him. He took off so fast you could play checkers on his coat tail, but he couldn’t find any place to hide.
Suddenly he saw a tree – but the lowest limb was twenty feet from the ground. He made a frantic leap for it, but missed it. However, he grabbed it on the way down.

You are full of fear. You are just fear and trembling and nothing else. And everybody else lives on your fear. So nobody is going to help you to drop it because everybody lives on it.
Your wife will not help you to drop it because she lives on it. Wives make their husbands very afraid. Your husband will not help you to drop it, because once you drop fear you may drop the husband himself. It may be just because of fear that you go on staying with this ugly man. Your children will not like you to drop fear. Because you are afraid, your children have some power over you. Your parents will not like you to drop fear. Nobody will like you to drop fear. You have to decide to drop it – because it is against you and in favor of all. It is destructive for you and a good opportunity for everybody to exploit you.

And the last question:
Osho,
I am suffering from writer's block! I wonder, how is it that lately, as I feel more and more overwhelming gratitude and love, I become less and less able to express it? It pains me that I cannot share what I am experiencing. Your love-sick bard, Maneesha.
It happens, Maneesha. The more you feel for me, the more you will feel incapable of expressing it.
Superficial feelings can be expressed easily; words are adequate for them. Deeper feelings cannot be expressed adequately words are not adequate for them. Words are too superficial. When the feeling goes very deep, it goes beyond words. You can feel it, you can be thrilled by it, you can feel the pulsation all over your body and being, but you cannot put it into words. You can try and you can feel that you have failed. When you put it into words something very tiny comes up – and it was so huge when you were experiencing it, so enormous. It was so overwhelming. Now you put it in a word and it is just a drop – and it was an ocean when you were feeling it.
I can understand Maneesha’s problem. She is my bard and the deeper she goes into me and into herself, the more and more difficult it will be for her, the more and more incapable she will feel: But that’s a good sign. That’s a sign that something really tremendous is happening.
Go on trying to express – because even if it cannot be expressed, it has to be expressed. Even if you cannot put the ocean of your heart into the words, don’t be worried. If even only a few drops get into them, that’s good – because even those few drops will lead people towards me, even those few drops will give them a taste, a taste of the ocean.
And remember one thing, even a single drop of the ocean is as salty as the whole ocean. And even a single drop of the ocean is as much water as the whole ocean. It may be small but it has the same flavor. It may be very small but it has the same secret. If you can understand a single drop of water you have understood all the water that exists on the earth or other planets. Even if water exists on some unknown planet, it will be H20. We don’t know, but if water exists on some unknown planet, it will be H20 and nothing else. We know the secret. A single drop of water has the secret.
So don’t be worried. The song is going to become and more difficult. The deeper you go. the more you will feel dumb. The deeper you go, the more you will feel that silence is needed, the more you will want to sing the song in silence. But silence will not be understood by people. And Maneesha is my bard so she cannot be allowed.
So let the writer’s block be there. I will go on hammering on it and destroying it. And you go on singing your song.
Enough for today.

============================================================

There was once a Sufi who wanted to make sure that his disciples would, after his death, find the right teacher of the way for them.
He therefore, after the obligatory bequests laid down by law, left his disciples seventeen camels, with this order:
“You will divide the camels among the three of you in the following proportions: the oldest shall have half, the middle in age one-third, and the youngest shall have one-ninth.”
As soon as he was dead and the will was read, the disciples were at first amazed at such an inefficient disposition of their master’s assets.
Some said, “Let us own the camels communally.”
Others sought advice and then said, “We have been told to make the nearest possible division.”
Others were told by a judge to sell the camels and divide the money.
And yet others held that the will was null and void because its provisions could not be executed.
Then they fell to thinking that there might be some hidden wisdom in the master’s bequest, so they made enquires as to who could solve insoluble problems.
Everyone they tried failed, until they arrived at the door of the son-in law of the prophet, Hazrat Ali.
He said, “This is your solution. I will add one camel to the number. Out of the eighteen camels you will give half – nine camels – to the oldest disciple. The second will have a third of the total, which is six camels. The last disciple may have one-ninth, which is two camels. That makes seventeen. One – my camel – is left over to be returned to me.” – which is how the disciples found a teacher for them.
Sufism depends absolutely on the concept of the master. Without the master there is no Sufism. Sufism does not believe in the books, it believes in the living master. One has to come to somebody who has come to know by himself. The books may contain great wisdom, but there is no way to decode it. If you decode it, you will decode it according to your mind. That will falsify the book.
Islam is known as the religion of the book – the Koran. Hinduism is also known as the religion of the book – the Veda. And so is the case with Christianity. The word bible simply means the book.
But Sufism insists that the book cannot help you. No book can help you. Sufis of course have a book which they call The Book of the Books, but it is empty. Nothing is written in it – not even a single word. That is their attitude about books – that although many things will be there, for you it will remain empty, because you can read only that which you know.

Just the other day I heard somebody ask Mulla Nasruddin, “Why did Jesus say ‘Blessed are the poor in spirit?’”
Mulla thought for a while and then said, “Blessed are the poor in spirit for they have no money to buy booze.”

Another time somebody asked Mulla Nasruddin, “And what is the eleventh commandment?”
He said, “Thou shalt not get caught.”

Your mind will become your master when you are reading a book, and the mind is the problem. This mind can continue perfectly well with a book. The book is dead. The mind has to interpret, comment, decide what the meaning is. So when you are reading a book, you are reading your own mind in an indirect way. The book goes on throwing you back to yourself.
You may become very learned but you will never become a man who really knows. You will know many things about God but you will never know God. And you will know many things about truth but you will never know truth. And to know about is just meaningless. To know is the thing, not to know about. To know about means you have missed. But the books can give you a very, very strong feeling that you know; without knowing at all you can have the feeling that you know – and that will become your greatest barrier to knowing. That will become a China Wall around you; your bridges will be broken. How to bridge? How to connect? How to attain to this connection with the divine?
The divine seems so far away; the divine seems almost impossible. The God is not obvious; the God is not close by. You look all around and the existence seems to be almost empty of God. That’s what Martin Heidegger says – “I have not found a single thing in the world which I can call sacred.”
From the ordinary standpoint he is right. Where can you find the sacred? The sacred is missing – not because the sacred is not there, but because you don’t know how to feel the sacred. You have not yet evolved that intuitive capacity that can feel the sacred. God is far away; the world is very close by. Matter is all around and you never come across the spirit. Hence religion remains just a theory, it never becomes an experience.
Sufism believes that you can approach God only through a master.
A master is one who can become a via media, who will bee just between you and the divine – a door through whom you can have a glimpse. He knows – not as knowledge but as experience. His experience has transformed him, transfigured him, transported him to another world. A master lives in two realities together, a master is a paradox. One of his feet is in the world, his other foot is in God. From one side he is just like you and from another side he is just the opposite of you. A master is a paradox. Through the paradox of the master you will be able to reach the divine; there is no other way.
So the first step for a seeker is to fall in love with a master, to seek a master. If you can find a master, half the journey is over. In fact, the most arduous part is over. To find the master is the basic requirement of becoming a Sufi. Sufi seekers travel for thousands of miles in search of a master, in search of the man with whom they can feel in tune, with whom they can vibrate into the unknown, with whom they can take the first step beyond the known.
So the first thing, the first and the most important thing, is to find a master. Sufis say that the greatest blessing of life is to be with a master. If you are not with a master, you have missed the whole opportunity. Then you live with the non-essential; then you never come in contact with the essential. And the only way to come in contact with the essential is to be connected with someone who is in contact.
It is almost like…. Have you seen somebody in a circus or in a carnival, or in an exhibition sitting on an electric chair? The chair looks ordinary. You can’t see that the chair is an electric chair, vibrating with electricity. And you can’t see – because it is not visible to the eyes – that the man’s whole body is electrified. But if you touch the man, you get a shock. The man who is sitting on the electric chair is electrified. You cannot see, but if you touch you are immediately connected with electricity.
So is the case with a master. He’s electrified by the divine. It may not be visible to those who are just spectators; it may become an experience only for those who come close and touch.
Once you have touched a master or the master has touched you, something that has never been in your consciousness has happened. And from that knowing there is no way to fall back. It is irreversible. And once you have felt it, then you know it is. And then you can see the same flame in the trees and in the rivers and in the people. Maybe it is not so clear, maybe it is clouded, hidden behind smoke, asleep, but it is the same whether asleep or awake, hidden behind a cloud of smoke or burning brightly with no smoke. It is the same flame. Once you have touched a master or you have been touched by a master…
Michelangelo painted the Day of Creation in the Sistine Chapel. He changed the whole story, the biblical story. And even the people who were making the Sistine Chapel, who were financing it, and the pope – even they could not detect that he had done something utterly new, something which is not in the Bible.
The Bible says that God created Adam. He created Adam with mud, humus – hence the word human. And then God breathed into the nostrils of Adam – he breathed life. Now Michelangelo must have thought – I was looking in his diaries, there are many references. – he must have thought for many days, “To paint this will look a little awkward. God breathing into the nostrils of Adam? It will look a little awkward to paint it.” So he changed it. He painted one of his most famous paintings: God touching Adam, not breathing. There is just God’s finger there from the unknown. God is high in the heaven, in the clouds; Adam is on the earth. A finger just comes and touches Adam. and that touch makes him alive.
Nobody thought that he had changed the whole story. It is not so in the Bible – not by touch but by breathing into him was Adam made alive. But Michelangelo was a student of Sufism. He was deeply interested in Sufism, and he must have come across the idea of the touch of the master – that the disciple becomes alive by the touch of the master.
Yes, it is a touch. It is the jump of a flame from one lamp to another lamp. Once you have felt it – and it is a feeling, there is no way of describing it – once you have felt it, you have become aware of the sacred. Then it is all over, then only it is.
So Sufis say that the greatest blessing of life is to find a master – one who knows, one who sees, one who is. You are only when you are in God – before that you are just empty, before that you are a house without a master, before that you are just a dwelling where nobody dwells, before that you only think that you are, but you are not. You are very momentary, you are bubble-like. You don’t have any integrity, you don’t have any center, you don’t have any soul.
Gurdjieff, who was immensely impressed by Sufi ideas, who was, in fact, a Sufi master, introduced a very new concept into the Western mind. In fact, nobody had talked about it in that way before. Gurdjieff introduced the idea that you have no soul. The soul has to be created. Don’t remain placid, smug, and don’t remain confident that you have a soul. All the great religions have told you that you have a soul, that it is already there – but Gurdjieff introduced a very new insight. He said that the soul is not there; there is only a possibility of it. You can have it, but you may miss it. There is no certainty about it. You have to create it. Yes, if you want, you can create it, but don’t take it for granted. Don’t think that it is already there inside you.
This is a Sufi insight. Sufis say that only the master is. You are not. One who has seen God exists for the first time. You exist only when you confront God. You exist only when God looks into your eyes and you look into his eyes. You exist only when you are touched by God and you touch God. Before that, your existence was just an emptiness, a dark night of the soul. It was just a stumbling, a hoping, a waiting. It was very insubstantial; it was dream-stuff. It had no reality in it.
A master is one who is really there. He has presence. He has a kind of radiance. And you can find it and you can observe it. Sometimes just sit near a hotel or by the side of the road and watch people passing by. Start looking for one thing: can you make a distinction? Most people walk like empty shells – and they are many, they are the majority – but sometimes you come across a person who has a kind of presence. You can observe that he is surrounded by an aura, you can feel that he has magnetism. You may have unknowingly observed sometimes that while you were sitting with a few friends, another person comes and suddenly the whole company becomes alive – as if the coming of this new man infuses you with life. Just a moment before, all was dull, you were sad, you were just dragging, talking – talking rubbish. One has to talk. You were passing time. Then a man or a woman enters and suddenly there is a radiance; everything flares up, everything heightens, everything is turned on. Nobody is off. A man of presence has entered.
It happens rarely, because men of presence are rare. It is very rare to find two men of presence in one company, it is very rare. But whenever a man of presence is there, it is loud and clear. If you are even a little bit alert you can see the quality. The empty man exhausts you. If you are sitting by the side of the empty man, he is a parasite. His emptiness pulls your energy into himself, and there it disappears. He is like a black hole.
Physicists say there are black holes in space. If anything comes into the area of the black hole it will be simply sucked in and it will disappear out of existence. A black hole is a star which has collapsed, collapsed into itself. And a star is a big thing. This earth is very small. The sun is sixty thousand times bigger than the earth and our sun is a very, very mediocre star. There are suns – stars – which are a million times bigger. When a star collapses, dies – everything has to die, whatsoever is born has to die – when a star dies, it collapses into itself towards its center. It has great gravitation. Because of the gravitation everything is sucked in. It creates a great negative atmosphere around itself and whatsoever comes close by will be sucked in.
Einstein has said that even sunlight, even sun rays coming closer, will not be able to get back. Now ordinarily it is very difficult to keep the sunlight caught; it will be reflected. But from a black hole it will not be reflected, it will simply be caught and will disappear. Anything that comes too close to the black hole will simply go out of existence.
A man who is empty is a small black hole. That’s why you sometimes feel very tired by meeting a certain person. You avoid him. Even to say hello to him on the road is tiring. Just by passing him he takes something of you, a lump of energy disappears. You are poorer by just saying hello to that man or seeing that man. He is an empty, negative space. Whosoever comes by, he sucks. These people are tiring people, exhausting people, parisitical.
Just the opposite is the case when a man has presence. When a man has presence he is showering energy. He has too much energy. He is overflowing with energy. Whenever you come close to such a man you are blessed. Suddenly you feel the shower. You are close by a waterfall. You feel cool, you feel tranquil, you feel vital. You feel a kind of power and also a kind of poetry arising in you – all together. You would like to be with this man again and again. Just to be in the vicinity of this man is life-enhancing.
The man of presence spreads his energy all around. He is reaching people and he has something to give. He is a giver. He is an emperor. That’s why in the East we have called sannyasins “swami.” “Swami” means a master – one who has something to give, one who is not a beggar.
A person who is empty, who has no soul yet, is a beggar. He is constantly begging, he is a begging bowl. He will take something from you. If you go into a crowd, and you have any understanding about your life and the way energy functions, you will always feel that you come home a little less than you went. A chunk of your being has been taken by the crowd. The crowd is always tiring, exhausting, because in crowds you will not find a man of presence; you will find only people who are absent, only people who ate sleepy, only people who are empty.
The master is a man of presence. He has utter authenticity, a substantial being, he has soul. This soul has to be created – you are just a dwelling. You have to provoke the guest to come, you have to invite the guest to come. The house is ready but the guest has not come yet.
Sufis say, “How are you going to learn the ways of being present unless you are in the presence of a man who is present” That’s what a master is. A master is not a teacher; a master is a magnetic force, a magnetic field of positive energy, of presence.
Sufis say that whenever you come to the master you have baraka. You have grace. That is the meaning of the Hindu satsang – being in the presence of the master to receive his grace. He is giving, and you are not obliged when you receive his grace, because even if you had not been there he would have given. Even if nobody had been there he would have given – that is just natural. As rivers flow, as a flower opens and the fragrance is released, so is it the natural thing with a master. He has bloomed and the fragrances are released to the winds. Whether somebody will receive them or not, that is not the point. If somebody can receive them, he will be blessed; if nobody receives them, then too the master will go on showering. He does not shower especially for you – he cannot help it, he has to shower. Just as light goes on showering from a lamp, and fragrance from a flower, so is the case with a master.
Sufis are right. They say that a master is one who knows, one who sees, one who is. That has to be remembered: one who is. To come into the presence of one who is, is the first step on the path. Before that, all is futile; before that, all is frustrating. The fulfillment starts only when you have become connected with one who is fulfilled. And this relationship between a master and a disciple is a love affair; it is not a rational thing. It is more of feeling than of thinking.
So those who think too much may go on missing. Only those who feel can connect. Remember, this shift has to happen: from thinking you have to go to feeling. Feeling is closer, closer to something in you that is called intuition. Thinking is the farthest point from intuition. Thinking is a kind of tuition. You have been taught by others – that is tuition. Something that has not been taught to you and blooms in you, that is intuition. Nobody has taught you – no school, no university, no college. Nobody has said anything about it to you. It explodes in you – that is intuition. You need not go anywhere, you only need to go inside yourself. Feeling is closer to intuition.
I don’t expect the impossible. I don’t say just be intuitive – that you cannot do. Just now if you can do one thing – move from thinking to feeling – it will be enough. Then from feeling to intuition it is very easy. But to move from thinking to intuition is very difficult. They don’t meet, they are polarities. Feeling is just in the middle. From feeling, thinking and intuition are at the same distance. If you go this way you reach thinking; if you go that way you reach intuition.
In feeling both meet and merge. Something of thinking remains in feeling and something of intuition too. Then you can choose.
To find a master means to have a change in your mind – you have to become more feeling. If you go to a master with all kinds of thoughts, those thoughts will not allow you to be there. The thoughts will not function as bridges, they will function as walls.
People are so alone because they don’t create bridges, they create walls – and then they suffer. And the walls are created by you. When you are searching for a master, remember that you have to change from thinking to feeling. When you come to a man whom you can feel as a presence…. Even if you are very caught up in your thinking, the presence will be felt. It is such a vital thing that you will feel it – but then you have to allow it and you have to slip more and more into the feeling space so you can be more and more in contact with the presence that is there. Once the contact starts happening, then it takes you on the greatest journey of your life, the greatest adventure, the greatest ecstasy.
The first step, Sufis say, is to come into the presence of one who is present. Before that, all is frustration; before that, there is no life. Only after that is there life. Life starts only when you are connected with a master. Before that, it was only a dream, a mirage. Before that, it was only thoughts and thoughts and thoughts, a desert land. Only feelings bloom; thoughts never bloom. Thoughts are very unproductive, uncreative, because they are borrowed. They are never original. Not a single reality can be created by thought; not a single reality can be discovered by thought. Thought is very impotent. All that is known is known by feeling; all that is discovered is discovered by feeling; all that is created is created by feeling.
The second step is surrender…and then there are no more steps. The whole path is covered in just two simple steps: one is coming in contact with someone who is in contact with God, and the second is to surrender to him. Sufis say that two simple steps are enough. In two steps the journey of millions of miles is finished. The first is the most arduous. Once you have come into the presence, by and by you will start surrendering. You cannot resist long. The real thing is to come in contact.
Sometimes it happens that you don’t come in contact, and you surrender. Then your surrender is false, then your surrender is from the mind, then your surrender is just pseudo. Then you are pretending that you have surrendered. but you have not surrendered. It is just a strategy – you want to exploit the man of presence. There is no way to exploit him. You want to gain something. You think, “Okay, if surrender is the condition, I will surrender.” But your surrender cannot be surrender. Surrender has to happen, you cannot do it, you cannot will it. It you will it, you can take it back. If you do it, you can undo it. Surrender is a happening.
So go step by step. And there are only two steps. First be suffused with the presence of a master, be drunk – and then a surrender comes on its own. You start feeling that you are bowing down. Don’t be in a hurry. Sometimes it happens that you do things in a hurry – in this age particularly, hurry is one of the problems. Everybody is in a hurry, wants to do everything fast and soon. So if you come to a master and you hear that surrender is needed, you are ready to surrender. You say, “Why not? Let us see. If something happens, good; if nothing happens, there is nothing to lose.” But this surrender won’t help. This is not the surrender Sufis are talking about, that’s why they say it is the second step, not the first. The first is to be in the presence of the master.
There is a sannyasin, Praghosh, who goes on writing to me again and again – “Why, Osho? You look very ordinary to me.” I have not answered him yet but now the right moment has come to answer. I don’t look ordinary, I am ordinary. But what is his problem? I’m not worried by my ordinariness, I’m immensely happy with it. So why is Praghosh in trouble? His trouble is that he wants me to be very, very extraordinary – a man of miracles or something. Some nonsense is in his mind. He wants me to be stupid – to produce ash or Swiss watches or do some miracles. He is in search of a magician, not of a master.
This search is of the ego. He wants me to be very extra-ordinary so that his ego can feel very good that it has surrendered to an extraordinary man. If by my touch I cure people, if by my touch I make dead people alive, then Praghosh will be very happy: this is the man to surrender to. But then you will not be surrendering to me. It will be your ego-trip. You will feel very good and satisfied that you are the disciple of such an extraordinary man.
Sufis don’t believe in miracles. They think they are stupid and only stupid people are attracted towards miracles. A master is ordinary. A master is a normal man – a regular. A master is so ordinary that he has no kind of ego in him. All extra-ordinariness is a kind of ego. A master is simply nobody. His ordinariness is a nobodiness. Only people who suffer from inferiority seek extraordinariness. If one has come home there is no search for extraordinariness, there is no search for speciality. To be ordinary is so extraordinarily beautiful.
But I can understand his trouble. He wants to have an ego trip through me. So he is disturbed – Osho is not doing any kind of miracles. He is a sannyasin, but what kind of surrender is this? This is not surrender. He has not even come into my presence yet, he has not yet got what I call that “connectivity.” He has not been touched by me and he has not touched me yet. And he is a sannyasin. He must have been in a hurry. He should have waited a little.
Just the other day his woman came – Urmi, his woman. And she was crying and she was saying, “What to do, Osho? Praghosh puts me on such a high pedestal. He almost thinks of me as if I am a goddess, and then he makes me feel guilty because I am a human being. He expects me to be a goddess, and if I don’t behave like a goddess, then he makes me feel guilty.” While she was relating her misery and story I was thinking, “So he is doing that to you too.” That’s what he wants to do with me and to me. He wants to put me on a high pedestal – to be a miracle man or something extraordinary that doesn’t happen.
Once he has put me on a high pedestal he will be in control. Then he will be powerful over me because he will have the control. If he wants to take me off the pedestal – it is his pedestal, he can. That’s what he is doing to his woman too. First he puts her on a high pedestal and then he tortures her. He becomes powerful.
How the ego goes on playing tricks! You have to watch. On the surface it looks just the opposite – that he is such a humble man, and he puts his woman in such a high place that she is a goddess. You will think he is very humble. He is not. He is very tricky; he is being very political. And he may not be consciously doing it; it may be just his unconscious ego trip. Once you have put the woman up as a goddess, you are powerful. Then she cannot be human, then you can find faults with her, and then she will be afraid of you. Afraid, because you can put her down any time. That is what he wants to do with me too.
First he wants to put me on a high pedestal, then he becomes powerful. Now see the game. Even the disciple wants to become powerful over the master. If I am ordinary, then he is no longer powerful, then he cannot put me anywhere lower than I am. I am just on plain ground – where can he put me down to? Then he has no power. Otherwise he can come and say, “Osho, you are so high, don’t do this, don’t say that.”
I have been watching this. For these twenty years I have come in contact with millions of people and this has been one of my observations – that everybody wants to control the master. People come to me and they say, “You should not say this because that will bring your image down. You should not say this.”
An Indian came just a few days ago and he was saying, “You should not talk about homosexuality, even if somebody has asked the question. And even if it is not wrong, you should not say so, otherwise people will think you are in support of homosexuality.” He was saying that this would tarnish my image.
People have been suggesting all kinds of things to me during these past twenty years: you should not do this. you should not say this. I used to stay in Jaina families. They would tell me, “You should not eat in the night because if you eat in the night and somebody comes to know, they will wonder what kind of saint you are.” Now if I want to be on their pedestal 1 have to be hungry!
I stayed in one ashram – Vinoba’s ashram – and I got up at six. Vinoba got up at three. So his disciples came to me and they said, “What are you doing? You should get up at three, otherwise people in this ashram will wonder what kind of saint you are – because we have become accustomed to seeing the saint get up at three.”
I said, “Don’t think that I am a saint – I am going to sleep up to six. What you think about me is of no value. I’m not going to disturb my sleep just to be your saint. Forget about it.”
“You should not do this, you should not be that, you should not say that, you should not comment on this” – so many advisors. And they all think they love me, and they all think they are followers, disciples. They are just helping their master to have a good public image. And they go on saying, “We don’t say that you are wrong. We are just saying it because of the public image.”
Now this Praghosh wants to put me on a high pedestal, then he becomes powerful. then if I want to remain on the high pedestal I have to look to Praghosh. Where is Praghosh? Otherwise I will not be on that high pedestal. Who will put me that high? Remember, Praghosh, expecting me to be extraordinary is just your ego. You want to be a disciple of an extraordinary man, then your ego will feel very, very enhanced, fulfilled.
I am ordinary, and I am absolutely ordinary. I don’t look ordinary – that is again a trick. He is asking me “Why do you look so ordinary?” He is not saying “You are ordinary.” He cannot believe that I am ordinary. Maybe I’m just pretending to be ordinary, then there is some hope for him. Some day or other I will show my extraordinary miracles. Praghosh, you are hoping against hope. It is not going to happen. I am simply ordinary. It is not that I am pretending or playing a game of being ordinary. I am ordinary. And because I am ordinary there is a possibility for you to surrender. And I’m not going to do anything that can give you any notion that I am extraordinary, I am not going to do anything. Only then will your surrender be true.
If you can surrender to an ordinary man, the ego will disappear. Sufis have never done miracles. Sufis have always been very, very ordinary people. That is one of the basics of Sufism – because the master exists to help you surrender and he can help you to surrender only when he is nobody. If he is somebody then being connected with him will make you feel somebody. You will feel good that you are no ordinary person – you are connected to an extraordinary person, so you are extraordinary.
Connected to a nobody – that’s what surrender is. And through surrender you will come to see that the ordinary life is so full of beauty and benediction. These trees are ordinary and these birds are ordinary and this sky is ordinary and this earth is ordinary, and God is ordinary. There is no ego, so who bothers to be extraordinary? Existence is ordinary but this ordinariness is so beautiful; it is a beautitude. And to be ordinary is to be religious.
Those who are here with me and who are really connected with me will know what I am talking about. Why this hankering for the extraordinary? There must be some kind of inferiority complex in Praghosh, so he’s seeking some superior being. If he cannot be superior, at least he can be the follower of a superior being. But it is an urge coming out of an inferiority complex. In surrender you surrender all – your inferiority complex, your superiority complex, your ego, your humbleness – you surrender all. A surrender has to be total. You put yourself in a bundle and you throw it at the feet of the master and you say, “I disappear from this moment.” And from that moment there is no question.
How can there be a question from that moment? Then you don’t question the master. It is finished. Question before you surrender as much as you want to question, but once you have surrendered, there is no need. And if the questioning still continues, if you are still suspicious and doubtful, then the surrender has not happened.
The first step is to come in contact with a master, and the second is surrender. And then, Sufis say, the whole journey is complete.
How to find a master? Not by thought, of course. By thinking, you go on keeping yourself in the same rut. in the same old rut, in the past. By thinking, you remain old, you stop all possibilities of being new. And watch, you are constantly thinking, there is a constant chattering inside – the internal talk. Even while you are listening to me – look in for just a second – the chattering continues, there is a constant internal talk.
This internal talk divides you from reality. Once this internal talk disappears, even for a few moments, you are one – one with reality, one with the master, one with the beloved, one with God. Whenever you want to be one with something – with your woman, with your man, with your master, with your God, with the existence – whenever you want to be one with something, in a unison, this internal talk has to disappear. That is the only barrier.
Without dropping internal talk, you cannot find a master. The question arises in many people’s minds: “How to find a master?” You will have to learn ways to be silent. And when you come into the presence of somebody who is present, sit silently. Collect yourself together, calm down, don’t think – because thinking is an activity – just be. It will be difficult, but if you try, then for a few moments it will happen. They will be very, very small moments, just intervals; they come and they go. But even in that interval, like a flash, something will descend on you. You will be connected, disconnected, connected, disconnected, but it will happen. And once you have touched somebody who is, for even a single moment, you will know the taste of it. Even a drop of it will give you the taste of it. And then all other tastes start disappearing; then that taste becomes your only taste. Then all desires start converging into one desire – how to be with this man and how to be totally with him? And every day it goes on growing. One day suddenly you find you are surrendered. Yes, one day you find you are surrendered. It takes you unaware, you were not planning to surrender – it has happened.
Internal talk is the way of the old self, is the way to remain hung-up with the past, is the way to remain in the ego. And you are constantly thinking, day in, day out. It is always there like an undercurrent. Once it is broken, you fall into the world of intuition.
Intuition is hiding there just behind this layer of internal talk, so learn how to be without internal talk. That is the way to find a master. And it will be easier for you to learn sitting by the side of the sea, looking at the roaring waves – when there is nothing much to think about, and you can just go on looking. Lying down on the grass looking at the sky, in the night looking at the stars, watching the trees – there is nothing much to think about. There is no need to think about stars. They are there, so beautifully there, you can just be with them.
Learn first to be with nature, because nature is silent. It does not respond, it knows no language. So you will be able to fall below the level of internal talk. And then start searching, then start looking for people who have a presence. When you come near a person who has a presence you will suddenly see that you are infused with energy, you are vibrating with a new rhythm. A dance has entered you. Each cell and fiber of your being is pulsating. You are very close to something immense, something incredible.
It is said of Buddha that on the day he became enlightened he started feeling a few hours before that that day something immense was just around the comer. It was driving him crazy. He could not figure out what it was, but something was there around the comer, something was going to happen. That urgency became very, very penetrating. At the last moment, just a few hours before he became enlightened…. It was almost like a pregnant woman. Her nine months are over and any moment it is going to happen, the child is going to happen. But the pregnant woman knows, she has a visible symptom – the child is there kicking inside her belly. But when you are going to be reborn into buddhahood, into satori, samadhi, nothing is visible. And something is kicking in the belly.
Buddha was sitting underneath the tree where he became enlightened and a woman offered him some sweets in a bowl. He ate the sweets and went to the river to wash the bowl. And it was coming, it was everywhere, he could feel it. It became so urgent that he did something which he had never done before. He put the bowl in the river and he said, to no one in particular, to existence itself, “If something is going to happen, give me some indication. Don’t drive me crazy.”
Buddha did not believe in any God so he could not address God. He was not talking to anybody in particular, he was simply talking to existence, or talking to himself. “Give me a visible indication. Let this be the indication: if this bowl starts flowing upstream then I will be satisfied that something is going to happen – because it is so heavy on me.” And the story is beautiful. The story says that the bowl started floating upstream. Within seconds it disappeared upstream. Then Buddha was satisfied. Then he rested underneath the tree. “Yes, it is going to happen.” And by the morning it had happened.
This is just a parable. Don’t take it literally. Don’t think that the bowl really started floating upstream. It simply says that to be connected with God is as absurd a phenomenon as a bowl floating upstream. It is against all the so-called laws, against the law of gravitation. It is against all the so-called laws that we are aware of. It is a new phenomenon, it is a new law functioning. Things are upside-down. What has never happened before is going to happen. The consciousness was always empty; now it is going to be fulfilled. The consciousness was always going outwards; now the consciousness is going inwards. That is the meaning of the bowl floating upstream. The consciousness was always going low, downwards; now it is rising high, upwards; that is the meaning of the bowl floating upstream. A new law penetrates.
To be connected with a master is the beginning of a new world, a new universe. For that you will have to sacrifice the old. And to sacrifice the old, nothing else is needed – only the internal talk has to be sacrificed. That keeps you a captive in the old reality. That is the world that has to be dropped, that is the world that has to be renounced. And that is what surrender is. When you have seen something new which you have never seen before, when you have felt the presence of a man who IS, who is a man of God, then this is what is needed: you surrender your internal talk, you bow down.
In the East this has been symbolic – the disciple puts his head at the feet of the master. It is just symbolic, it has nothing to do with your physical head. It is simply symbolic. The head is the symbol of thinking, of mind. The disciple puts his mind at the master’s feet and he says, “Now you take care.” And the master takes care.
In fact, when you surrender to a master you have nothing to surrender. Never think for a single moment that you have done something great. In fact, the master has been really compassionate that he accepted you, because now the responsibility will be his. That is the meaning of this story.
There was once a Sufi who wanted to make sure that his disciples would, after his death, find the right teacher of the way for them.
Not only while he is alive will he help you, the master will even make provisions for when he is gone. He will make arrangements, because those who have trusted in him should not be left in the middle. This Sufi master is just on his deathbed. A few disciples have arrived, a few have reached, but many are still struggling.
Now remember that many disciples of this master must have arrived. Why couldn’t they function as teachers? To know is one thing, but to help others to know is quite another. Not every enlightened person is a master and not every teacher is enlightened. There are people who are good teachers, great teachers, they can teach beautifully. They can be very articulate people with an immense capacity to teach or make things clear, but they may not have known themselves. Then all that they are trying to teach is borrowed and dead. And there are people who may have known, but are not capable of teaching – because teaching has nothing to do with just knowing.
For example, you may have seen a beautiful sunrise, but that does not mean that you can paint it, that you can come home and paint it for your children and show them that this was the beautiful morning you have seen. And it is possible that if you describe that beautiful morning to somebody who has not seen it and who is a painter, he can paint it without seeing it. And his painting will be better than your painting. Your painting will be nothing. It will not give any idea of what you have seen or what you are talking about.
The same is the case with the inner journey. There are teachers who have not heard but who are articulate people; and there are masters who have known but who are not articulate. The rare phenomenon is when a master is a teacher too, when an enlightened person is articulate too. He has known it and he has the ability, the art, to help others know it.
This Sufi was dying. There must have been a few of his disciples who had become enlightened, but they were not teachers. So he must have been worried – what is going to happen to those who are in the middle? The master must provide. He must find a way for them to find a master.
Now Sufis work in very, very strange ways, but they know how to work. The master could have said, “Go to Hazrat Ali” – Hazrat Ali was the son-in-law of Mohammed. “Go to Ali,” he could have said. It would have been so easy. But that would not have been right. He wanted them to find him themselves – because when you find something yourself, it has immense value. When somebody says something and you do it, it is no longer so valuable. Then you are doing your duty.
If when the master is dying he says, “When I am dead you go to Hazrat Ali,” you will follow the old man. You will say, “We will have to go to Hazrat Ali.” You may like Hazrat Ali, or you may not like Hazrat Ali – it will be a kind of obligation, a duty. Then the whole point will be missed. The master wants you to seek the new master. The master wants you to grope in the dark, so that when you have found, you have the feeling that you have found. This is one of the most important things to remember.
Those people who found Mohammed were immensely profited. But now there are millions of Mohammedans. They have not found Mohammed themselves, their fathers told them. It has not been their own search. Now they are just so-so, lukewarm Mohammedans – as there are lukewarm Christians. The first disciples who had searched for Jesus and found him were thrilled. They had really found something on their own. Their whole life was transformed. But now your father says, “Christ is the savior. Christ saves. He is the salvation. You go to Christ.” And he takes you to the church. You go reluctantly, because nobody likes anybody else’s truth. That is a basic arrangement in life. It is built-in – that nobody likes anybody else’s truth because anybody else’s truth is a lie to you.
So the master could have said “Go to Hazrat Ali” – it would have been easier. Ali was there in the same place and he was a well known man, one of the rarest followers of Mohammed; a man of great insight. The master could have said, “I am dying, now it will be difficult for you to walk on the path that you were following with me. You go to Ali, he will help.” But that would have missed the basic thing: the master has to be found. You have to take a risk, you have to search, you have to surrender. It would have been too secure. From the old man you would have heard and you would have said, “Okay. So when you are dead we will go to Ali.” It would have been simple, but of no help.
So the old Sufi created a device – a very strange one.
He therefore, after the obligatory bequests laid down by law, left his disciples seventeen camels, with this order…
He must have been a wandering dervish with camels. He must have been wandering all over the country with his disciples. He leaves seventeen camels with the order:
“You will divide the camels among the three of you in the following proportions: the oldest shall have half, the middle in age one-third, and the youngest shall have one-ninth.”
Now this is very strange and absurd, illogical – but masters are illogical, they are not much worried about logic. He used it as a device. It was something that could not be done mathematically.
As soon as he was dead and the will was read, the disciples were at first amazed at such an inefficient disposition of their master’s assets.
They were amazed. They must have become a little doubtful, because what kind of arrangement has he made? Seventeen camels: half to be given – so one camel will have to be cut up. Then one third has to be given – so a few camels will have to be murdered. How can you divide alive animals in this way? This is so absurd. The idea must have come to them, “Had the man gone senile or mad? He was so old, maybe he had lost all ideas about how to figure things out.” This was so absurd, so blatantly absurd. Doubt must have arisen; they must have been puzzled. that was the device. The master wanted them to be puzzled. Now watch, you will be surprised. You may not have understood that point.
Before you can choose another master, the old master has to be lost – otherwise how can you choose a new master? The old man had made a perfect device. It was so absurd that they would laugh. They would say, “This old man was finished, so it is better that he is dead and we are free. It is good now to search somewhere else. If this man had been alive we would still have been clinging to him, and he has gone mad.” The master condemned himself so that they wouldn’t go on hanging on to the past master and his memory, so that the past was closed, the chapter was finished. They could start a new chapter in their lives.
Some said, “Let us own the camels communally.”
Now logic entered; now they started thinking about what to do. The order cannot be fulfilled as it was so they would have to find a way. Now interpretations, thinking entered. The order was simply absurd.
Somebody suggested, “Let us own the camels communally.” They were trying to find a way out.
Others sought advice and then said, “We have been told to make the nearest possible division.”
So somebody, a wise man, a knowledgeable man, must have suggested, “It is simple. Make the nearest possible division. Don’t be foolish. You are not to cut the camels up, just the nearest possible, the approximate, will be right.”
But remember, Sufis don’t believe in approximate truth. They are very exact people. They mean what they say and they say what they mean.
First the disciples had thought amongst themselves that it was better to own the camels communally. That was the closest – to own them communally. Then they went to ask somebody. Now things started going farther and farther away from the master’s intention. Some said,
“Make the nearest possible division.”
Others were told by a judge to sell the camels and divide the money…
Now things have become very, very worldly-wise. This is perfectly okay. Why bother? You can divide the money. Sell the camels.
And yet others held that the will was null and void because its provisions could not be executed.
This is the farthest. Some people said, “It is not possible. Drop the whole idea. The will is null and void because it cannot be done in the first place.”
Now there are so many interpretations. The disciples started thinking. When a master gives you an order, it is not to be thought over; it has to be listened to, it has to be meditated upon, not contemplated. Otherwise you will miss the message. You have to meditate over it, you have to keep it in your womb, you have to sleep on it. You have to keep it there inside you and wait – just wait, keep it inside. Remember it and wait. Don’t start interpreting. Your interpretations are your interpretations and are going to be meaningless. And they are not only meaningless, they can be harmful also.

A man jailed for twenty years kept his sanity by befriending an ant that used to share his cell. He even made a two-story home for him in a matchbox. To while away the hours the convict made a tiny guitar, and in five years he taught the ant to sing and play the guitar. In the long winter evenings the ant was of great consolation, giving recitals and concerts for his benefactor.
In another five years the convict had taught the ant to dance and by his twelfth year he was also an accomplished uillean pipe player.
As the day of his release approached, the convict began to realize that he had in his possession the greatest television performer ever known. He would be rich, famous….
On the day of his release, the ex-convict rushed to the nearest pub to celebrate his liberty. He ordered a pint and while he drank it he produced the matchbox, shook the ant onto the counter of the deserted bar and asked for a tune. The ant rose to the occasion with a lovely rendering of The Heart Bowed Down. He was powerful. His owner, so overcome with joy, called over the barman and nodded towards the ant.
“What do you think of that?” he said.
Whereupon the barman raised his hand, brought it down on the counter and killed the ant.
“Sorry about that, sir,” he said, “it is the hot weather.”

Now the barman had his own interpretation. He did not look at this ant. It must have been an everyday thing – somebody, a customer, would call and would say, “Look at the ant on the table,” and he would kill it and say, “It is the hot weather.”
Now he has killed one of the most precious ants. That’s what happens when you bring your interpretations in.
The master left a great device through which the disciples were going to find their new master. But the interpretations would kill the ant. all the things that were suggested to them were against the will. And nobody had even an inkling of an idea about what the master really meant.

An old Irish Catholic lady was lying on her deathbed. The priest was called to issue the last rites. The priest took her hand and said, “Now Mary, you know where you are going, don’t you?”
“Yes, Father,” she said.
“And you have been good all your life, not sinned, said your prayers every day and been a pious woman?”
“Ah yes, Father, I have always been a good Catholic,” said Mary.
“Then I have a question to ask you, Mary, before you go to meet St. Peter. Are you ready to answer, Mary?” said Father Patrick.
“Oh yes. Father. ask me anything.”
“Well Mary, what I want to know is, do you want a white lining to your coffin, or a purple lining?”
“What is the difference, Father?” said Mary.
“Well,” said the Father, “if you have really been a good woman, not lusted, committed adultery, never stolen, envied, been greedy, or used the name of the Lord in vain, and been a good Catholic, you shall have a white lining to your coffin. But, if you have been a sinner, lusted, committed adultery, been greedy, vain, envious, stolen or used the Lord’s name in vain and been a bad Catholic, you will have to have a purple lining to your coffin. Now what I want to know is, what color will you be wanting in your coffin?”
Mary closed her eyes, thought for a moment and said, “Well Father, I would like a white lining with a little dash of purple here and there.”

Your interpretations are going to be reflections of your mind. Whatsoever you say reflects you. So when a master gives you a device, you are not to think about it – otherwise you will miss it. Thinking is the sure way to miss it. You have to meditate upon it. And meditation does not mean thinking, it simply means keeping it in your awareness, just keeping it there, not forgetting it – that’s all. Sitting silently, keeping it there, not forgetting it – that’s all. Not doing anything positive about it, just letting it be there. And sooner or later something will open inside you and you will have a vision. And that vision will be the meaning of the device. Your internal talk will have to disappear to know the meaning. If your internal talk continues…
Not only did the disciples think about it themselves, they went to ask other people. Now that was foolish. What has a judge to do with it? It is not a legal matter. In fact, it is not a will. The master is not concerned with the camels and how they are to be divided. How can a master be concerned with such non-essential things?
Then they went to a lawyer. Now how is a lawyer concerned with it? It has nothing to do with the law. It has nothing to do with this ordinary world. They must have gone to wise people – so-called wise people – wise in the ways of the world: clever, cunning, calculating. They suggested all these things, but the disciples were fortunate that they didn’t get involved in any interpretation.
Then they fell to thinking that there might be some hidden wisdom in the master’s bequest, so they made inquires as to who could solve insoluble problems.
Then they came upon one thing, stumbled upon one thing: that the problem seemed to be insoluble. Whatever solutions were given didn’t seem to be pertinent, adequate. No solution seemed to fit the situation perfectly. The problem seemed to be insoluble, and it became more insoluble as they collected advice from people. So now one idea arose in their consciousness: they should seek somebody who could solve insoluble problems. That’s what Zen people call a koan, an insoluble problem. It can be solved, but it is not solved by logic and reasoning. It is solved by intuitive energy. It is solved by silence, not by words, not by figures. It is solved by utter silence. Now they were coming closer to the point. So they started looking for the man who could solve insoluble problems.
Now Sufis are known to solve insoluble problems. In fact, all great problems are insoluble because life is a mystery, it cannot be solved. And Sufis are interested in the mystery, not in solving it. All religious people, all religious search, is concerned with the insoluble.
First they went to the magistrate, the lawyer, the mayor, and people like that. Then they became aware that the problem seemed to be insoluble and no solution seemed to be adequate. So they thought, “We must go to somebody who is interested in insoluble problems, in the mystery of life.”
Everyone they tried failed, until they arrived at the door of the son-in law of the prophet, Hazrat Ali.
He said, “This is your solution. I will add one camel to the number. Out of the eighteen camels you will give half – nine camels – to the oldest disciple. The second shall have a third of the total, which is six camels. The last disciple may have one-ninth, which is two camels. That makes seventeen. One – my camel – is left over to be returned to me.”
Now Sufis say that your problems cannot be solved as they are unless the master adds something of his being to you. That is the meaning of the whole story.
There are seventeen camels. You are those seventeen camels. there is no way to solve anything unless you come to a man of compassion who is not only ready to solve your problem but is ready to be involved with you – that is the meaning. The story is tremendously beautiful.
They had gone to many people but nobody had thought that one camel could be added – and once the camels are eighteen in number, things become simple, they become divisible.
The master is one who is ready to get involved with you. When you surrender to a master, he opens all his doors to you, he is available to you, he becomes involved with you. You are committed to him, he is committed to you. You surrender nothing. You don’t have anything to surrender. You surrender only that which you don’t have, and the master starts giving you that which he has.
Now these people came with a problem. The problem in itself was insoluble, but Hazrat Ali solved it. And the device was that he added one of his camels to their camels. So the first thing to be remembered is that a master is one who can give his being to you, who can become associated with you, who can come to you and hold your hand, who can make your problem his problem, who does not think from the outside as a spectator, who becomes a participant.
When you come to me with your problems, never think for a single moment that I am standing there like a wise man, aloof, away, and advising you – not for a single moment. I get involved with you, I become you, I stand in your shoes. Your problem becomes my problem; only then can I be of any help. Unless I become you, I cannot help you. Unless I become you, I cannot even understand you – what to say about help? Unless your problem starts becoming my problem, unless I am surrounded by your problem, there is no way to solve it. That is the difference between a therapist and a master.
A therapist stands outside. He brings his expertise, his knowledge to help you. A master? – he does not bring any expertise, he has none. He does not bring any knowledge to help you, he has none. He brings his being, he brings his knowing. He lends you his eyes. He lends you his eyes, not his knowledge. He lends you his vision, his clarity, his transparency. He becomes you for a moment. Those who have loved me will understand it. While talking to them I become so involved with their problem that they are almost an observer. It becomes my problem. And whenever it becomes the problem of the master, help arises. That’s why the disciple’s utter surrender is needed, so that the master can come and have a deep meeting with your being.
He said, “This is your solution. I will add one camel to the number. Out of the eighteen camels you will give half – nine camels – to the oldest disciple. The second shall have a third of the total, which is six camels. The last disciple may have one-ninth, which is two camels. That makes seventeen.”
And then comes the last beautiful thing: One – my camel – is left over to be returned to me.”
Because whatsoever the master gives to you always goes back to him. You are transformed between the master’s coming to you and his going back. But whatsoever is given goes back to the master, because in the very nature of things it cannot be given. It can be only loaned, at the most. It is his being. How can he give it to you? The being cannot be given, he can only loan it to you for a moment. But even in that single moment, things become clear, and then whatsoever is the master’s, goes back to him.
This is one of the most beautiful parables Sufis have invented. First the master gives to the disciple, then the disciple’s problems are solved, then whatsoever is given comes back to the master. The master gives you his being, transforms you through it, you become luminous, and he does not lose anything – because whatsoever is his comes back to him. That is why the master can go on giving to millions and nothing is lost.
Many times there are questions from you, “Osho, now you have so many disciples, so many sannyasins, in the thousands. It will be difficult for you to help us.” Not at all, because it is not something that can be divided. I can give my vision to as many people as are ready to take it and receive it, and yet it remains intact. It always comes back to me. You cannot take it away. Numbers don’t matter. One or one million, it makes no difference. Remember this. Only one who is ready to get involved with you can solve your life problems. Outsiders cannot solve them. The master has to become your inside.
And remember that when you have arrived home – sooner or later – and your light is lit and your flame is burning bright, don’t be a miser. Remember, you will not be losing anything. You can go on giving to as many people as you want and you will not lose anything. It is not possible to lose. That which is yours you cannot lose, only that which is not yours can be lost. Money can be lost, stolen, divided. Naturally, if a father has four sons then four sons will divide the money. If he has sixteen then sixteen will divide the money. And the more sons he has, the poorer the sons will be.
But not so with a master. A master can have a million disciples or ten million disciples. It does not make any difference. It does not make the disciples poor, remember – because the master can go on giving to everybody, nothing is lost. So when you become masters in your own right – you will become masters one day – then don’t be misers. Share it! The more you share the more you become beloved by God.
Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
As a U.S. psychiatrist I am well-trained. Experienced and have been successful by outer standards – but now, what to do? I no longer feel that I am a doctor or therapist or analyst, only a person, and perhaps a teacher. You and others like you are to blame for this. Now I am only listening to the inner voice for direction. Is there any more I can do?
First, there is no success as far as the outer is concerned. All success is just an effort to cover failure. There is only one success, there are not many successes – and that one success is to know oneself, to be oneself.
I understand what you mean by being successful by outer standards. Man has created outer standards of success to deceive himself. You can have money, you can have a name, you can have prestige, but if you are not, what does it matter? You can have the whole world but if you are not, what does it matter?
In fact, man tries to possess things because he does not possess himself. This is a strategy to hide the fact that he does not possess himself. This is a strategy to hide the fact that he does not possess himself; this is a way of explaining away the inner emptiness; this is a way to feel, “Look, I have so many things, what else does one need?” When you are surrounded by too many things – what you call “success by outer standards” – what exactly are you doing? You are trying to create a substitute of “having” for an emptiness which you are feeling inside. Being is missing, and you are trying to replace it by having. And it cannot be replaced by any having.
This is the whole struggle of human mind. These are the two directions: having and being. In the West you have worked very hard to have more; in the East we have worked hard to be more. Yes, sometimes it happens that even a beggar may have more being than a rich man, than a king. Somebody who has nothing, may have himself; and in that very having there is peace, there is bliss, there is benediction.
So the first thing I would like to tell you is that there are no outer standards of success. They are efforts to cover up your inner emptiness, efforts to deceive yourself and to make you feel that you have not failed. There is only one success, absolutely only one – that is to be. Through that, one attains to ecstasy; through that, one attains to the ultimate.
So it is good that I and people like me have destroyed your illusion. Once that illusion goes you will be in a deep crisis. That is what is happening to you.
The questioner’s name is Walter Hoffman – that’s what is happening to you, Hoffman. Now you will have to take a very decisive step, a radical step. You will have to learn the ways of inner success. Now the outer will never appeal to you. Yes, I and people like me are to blame. The outer will never appeal to you any more. So don’t go on making efforts in the outer. Direct your energy towards the inner. Now only that can have any meaning.
Right now you are in a limbo. The outer is there but has no meaning; the inner seems to have meaning but is not there. This is the critical stage. But every seeker has to pass through it. I understand this pain, this anguish, and I have all sympathy for you. But although it looks like pain right now. once you have started contacting the inner, you will be surprised – it was not pain, it was a growth pain, it was a birth pain. And you will feel blessed that it happened because you will be reborn out of it.
You say: “as a U. S. Psychiatrist I am well-trained, experienced, and have been successful by outer standards….” Something important is to be understood. Each age creates its own myth to live by. The modern myth is the myth of the completely analyzed person. People are trying to be completely analyzed in the hope that if they are completely analyzed. there will be joy. It does not happen. Even the founder of psychoanalysis, Sigmund Freud, was not a joyous man. And if it did not happen to the founder, it is not going to happen to anybody.
You can go on analyzing – it is infinite. The mind is very creative, it goes on creating. It is not a limited phenomenon – that one day you can come to the end of the mind by analyzing it. You can go on analyzing and something will still remain to be analyzed. You can still go on and something will still remain to be analyzed. It is a non-ending process.
The East has worked in a totally different way. The East says that the mind has not to be analyzed, one has to drop out of the mind. The problem has not to be solved, the problem has to be dropped. In solving, you will remain in it; in solving, you will create more and more problems. And this is happening. People who can afford analysis – it is a costly thing, millions cannot afford it – but those who can afford it go into it for years. They go on changing from one analyst to another analyst in the hope that if it has not happened with this one, it will happen with somebody else.
It is not going to happen. Through analysis mind can never come to a state in which you can become something beyond mind. By analyzing, you will remain it. You may become a little more smooth in your life but you will be as neurotic as anybody else. Yes, there will be one difference – you will be more smooth in your neurosis, more adjusted, a little more understanding, but that does not make any radical change. The radical change comes from the understanding that through analysis there is no way. One has to jump out of the mind.
That’s what meditation is. Meditation is just the contrary to analysis. Meditation means that, seeing that the mind is infinite, there is no need to bother about it – you can get out of it. You are not the mind – why go into it? You can slip out of it. The mind remains in its same place but you are out of it. And once you are out of it, you are the master of your mind. Then you can use it; then you will not be used by it.
This myth of the completely analyzed person is a new dream. Man likes to dream, man likes to invent new ideas to hope for. Sometimes it is moksha, nirvana; sometimes it is money, power, prestige; sometimes it can become the completely analyzed person.
I have many psychiatrists, psychoanalysts and other kinds of therapists here. The greatest number of any profession that has come to me is from therapy. There is a reason for it. Those who have been working in therapy have by and by become aware of one fact – that it keeps you moving in a circle. It does not lead you anywhere, it only pretends. It promises but it never delivers the goods. It is just an infinite circle – one can go on and on and on. It keeps you hoping, waiting, but that’s all. Once you have become aware of it then forget about analysis and try something totally different – that is meditation. Meditation does not mean that you have to think about the mind – you have to drop out of it. Meditation is an escape from the mind. meditation is creating a distance from the mind, meditation is a transcendence.
And once you are standing above the mind, away, aloof, a watcher on the hills, things are totally different. Then those problems are no longer relevant. When you are in them, they are relevant. It is just like having a dream, a nightmare, at night, and being really troubled by it. A lion is following you and you are running and running and the lion is coming closer and closer every moment. You can feel his breath on your back. It is terrible! And you start climbing a tree and the lion starts climbing it with you – because in a dream everything is possible. Your heart is in a turmoil, your whole body is perspiring. And when you reach the top of the tree the lion is also there with you. A scream comes out of you, and because of the scream you become awake. And suddenly you start laughing, although the body is still trembling and your breath is not rhythmic. and your body is perspiring; you can see the beads on your forehead. But now you start laughing. You laugh at the whole thing, the ridiculousness of it – it was just a dream.
What has happened? Just a moment ago you were in it. It was not a dream because you were in it, you were identified with it, you thought it was a reality. The idea that it was real was driving you crazy. Now that you are out of it, aloof, alert, you can see that it was just a dream. Mind is a dream – sometimes very sweet and sometimes very nightmarish. But it is a dream.
The effort that we have been making in the East down through the centuries, is not to solve the problems. For example, in your nightmare you try to solve the problem of what to do with this lion who is following you. That’s what psychoanalysis is. Or you start trying to find out where it comes from, how it happened in the first place – “Why is this lion following me? And from where is this fear coming? And why am I climbing the tree?” And you meet somebody who is very expert in analyzing things, in explaining, in creating theories, in telling you how it happened in the first place. Maybe it is a birth trauma or maybe your parents have not treated you well. Or maybe this lion is nobody. Just look directly into its eyes – it is your wife or your husband and you are afraid of your wife or your husband.
But all these explanations take one thing for granted – that it is real. And that is the basic problem, not where the lion has come from or what the symbolic meaning of the lion is. That is not the real problem. The real problem is that the lion is real. Psychoanalysis does not help you to become aware that mind is an unreal thing – illusion, maya. In fact, it takes you more into the mud and the mire. It takes you deeper, to the roots. But an illusion cannot have any roots. You will always be getting to the roots but you will not arrive. An illusion cannot have any cause.
Now let me repeat it, because this will make the difference very clear. An illusion cannot have any cause, so you cannot search for the cause. You can go on and on, you can go into the unconscious of man…. Freud did that, and did it perfectly, but that didn’t solve anything. Jung had to go deeper. He had to find something like the collective unconscious. And you can go on. Then you can find the universal unconscious, and so on, so forth, layer upon layer. You can go on analyzing – that maybe it is a birth trauma, that you became very much afraid when you came out of the birth canal from your mother’s womb. But things don’t end there because you were in your mother’s womb for nine months. Those nine months cannot be simply dropped. In those nine months much happened to you. You have to go into analyzing that.
And if you go deep enough you will have to enter into your previous life – that’s what Hindu analysts have done. They say “previous life,” and then “previous to previous,” and go on and on backwards. And you reach nowhere. Either way you come to a point where you see the whole futility of it.
To see the futility of the mind and to see that an illusion cannot have any cause and cannot be analyzed, the only thing that can be done is to make yourself a little bit alert, aware. In that very awareness the dream disappears. It has no grip over you. And once the mind is not there gripping you, you are a totally new man. A new consciousness is born in you.
And Hoffman must be aware of the futility. He has been helping people, analyzing – but it has not even helped himself. That analyzing has not even helped himself. Maybe it makes things a little more clear, maybe it helps things to be a little more categorized, pigeon-holed – it is a kind of labeling – but nothing essential happens. And if something happens sometimes, it is not because of analysis. If something happens sometimes, it may have some other causes; it has to have some other causes.
A man may become very much fed-up with the whole thing called analysis. That very fed-upness with analysis, may create a new awareness in him. He may get bored. One day he may understand that enough is enough. Rushing from one psychotherapist to another psychotherapist, from one school to another school, a time comes when one thinks that now it is enough, one need not bother about it. It doesn’t matter. In that indifference something is possible.
Or, something is possible through the magnetic personality of the therapist. My own understanding is that the therapist helps more than the therapy. If the therapist has a charisma – as Freud had, Jung had, Adler had – if the analyst has a charisma, a magnetic personality, a certain kind of presence, that helps, that is therapeutic. That is why it happens again and again that when the therapist is alive, it works; but when the therapist is gone, by and by it disappears. The therapy works no more.
Psychoanalysis died with Sigmund Freud. It was his charisma not analysis itself. Freud had a certain magnetism of personality, something that is very mysterious. One has it or one does not have it. Whatsoever he was doing would look meaningful, because he put the meaning into it. When a man of charisma, magnetic energy, does anything, that thing seems to be very important. In another’s hand it may become very ordinary, mediocre. that’s what it became.
Jung helped people not by what he was saying, not by what he was analyzing, but just by what he was.
But therapists are as yet unaware of the fact that it is the personal factor that helps – not the theories and the dogmas and the principles. It is something mysterious, the personal factor, that helps.
Have you watched it sometimes? You are ill and your doctor comes. And the moment he enters the room you start feeling good. He has not given you any medicine yet, he has not even diagnosed what kind of illness you have, he has not even touched you. He just enters. The moment you know your doctor has come, your physician is there, something that was a worry disappears. You need not worry. The tension is there no more. Now the doctor will take care. If the doctor has some personal aura in him, even while he is testing you, taking your blood pressure and your pulse, you have already started to be healed. Before he prescribes any medicine you are fifty per cent healed. The medicine may not do much but the doctor has done much. It is your confidence in him, your trust in him, his personal aura, his certainty – “Don’t be afraid. Now I am here.”
Psychotherapy has not yet become fully alert of the phenomenon that it is not the therapy that helps but the personal factor. The person may not be aware himself that he is functioning as a healing force. If you understand me rightly, it is always God who heals. God is the only healer. If somebody is alive, flowing, then God flows through him. Psychotherapy has yet to understand this magic, this mana, this energy.
In the East a person will simply go to his master, touch the feet of the master, and be healed. The master is not doing any analysis, any therapy, nothing, the master has no expertise about it – it is just the personal energy, the aroma that surrounds the master, and the trust that the patient brings. What psychoanalysis is doing in the East is nil because there are so few psychoanalysts in the East. But people are more psychologically healthy, far more psychologically healthy, than the Western counterpart.
And much is going on to help people in the West, great energy is being put into helping people psychologically, but still they remain psychologically ill. Psychoanalysis has not yet come home; it has yet far to go. And when it really comes home it will be found that it is not the theory but the person that helps.
Now, Hoffman says: “but now what to do? I no longer feel that I am a doctor or therapist or analyst, only a person, and perhaps a teacher. You and others like you are to blame for this.” If you are not feeling like a doctor, not feeling like a therapist, not feeling like an analyst, you are coming close to the point which I am talking about. You are becoming a person. A person means a presence. If you are feeling like a person you will be able to help many more people than you have ever helped before, but now be conscious of the phenomenon that everything else is secondary.
The most primary thing is the presence that the therapist brings to the patient. The patient has lost hope, the patient has fallen into a negative space, the patient is in despair, the patient cannot trust any more, the patient has become shrunken into himself, he has collapsed. The real therapist will bring his presence, his positivity, his aliveness, his streaming energy to the patient. He will come there like a fresh breeze, new sun rays. He will bring something of the divine to the patient, something of prayer and meditation. He will overwhelm the patient, he will surround him from everywhere, he will become a womb, a warm womb for the patient, and things will start happening. Miracles start happening.
And I am not saying that you should drop your expertise. Use it – but it is secondary. First have a person-to-person contact with the patient, first let him share something of your presence so that he starts hoping again, so that his negative space starts turning into a positive space. Let him feel your joy, let him feel your trust in life, let him feel you – that you are there. Let him see that life is not meaningless. Sing a song or dance around him but let this message be very loud and clear to him – that life has meaning. Let him see that it has meaning for you, why can’t it have meaning for him? And he will start coming out of his despair. You have reached him, you have taken his hand in your hand; you can pull him out of his confusion, you can pull him out of his anguish.
Once he is pulled out of his despair, healing forces start working. Healing forces are always around, God is always around. When you fall into a negative space you cannot connect with god and then you need a link – one who can connect with God.
So, Hoffman, perfectly good! Become a person. Forget therapy, forget analysis. Become a person. And when I say “forget therapy, forget analysis” I don’t mean don’t use them – but don’t be identified with them. They will be there, your whole knowledge, your experience, will be there; but now let this experience and knowledge become secondary to your presence. It will help to a certain extent, it will be good.
In Zen they say that if you really want to become a painter then learn painting for years. Then for a few years forget all about painting. Throw away the brush and the canvas and the color and do something else and become completely oblivious to the fact that you know anything about painting. First learn, then unlearn – and then one day, suddenly, you will be painting. And your painting will have innocence – the innocence of a child – and the expertise of one who knows. Both will be there. And when both are there, there is great art.
Remember, you may be very, very feelingful, you may be very poetic, but you may not know how to put it into color, you may not know the technique. then your painting will be just worthless, amateur. Or you can become a great technician, you can know everything about color and the brush and form, you can have studied in an academy, you can be a great technician, but you don’t have any feeling, you don’t have any love, you don’t have any poetry. Your heart has no song. Then you can paint – and your painting will be perfect technically – but it will be dead. The real artist has both qualities – the innocence of a child and technical expertise. But when he paints he forgets all technicalities. They are there, from the deep unconscious they are working, but he forgets all expertise. He becomes innocent. He paints like an amateur. He does not know anything he paints from the mind of not-knowing – so there is freshness, there is vision. And the expertise goes on functioning from the unconscious. It is there, it is in his blood, in his bones. There is no need to remember it, there is no need to be self-conscious about it. Then something of the unknown descends into the known.
And the same should be the principle for every kind of life you are going to live. Know it well technically and then forget the techniques. Then go into it very innocently. If you are feeling like a person, that is the best thing that can happen to a person.
…And perhaps a teacher. Good. That word perhaps is beautiful. If you were very certain about being a teacher I would have told you to drop that idea; it is dangerous. “Perhaps” is good, hesitation is good. A good teacher is always “perhaps.” He is not dogmatic, he is not rigid; he is liquid, he is flowing, he is spontaneous. He cannot destroy; he can only create. When you become very dogmatic and certain, you become destructive. You become a pedagogue, not a teacher.
So both things are good, Hoffman. Go inwards, become a person and perhaps a teacher.
You say: now I am only listening to the inner voice for direction. Is there any more I can do? No, if you do anything you will disturb the whole thing. You simply wait. Simply wait, prayerfully, meditatively. Things are happening. The inner voice will start leading you. And when the inner voice starts leading you, don’t be cunning, don’t choose. Don’t say, “This I will choose and this I will not choose” Then it will not be of any meaning. Then even if it does come from the inner voice, if you remain the chooser you decide from the ego. Now relax into the inner voice. Let it take possession of you.
It will be difficult for you because you say you are “experienced, well-trained and successful.” It will be difficult for you because one never knows where the inner voice is leading. The inner voice may say to you “become a sannyasin” – that’s what my feeling is. But then don’t bring your experienced mind and successful past and your well-trained state into it. Don’t interfere. If the inner voice says “become a sannyasin,” then become a sannyasin – there is nothing to do on your part. Just be possessed. The more you trust the inner voice, the more clear and loud it will become. And the more you trust and act accordingly, by and by you will see there is no need to think about anything.
God goes on giving you hints, but you don’t listen. God goes on saying what has to be done, but he whispers – that’s true. He does not shout. And we are so full of noise that that whisper is lost. Listen to the inner voice, that is God’s voice. And don’t only listen, act on it. Move into commitment, into involvement.
When you start acting on the inner voice…. Sometimes it will be very risky, but take the risk – because only when there is risk is there life, only when there is risk is there growth. Live dangerously. If the voice says “do this” then do it and don’t bother too much about consequences. Nothing else matters.
And sometimes your mind will tell you that this is too much – think about it. If you think, the inner voice will be lost. It is lost in thinking. Don’t think. Act. And you will see that each act brings you closer and closer to the voice. And when you have acted many times and have seen that the voice always takes you to the right place, then there will be no doubt. And then thinking can be dropped. It is a substitute. Because we have forgotten how to listen to God, we have to think.
The real man of awareness need not think. God goes on supplying him with all that is needed, whenever it is needed.

The second and third questions are connected:
Osho,
Do you have some sort of contraption in your room with which you control or alter the moods of everyone in the ashram, putting everyone into the same or similar mood at the same time? It seems that everyone goes through the same cycle or phases, not as individuals but as a community. What's up?
And the third:
Osho,
Is there a collective unconscious at the ashram? Every other question I have thought to ask has been asked by someone else, or you have answered it anyway.
The second is from Big Prem and the third from Anand Samatha.
That is the meaning of a commune. A commune slowly, slowly grows a soul. And if the soul is missing, the commune is not a commune. then it is a crowd. A crowd has no soul. When a crowd has a soul, it is a commune. Then there is a center where all meet.
I am your center. You are here because of me. You are all here because of me; each of you is deeply involved with me. I am functioning as a center to you all. Prem is involved with me, so is Samatha involved with me. And when you all are involved with me, naturally you become involved with all. Each becomes involved with all.
I am your space, your bridge, from where you move into each other. If you really love me, this is going to happen more and more. Before you have asked the question, it will be answered. Before you have asked the question, many will have asked it. You need only to wait a little.
And there will be moods – when the whole commune will pass through a phase and a cycle simultaneously. This is going to happen. The closer you come to me, the more it will be happening. Yes, something is up. And Prem has felt it rightly.
You are disappearing as separate units.
This is the meaning of a church, really. This is the meaning of a church, a commune. We pool our consciousnesses into one space and then each affects each other. Then great energy is released. Alone you cannot go very high. Alone, you are alone. Alone, you have all kinds of limitations. When you are one with many, infinite energy is available. And many things will start happening which cannot happen alone.
For example, a solo guitar player is one thing. An orchestra is totally different. Yes, it is beautiful, a solo guitarist is beautiful, but there is a kind of limitation. It cannot be very rich, because it will not have many dimensions to it. It is solo. The orchestra is far more rich. Many dimensions, many directions, meet in it. Many kinds of instruments and many artists pool their energy and a harmony arises. This is what a commune is – an orchestra.
You are pooling your energies with me. and, naturally, you will start feeling the same kind of rhythm, the same moods passing through the whole commune.
If you are alone it is difficult to keep awake. But if you are with a few people – laughing, talking, joking – you can keep awake the whole night very easily. It would have been difficult for each to remain alert the whole night, but together it is simple. The total energy is so much – laughing, joking, singing, talking – that it keeps you alert.
And this whole experiment is to bring a kind of buddhahood into the world. This commune is not an ordinary commune. This is an experiment to provoke God. You may not be aware of what is going to happen. You may be aware of only your problems. You may have come to me only to solve your problems. That is secondary. I am cooking something else.
I am trying to create a space where God can descend more and more. This commune will become a connection. The world has lost the connection. God is no more a reality. As far as this century is concerned, Nietzsche is right that God is dead. The connection is broken. God can only be through the connection. God will be there, we are here, but there is no bridge. So how do we know?
This commune is an experiment to create the bridge. Fall more and more in harmony. Pool your energies. And remember, a small stream cannot reach the ocean. It will be lost somewhere, it is so far away. It will be lost in some desert land, some wasteland. But if many small streams pool into one, they become a Ganges. Then it can reach the ocean. Even the Ganges cannot reach alone.
If you go to the source of the Ganges it is just drops dripping. In Gangotri, the source of Ganges, there is a marble cow mouth and the Ganges comes out of it. So small. How can you hope it will reach the ocean? But millions of tributaries, millions of small streams and rivers, pool their energies and the Ganges becomes a great river. then nothing can hold it. Then it reaches the ocean.
A commune is an effort to create a Ganges of consciousness. It is happening. And it will be happening more and more if you become more cooperative and more conscious of it. Don’t create any conflict here. Don’t be resistant about small things. Relax, cooperate. Even if you have to lose something, don’t be afraid – because your losing will be a gaining in the end.
Don’t bring your egos in, otherwise you destroy my work. Throw your egos away. Something far more valuable is happening here. And soon many will be coming, and you will become the precedent, you will become the pattern of what will happen to them. Soon many will be coming, in thousands. Before they start coming you have to prepare the orchestra, otherwise there will be a great noise.
Have you watched it? If thirty persons are singing in rhythm, in harmony, and you join in, immediately you start falling into rhythm and harmony. But if they are just noisy, and there is no rhythm and no harmony and there is just chaos, you also become a chaos.
I am working slowly – slowly I am adding more people to your commune. Soon there will be thousands. I want to create a small city, sooner or later, where people will be living totally egolessly. And the more people there will be, the greater is the possibility for happenings, for miracles – because God will be more available. The sky will come more close to you.
Remember it always – whenever your small ego comes in as a conflict. When a small river comes to meet the Ganges, naturally the ego will come in. The ego will say, “What are you doing? You will be lost. You will no longer be yourself. You will lose your identity. If you move with the Ganges you will be called Ganges – your name will be lost.”
That’s what sannyas is. The moment you take sannyas you are part of me; you are lost. You will be known by me, you will not be known by yourself. That is courage. By taking sannyas you are simply merging into a totally different kind of existence because you are merging into me. Sannyas is your death, and a rebirth – death as an ego, and rebirth as a consciousness.
But if the small river thinks, “I am not ready to lose myself in the Ganges,” then the river will be lost in a desert. And that will be suicide. With the Ganges it is not suicide. With the Ganges, the river becomes the Ganges. It is only a question of how you look at it. If you look positively, the river becomes bigger. It is no longer small, no longer confined to its own small banks. Now the Ganges is what she is, now the Ganges’ being is her being. That is another way of looking at it. And that should be the attitude.
When you join me as a sannyasin, you are dropping yourself, disappearing. When you join the commune then you have to utterly efface yourself. If a little bit is hanging there, then you will be a trouble to yourself and to the commune too. And you will not be benefited by me.
This is happening, and this is going to happen more and more. Be prepared for it.

The fourth question:
Osho,
Ayn Rand, the originator of objectivism philosophy, went mad and committed suicide. How could this happen to such a rare, logical mind?
Precisely! It happened because of such a logical, rational mind. The rational mind cannot go beyond suicide and madness. That is the ultimate that has to happen. If some logical person is not mad it simply means that he is not logical enough. If some logical person has not committed suicide yet, it simply means that he is mediocre. He has not touched the pinnacle of logicality. If you reach to the pinnacle of logicality, life loses all meaning – because logic cannot give any meaning. Logic takes away all meaning. Logic is destructive, poisonous.
It is love that gives meaning to life, it is love that blooms and flowers, it is love that sings and dances, it is love that becomes celebration. A logical mind by and by loses all possibility of loving – because love is so illogical it cannot exist with logic. They prohibit each other, they exclude each other. If you love, you become illogical; if you are very logical, you become unloving. and without love, what is there to live by, to live with, to live for? What is there?
Ayn Rand was a very egoistic, rationalistic, realistic woman. Her philosophy is that of absolute selfishness. If you are absolutely selfish, how can you be loving? It is impossible. Her philosophy is absolutely realistic, materialistic. When there is only matter, what is there to bloom into? There is no soul. All search disappears. Life is flat and dull. There is no mystery. With the soul enter mystery and life. With mystery there is joy, because there is a possibility to inquire, to explore, to expand. There is a possibility that something may happen, can happen.
Man is more than he knows. You are more than you know. Not only that, you are more than you can ever know, because your intrinsic reality remains mysterious, always remains unknown, unknowable. You can go on knowing more and more and more but that does not reduce your mystery. That’s what we mean by soul – utterly mysterious.
For Ayn Rand there was no mystery. When there is no mystery, how can there be life? Then what is there to live for? Suicide seems to be the logical conclusion. And if you don’t commit suicide, then madness is the conclusion. Those seem to be the two alternatives. Either go mad – mad means go illogical, drop your rational mind – or commit suicide, drop this useless life.
Jean Paul Sartre has said: “Man is a useless passion.” Now my feeling is that Sartre is not very, very logical, otherwise he would have committed suicide. If man is a useless passion, if there is no meaning in it, if life is meaninglessness, then why go on living? Why think of tomorrow – that you would like to exist tomorrow? That is very irrational. If nothing is going to happen, if nothing has ever happened, if nothing happens in the very reality, then why go on living? Why go on eating and why go on sleeping and getting up again and again? It is nauseating.
Another book of Sartre’s is Nausea. But it seems it is still philosophical, he has not taken it existentially – otherwise suicide would be the logical conclusion to the philosophy. Beware. These possibilities are in you too. If you become too logical, madness or suicide or both will be the conclusion.
That’s why I teach you love not logic, feeling not reasoning, heart not mind. Then life has such beauty, such beautitude, such joy, that one cannot contain it. It is so much, it is so over-flowing, so overwhelming.
You ask me: “Ayn Rand, the originator of objectivism philosophy, went mad and committed suicide. How could this happen to such a rare logical mind?” The question is from Sudheer Saraswati. I say “Precisely.”

The fifth question:
Osho,
I am very afraid of dying. Can you tell me what the secret of achieving a long life is?
Keep breathing!

The sixth question:
Osho,
I have been thinking and thinking about taking sannyas for five years, yet I cannot decide. What should I do?
Get lost!

And the seventh question:
Osho,
Should one love one's neighbor?
Make sure that her husband is not at home.
So you like one-liners! But God has not heard about it!

I have heard….
God called together his writers, “Gentlemen, I have a big show coming up next week on Mount Sinai and I need some material.”
“How about: ‘Thou shalt not steal’?” one of them volunteered.
“Thou shalt not kill,” suggested another.
“Thou shalt not….”
“Wait!” thundered the Lord. “How many times have I told you I can’t use one-liners!”

But people like them! Sometimes just a single word, unexplained, unelaborated, goes deep, falls like a seed in the heart, can open doors.

The eighth question:
Osho,
If you do not do miracles, then how is it that miracles are happening to me?
The question is from Chaman Bharti.
I do not do miracles, but they happen. The happening is a totally different phenomenon. They are happening every day. I am not doing them, you are not doing them, they are happening. We are creating a space where it becomes possible for them to happen.
The real miracles are never done, they happen. And those which are done are not miracles, they are just magic tricks. When the doer is there, how can there be a miracle? A miracle means something out of God, something from the beyond, something that nobody has done but has suddenly concretized out of nothing.
Christians have a very wrong notion when they say, “Jesus did this, Jesus did that.” Jesus never did anything, not a single miracle. Miracles happen, that is true. Miracles always happen. The whole life is so miraculous! If you have a little alertness you will see miracles and miracles all around. A bud opening into a flower – you don’t call it a miracle because you have become so accustomed to it. A seed sprouting, coming out of the earth – you don’t call it a miracle. What more can a miracle do? A dewdrop just slipping down a grass leaf, with the sun reflected in it – just a dewdrop. It looks so precious; the whole existence is reflected in it. A star in the night, a small baby smiling, a woman crying with eyes full of tears – all is miraculous because all is mysterious.
You are dull, dead, insensitive, so you go on missing it. Otherwise it is all over the place. And there is no need to do. One has just to be receptive.

The ninth question:
Osho,
I like my name but I like women too.
The questioner is Swami Prabhu Anuragi. The name means: lover of God – hence the question.
He says: “I like my name but I like women too.” But who has told you that God is against women, or that God is not in women? In fact, God is far more in women than in men. Men. have gone further astray than women have; women are still closer to nature, closer to feeling, closer to God.
When you love a woman, what do you really love in her? It will be different with different people and it will be different at different times. If love really grows, this is the way: first you fall in love with the woman because her body is beautiful. That is the first available beauty – her face, her eyes, her proportion, her elegance, her dancing, pulsating energy. Her body is beautiful. That is the first approach. You fall in love.
Then after a few days you start going deeper into the woman. You start loving her heart. Now a far more beautiful revelation is coming to you. The body becomes secondary; the heart becomes primary. A new vision has arisen, a new peak. If you go on loving the woman, sooner or later you will find there are peaks beyond peaks, depths beyond depths. Then you start loving the soul of the woman. Then it is not only her heart – now that has become secondary. Now it is the very person, the very presence, the very radiance, the aliveness, that unknown phenomenon of her being – that she is. The body is very far away, the heart has also gone away – now the being is.
And then one day this particular woman’s being becomes far away. Now you start loving womanhood in her, the femininity, the feminineness, that receptivity. Now she is not a particular woman at all, she simply reflects womanhood, a particular form of womanhood. Now it is no longer individual, it is becoming more and more universal. And one day that womanhood has also disappeared – you love the humanity in her. Now she is not just a representative of woman, she is also a representative of man as much. The sky is becoming bigger and bigger. Then one day it is not humanity, but existence. That she exists, that’s all that you want – that she exists. You are coming very close to God.
Then the last point comes – all formulations and all forms disappear and there is God. You have found God through your woman, through your man. Each love is an echo of God’s love.
So no need to be worried, Prabhu Anuragi. I have given you the name lover of God, but that does not mean you have to destroy your love for women, that does not mean you have to destroy your love for anything. It simply means you have to deepen it, you have to go on deepening it. Dig more and more, dig deeper, and one day you will find your beloved has disappeared and God is standing there – because God is hiding in every being, in every form. He is dwelling in every house. Your woman is a house, is a temple; so is your man.
I am for love. Even when you fall in love with the body, I am not against it. It is the farthest from God, but still it is related to God. It is a very faraway echo but still it is an echo – the original is still there somewhere. Never let your love stop anywhere.

The tenth question:
Osho,
How to drop judging people?
There is no need to stop or drop judging people; you have to understand why you judge and how you judge.
You can judge only the behavior because only the behavior is available. You cannot judge the person because the person is hiding behind, the person is a mystery. You can judge the act but you cannot judge the being.
And the act is irrelevant. It will not be right to judge a being through the act. Sometimes it happens that a man is smiling. The act is there on the surface and deep inside he may be sad. In fact, he may be smiling because he is sad. He does not want to show his sadness to anybody – why bring one’s wounds to everybody? Why? That seems embarrassing. Maybe he is smiling just because he is crying deep down.
Nietzsche has said, “I go on smiling. People think I am a very jolly person and that is absolutely wrong. I go on laughing because I am afraid that if I don’t laugh, I may start crying. So I have to convert my energy somewhere otherwise it will become tears. Before it becomes tears it has to become laughter.” The insight is perfectly true. Nietzsche is one of the most perceptive men ever born on the earth. Tears and smiles are very close.
In Indian villages women say to their children, “Don’t laugh too much otherwise you will start crying.” And that happens. If a child laughs too much he starts crying. Tears and smiles are very close. If you want to hide your tears the best way is to smile – that’s why people are smiling. Just by seeing a smiling face you cannot judge what is happening inside. The inside is not available to you. The inside is private; it is not available to anybody.
So the first thing to understand is that you can look only at the behavior and the behavior does not mean much. All that is really significant is the person behind. And you don’t know. Your judgments are going to be wrong. And you know it – because when people judge you by your acts, you always feel that they have judged you wrongly. You don’t judge yourself by your acts, you judge yourself by your being. So everybody feels that all judgments are unjust. You feel that judgments are unjust because to you your being is available – and the being is such a big phenomenon and the act is so tiny and small. It does not define anything. It may be just a momentary thing.
You said something to somebody and he became angry, but don’t judge him by his anger because it may be just a momentary flash. He may be a very loving person. If you judge him by his anger you misjudge him. And then your behavior will depend on your judgment. And you will always wait for the man to be angry and you will always think that he is an angry man. You will avoid the person. You have missed an opportunity. Never judge anybody by their action – but that is the only thing available to you. So what to do? Judge ye not.
By and by become more and more aware of the privacy of being. Every being inside his own soul is so private there is no way to penetrate it. Even when you love, something at the deepest core remains private. That is man’s dignity. That is the meaning when we say man has a soul. Soul means that which can never become public. Something of it will always remain deep, lost in some mystery.

I have heard….
Two men were called to a home and asked to haul some trash to a garbage heap. After they had loaded the truck the back of the truck was overflowing with all the trash.
One man said, “You may get into trouble with the police if we drive through town and the trash blows onto the street.”
The other man said, “Don’t worry, I have an idea. You drive and I will spread my body over the trash and that will keep it from blowing about.”
On the way to the garbage heap they passed under a bridge. As they drove under it, two men standing on top of the bridge happened to look down and saw the man lying on top of the garbage, arms and legs spread wide.
One of the men said, “Will you look at that! Someone is throwing away perfectly good men!”

From the outside that’s what we can judge. From the outside it is always wrong.
Seeing it again and again, understanding it again and again, penetrating it again and again, you will not need to drop judgments, they drop of their own accord.
Just watch. Whenever you judge, you are doing something foolish. It does not apply to the person at all, it can apply only to the act. And that act too is taken out of context because you don’t know his whole life. It is as if you tear a page from a novel and you read it and you judge the novel by it. It is not right; it is out of context. The whole novel may be a totally different thing. You may have taken a negative part, an ugly part.
But you don’t know anybody’s life in its totality. A man has lived for forty years before you come to meet him. Those forty years of context are there. The man is going to live forty years more when you have left him. Those forty years of context are going to be there. And you saw the man, just a single instance of him, and you judged him. That is not right. That is just stupid. It will not have any relevance to the man himself.
Your judgment will show something more about you than about the man. “Judge ye not so that ye may not be judged” – that’s what Jesus says. Your judgment shows something about you, nothing about the person you have judged – because his history remains unavailable to you, his being remains unavailable to you. All contexts are lost, there is just a momentary flash – and your interpretation will be your interpretation. It will show something about you.
Seeing this, judging disappears.

The last question:
Osho,
Are all words useless?
Not all. How can all words be useless? Words are useful as far as the world is concerned, the outer; words are useless as far as you are concerned, the inner. When you start moving inwards you have to drop words. They are not needed. They are an unnecessary load on you, a disturbance, a noise.
But when you go outwards and you meet people, you need language. When you are talking about things, you need language. Language is perfectly adequate for the world – otherwise there would be great difficulty. If you go to the market and you want to purchase something, you will be in difficulty without words. And it will be an unnecessary wastage of time. Words are tremendously useful instruments.
If you want to see it, one day go into the market and try to purchase things without words. Each small thing will take so much time and so much trouble, and each shopkeeper will try to avoid you – “You please go somewhere else.” You will be such a nuisance.
In the world, words are perfectly useful. In the inner journey they are not useful because in the inner journey they are not needed at all. You are alone, so what are the words needed for? When you are with somebody, words are needed.
If you are working in some objective reality, some scientific work, words are useful. Thinking is needed. You have to be very precise and very exact. You are thinking with your logic. But if you are meditating, going towards God, words are not needed. Silence is the medium there.
So listening to me and hearing again and again that words are not needed, that words are useless, don’t misunderstand me. Meditate over this small story….

A man went to his local doctor and said, “Doctor, I want to be castrated.”
“What?” said the doctor. “That’s a very drastic operation – are you sure?”
“Quite sure,” said the man.
“Are you married, or do you have a regular girl friend?” said the doctor.
“I’m married,’ said the man, “but what has that got to do with it?”
“Well,” said the doctor, “it would be a good idea to discuss it with your wife – it will affect her too.”
“Yes, true, but only for a time.” said the patient.
“Nevertheless,” said the doctor, “I think you should ask her about it tonight and if you still want to go ahead tomorrow, I’ll book you into the hospital. It’s very quick and you’ll be in and out in one day.”
The next day the man returned, affirmed the situation and was booked in that morning. The operation was completed and he was lying in bed that afternoon, coming out of the anesthetic. Looking round with a smile, feeling good. he winked at the man in the next bed and said cheerily, “Hello, and what are you in for?”
“Oh,” said the other, “I’ve come in to be circumcised.”
The castrated patient clicked his fingers, whistled through his teeth and said, “Shit, that’s the word I was trying to think of!!!”

And the really, really last question:
Osho,
I have found the answer. My heart is filled with joy where there was always pain. I feel with great surprise that it is true – I have a choice. I bow in gratitude. Vani.
This is significant. This is significant to you all. There is always a choice. If you are miserable, it is your choice. Never throw the responsibility onto anybody else. If you throw the responsibility onto somebody else, you will remain miserable. By throwing the responsibility onto somebody you are throwing away your freedom, you are throwing away your freedom to choose.
This has to be one of the most fundamental principles around here – that misery or happiness is your choice. Let it sink deep in you. You choose it. When you are unhappy you have chosen to be unhappy. There is no other excuse. Once you understand this you will be freed from the prison. Then it is up to you.
I have heard about a great Sufi mystic who was always happy, always cheerful, always blissed-out.
A disciple asked him, “Master, you always look so happy. I have been watching you for many years, in many situations. Day in, day out, for years I have observed you. All kinds of situations have passed, must have passed, but you always remain happy. What is your secret?”
The master said, “There is no secret in it. Whatsoever situation confronts me, I always have the choice: to be happy or to be unhappy. And I always choose to be happy.”
Try it. This is a magic formula. In each situation, look before you become unhappy or happy – look. Is there a possibility of being happy? And you will always find that the possibility is there. There is always something to be happy about. If you want to be unhappy then there is always something to be unhappy about.
The world is full of thorns and full of flowers. It is neither a rose-bed nor a thorn-bed – it is full of both. It depends on you. You can choose flowers and you can make a bed of flowers and sleep on the bed of roses. Or you can choose thorns and suffer. Hell is your creation, so is heaven.
Vani is an important case. Vani had been asking to come into the ashram again and again for two, three years, and I was postponing it. I told her, “You are needed there.” She was a hostess, well-paid in the German airlines. But she persisted.
Why was I postponing? Why was I saying to her, “You just wait a little more?” – because she was always so miserable and I don’t want miserable people to be around here. One miserable person is enough to create much misery in others, because others are just coming out of their misery and when they see somebody, a great miserable person, they tend to fall back into their old habit. Then they start competing with the miserable person – “What! Do you think you are ahead? I can beat you.”
So I put Vani off but she persisted – the German persistence – and finally she came. And, of course, she has remained miserable for these few months she has been here. She got more and more miserable.
But this is beautiful of her – that she has understood the fact. I have been telling her again and again in so many ways that it is her choice. She has come out of it. I hope she will remain out of it. It will be difficult. Old habits die hard. One tends to slip back into them. They are very comfortable and cozy. One feels very good falling into the old habits. One knows them, one has known them so long. They are so familiar and so friendly. The new is so strange.
So, Vani, this is good. I was waiting for this to happen some day. It has happened. You say: “Osho, I have found the answer. My heart is filled with joy where there was always pain. I feel with great surprise that it is true – I have a choice. I bow in gratitude.”
Continue to remember it. Don’t forget it for a single moment. For just a few days you will have to remember it. Once it has become your climate then the old cannot win over it. The old was so ugly, the new is so beautiful. The new is so heavenly, the old was nightmarish and hellish. It cannot win over it. But the new needs a little time so that it can take root in your being.
I am happy, Vani. With all my blessings go deeper into your new space.
Enough for today.