---
title: Sufis The People of Path Vol 1 01
series: Sufis The People of Path Vol 1, 01-16
talk_number: 1
url: https://oshoworld.com/sufis-the-people-of-path-vol-1-01
language: English
duration: 01:38:17
author: SUFISM
scraped_at: 2026-01-03T09:20:57.041999+00:00
---
Uwais was asked, “How do you feel?”
He said, “Like one who has arisen in the morning and does not know whether he will be dead in the evening.”
The other man said, “But this is the situation of all men.”
Uwais said, “Yes, but how many of them feel it?”
Once a learned Mohammedan came to me and asked, “You are not a Mohammedan, so why do you speak on Sufism?”
I told him, “I am not a Mohammedan obviously, but I am a Sufi all the same.”
A Sufi need not be a Mohammedan. A Sufi can exist anywhere, in any form – because Sufism is the essential core of all religions. It has nothing to do with Islam in particular. Sufism can exist without Islam; Islam cannot exist without Sufism. Without Sufism, Islam is a corpse. Only with Sufism does it become alive.
Whenever a religion is alive it is because of Sufism. Sufism simply means a love affair with God, with the ultimate; a love affair with the whole. It means that one is ready to dissolve into the whole, that one is ready to invite the whole to come into one’s heart. It knows no formality. It is not confined by any dogma, doctrine, creed or church. Christ is a Sufi, so is Mohammed. Krishna is a Sufi, so is Buddha. This is the first thing I would like you to remember: that Sufism is the innermost core – as Zen is, as Hasidism is. These are only different names of the same ultimate relationship with God.
The relationship is dangerous. It is dangerous because the closer you come to God, the more and more you evaporate. And when you have come really close, you are no more. It is dangerous because it is suicidal, but the suicide is beautiful. To die into God is the only way to really live. Until you die, until you die voluntarily into love, you live an existence that is simply mediocre; you vegetate, you don’t have any meaning. No poetry arises in your heart, no dance, no celebration; you simply grope in the darkness. You live at the minimum, you don’t overflow with ecstasy.
That overflow happens only when you are not. You are the hindrance. Sufism is the art of removing the hindrance between you and you, between the self and the self – between the part and the whole.
A few things about this word sufi. An ancient Persian dictionary has this for the entry “Sufi” – the definition given by this dictionary goes in rhyme: Sufi Chist – Sufi, Sufist. Who is a Sufi? A Sufi is a Sufi. This is a beautiful definition. The phenomenon is indefinable: a Sufi is a Sufi. It says nothing and yet it says so much. It says that the Sufi cannot be defined; there is no other word to define it, there is no other synonym, there is no possibility of defining it linguistically, it is an indefinable phenomenon. You can live it and you can know it, but it is not possible through the mind or through the intellect. You can become a Sufi – that is the only way to know what it is. You can taste the reality yourself, it is available. You need not go into a dictionary, you can go into existence.
I have heard…

A small boy was playing in the garden. He was a very small boy and was very frightened of the large bulldog that occupied the yard next to his home.
One day, feeling rather adventurous, the little boy climbed the fence and the huge bulldog rushed up to him and licked his face. The boy began to scream and his mother arrived on the scene almost immediately.
“Did he bite you, darling?”
“No,” whimpered the little boy, “but he tasted me.”

If you are not ready to take a bite into Sufism you can at least taste it, and that’s what I will be making available to you – a little taste. Once you have tasted even a drop of the nectar called Sufism you will become thirsty for more. For the first time you will start feeling a great appetite for God.
These talks cannot explain to you what Sufism is, because I am not a philosopher. I am not a theologian either. And I am not really talking on Sufism, I will be talking Sufism. If you are ready, if you are ready to go into this adventure, then you will attain a taste of it. It is something that will start happening in your heart. It is something like a bud opening. You will start feeling a certain sensation in the heart – as if something is becoming alert, awake there; as if the heart has been asleep for long and now…the first glimmer of the morning – and there you will have the taste.
Sufism is a special kind of magic, a rare kind of magic. It can be transferred only from person to person, not from a book. It cannot be transferred by scriptures. It is also just like Zen – a transmission beyond words. The Sufis have a special word for it – they call it silsila. What Hindus call parampara, they call silsila. Silsila means a transfer from one heart to another heart, from one person to another person. It is a very, very personal religion.
You cannot have it without being related to an enlightened master – there is no other way. You can read all the literature that exists on Sufism and you will be lost in a jungle of words. Unless you find a guide, unless you fall in love with a guide, you will not have the taste.
I am ready to take you on this faraway journey if you are also courageous, adventurous. I hope you are, because only courageous people become attracted toward me. This place is not for cowards; this place is not for those so-called religious people; this place is not for so-called God-fearing people. This place is for those whom I call God-loving people. And they have a totally different quality. A God-fearing person never moves into the deeper realms of religion, he cannot because of his fear.
The word God-fearing is so absurd. If you are afraid of God then where are you going to be loving? Whom are you going to love? If you cannot even love God, then love will not be possible for you at all. If you are related through fear even with God, then this can’t be a relationship.
But we have been taught to be afraid of God. In fact, we have only been taught to be afraid of everything. Our whole life is a trembling, a fear, a cowardice – fear of hell, fear of God, fear of punishment. We are good, virtuous, because we are afraid. What kind of virtue is it that is based on fear? And how can you love God if your basic approach is through fear? Out of fear love never arises – that is an impossibility. And out of love fear never arises.
When you love a person all fear disappears. And when you are afraid all love disappears. You can hate the person if you are afraid of him, but you cannot love him. Down the centuries man has been taught to be afraid of God and the ultimate result is that Nietzsche had to declare that God is dead. That is the ultimate result of the fear-oriented mind. How long can you tolerate this God? How long can you remain afraid? One day or other you will have to kill him. That’s what Nietzsche did. When he said, “God is dead,” he also said, “Now man is free.” God is dead and now man is free. Otherwise how can you be free with God if he is only a source of fear? Fear cannot give you freedom.
People who come to me are God-loving people. When I say God-loving, I mean they are in search, they want to know. And they want to know authentically, they don’t want to have borrowed knowledge about it. They want to have a taste. They want to encounter, they want to face God, they want to look into his eyes. But before you can become capable of looking into the eyes of God you will have to become capable of looking into the eyes of a master. From there you take off. The journey begins.
I will make myself available to you. Sufism is just an excuse. I will not be talking about Sufism, I will be talking Sufism itself. The word Sufism is also beautiful. It has many orientations and all are beautiful. And I would not like to emphasize any one orientation, as it has been done again and again. A few people choose one orientation, a few people choose another, but my understanding is that all those orientations are beautiful and have something special to say. I accept them all.
One old Sufi master, Abul Hasam, has said, “Sufism was once a reality without a name and now Sufism is a name without reality.” For many centuries Sufism existed without a name. It existed as reality. That’s why I say Jesus was a Sufi, so was Mohammed, so was Mahavira and so was Krishna. Anyone who has come to know God is a Sufi. Why do I say so? Try to understand the word sufi and it will become clear to you.
The word sufi is a new coinage – a German coinage, out of German scholarship – not more than one hundred and fifty years old. In Arabic the word is tasawwuf. But both come from a root suf, which means wool.
It seems very strange. Why should wool become the symbol of Sufism? The scholars go on saying that it is because Sufis used to wear woolen robes. That’s true. But why? Nobody has answered it. Why should they be wearing woolen robes? Mohammed says in the Koran that even Moses was wearing a woolen robe when he encountered God. When God spoke to him he was entirely in a woolen robe. But why?
There is a deep symbolism in it. The symbolism is that wool is the garb of the animals and a Sufi has to become as innocent as an animal. The Sufi has to attain a primal innocence. He has to drop all kinds of civilization, he has to drop all kinds of cultures, he has to drop all conditionings, he has to become again an animal. Then the symbol becomes tremendously significant.
When man becomes animal he does not fall back, he goes higher. When man becomes animal, he is not just an animal. That is not possible. You cannot fall back. When a man becomes an animal he becomes a saint. He remains conscious, but his consciousness is no longer burdened by any conditioning. He is no longer a Hindu and no longer a Mohammedan and no longer a Christian. He is in tune with existence as deeply as any animal. He has dropped all kinds of philosophies, he carries no conceptualizations in his mind, his mind is without any content. He is, but he is no longer in the mind. To be without the mind – that is the meaning of the woolen robe. To be like innocent animals, not to know what is good and what is bad – and then the highest good arises, the summum bonum.
When you know this is good and that is bad, and you choose good against bad, you remain divided. When you choose, there is repression. When you say, “I will do this. This has to be done. This should be done,” this becomes an “ought.” Then naturally you have to repress – you have to repress that which you have condemned as bad and the repressed part remains inside you and goes on poisoning your system. Sooner or later it will assert, sooner or later it will take revenge. When it explodes, you will go mad.
Hence all civilized people are always on the verge of madness. This earth is a big madhouse. A few have already become mad, a few are potentially ready. The difference between you and the mad people is not of quality, it is only of quantity, only of degree. Maybe they have gone beyond a hundred degrees and you are just lingering somewhere – at ninety-eight, ninety-nine – but any moment any situation can push you beyond the boundary. Don’t you see it? Can’t you observe your mind? Can’t you see the madness that goes on and on inside? It is continuously there. You avoid it; you get occupied in a thousand and one things just to avoid it. You don’t look at it, you want to forget about it. It is too scary, too frightening. But it is there – and whether you avoid it or not it is growing. It is continuously accumulating momentum. It can come to a peak at any time, any small thing can trigger it. When you choose, you have to repress.
The animal does not choose. Whatever is, is. The animal simply accepts it; its acceptance is total. It knows no choice.
So does a Sufi. A Sufi knows no choice. He is choicelessly aware. Whatever happens he accepts it as a gift, as a God-given thing. Who is he to choose. He does not trust in his mind, he trusts in the universal mind. That’s why when you come across a Sufi you will see such animal innocence in his eyes, in his being; such freedom, such joy as only animals know – or trees or rocks or stars.
Idries Shah has condemned the definition of sufi from suf – wool – on exactly the same grounds as I am approving of it. He says that Sufis are so alert about symbols how can they choose wool as a symbol? The wool represents the animal, and Idries Shah says Sufis cannot choose the animal as a symbol. They are the people of God – why should they choose the animal? He seems very logical, and he may appeal to many people.
But on exactly the same grounds I approve the definition. To me, to be an animal means to be innocent – not to know morality, not to know immorality. To be an animal is not a condemnation. A saint is more like the animals than like you, than like the so-called human beings.
The human beings are not natural beings, they are very unnatural, artificial, plastic. Their whole life is a life of deception. If you touch somebody’s face you will never touch his face, you touch only his mask. And remember, your hand is also not true. It has a glove on it. Even lovers don’t touch each other; even in love you are not innocent; even in love you are not without masks. But when you want to love God you have to be without masks. You have to drop all deceptions. You have to be authentically whatever you are, to be choicelessly whatever you are. In that primal innocence God descends.
So the reasons Idries Shah finds to condemn the definition that sufi cannot come from suf are exactly the reasons I approve it.
I have heard…

The Catholic priest was trying to get a Jew converted to his faith.
He said, “All you have to do is say three times, ‘I was a Jew, now I’m a Catholic. I was a Jew, now I’m a Catholic. I was a Jew, now I’m a Catholic.’”
He said it, but the priest thought he had better check up on his convert one Friday at his home.
The Jew was frying chicken. “Now, you know you can’t eat that chicken on Friday.”
“Oh, yes, I can,” he replied. “I dipped it in a pan three times and said, ‘Once I was a chicken, now I am a fish.’”

That’s how we go on living. All of our religions are just like that – all just verbal. They do not penetrate your being. And you know that whatever you say, you do exactly the opposite. You think one thing, you say another, and you do something else. You are a trinity, you are not one. And all those three people are going in three different directions. You are a crowd – hence the misery.
The animal is one – hence the blissfulness of the animal. The animal has nothing whatever to be happy about. He does not have a big palace to live in and he does not have a TV and radio and all of that. He has nothing, and yet in him you will find great peace, silence, joy, celebration. Why? One thing is there: the animal is not a chooser.
The Sufi is not a chooser. Choose and you deceive; choose and you start becoming false; choose and you become plastic.

A man was going to attend a Halloween party dressed in the costume of the Devil. On his way it began to rain so he darted into a church where a revival meeting was in progress. At the sight of his devil’s costume, people began to scatter through the doors and windows.
One lady got her coat sleeve caught on the arm of one of the seats and as the man came closer she pleaded, “Satan, I’ve been a member of this church for twenty years, but I’ve really been on your side all the time.”

But that’s the situation of all ladies and of all gentlemen – they pay lip service to God, but basically they are surrendered to the Devil. The Devil is deeper because the Devil has been repressed. Whenever something is repressed it goes deeper in your being; you become just a hypocrite.
By asserting the symbol of the animal Sufis declare, “We are simple people. We don’t know what is good and what is bad. We know only God, and whatever happens is his gift. We accept it. We are not doers on our own accord.” This is the first meaning of the word sufi.
There is another possibility: the word sufi can be derived from sufa – purity, cleanliness, purification. That too is good. When you live a life of choicelessness a natural purity comes. But remember, this purity has nothing of morality in it. It does not mean pure in the sense of being good; it means pure in the sense of being divine, not in the sense of being good. Pure simply means pure of all ideas, both good and bad. Purity means transcendence. One has no idea at all, no prejudices. One trusts life so utterly that one need not have any ideas, one can live without ideas. When ideas are there in the mind they create impurity, they create wounds. When you are too full of ideas, you are too full of dirt. All ideas are dirty. Yes, even the idea of God is a dirty idea because ideas are dirty.
For a Sufi, God is not an idea, it is his lived reality. It is not sitting somewhere on a throne high in the heavens, no – it is herenow, it is all over the place, it is everywhere. God is just a name for the totality of existence.
Purity means a contentless mind – so please don’t be misguided by the word purity. It does not mean a man who has a good character. It does not mean a man who behaves according to the Ten Commandments. It does not mean a man who is respected by the society as a good man.
A Sufi has never been respected by the society. A Sufi lives such a rebellious life that the society has almost always been murdering Sufis, crucifying them – because the Sufi makes you aware of your falsity. He becomes a constant sermon against your artificiality, against your ugliness, against your inhumanity to human beings, against your masks, against all that you are and represent. A Sufi becomes a constant pain in the neck to the so-called society and to the so-called respectable people.
I have heard…

It happened that Abu Yasid, a Sufi mystic, was praying – these are parables, remember, they are not historical facts – and God spoke to Abu Yasid and said, “Yasid, now you have become one of my chosen people. Should I declare it to the world?”
Abu Yasid laughed. He said, “Yes, you can – if you want me to be crucified, declare. You declared about al-Hillaj and what happened? They crucified him. Whenever you declare that somebody has attained, people crucify him immediately. They don’t love you and they cannot tolerate your people, so if you want me to be crucified, declare.”
And it is said that God never declared about Abu Yasid. He kept quiet.

This has been the case.

Somebody asked al-Hillaj Mansoor, the greatest mystic ever, “What is the ultimate in Sufi experience?”
Al-Hillaj said, “Tomorrow, tomorrow you will see what the ultimate in Sufi experience is.”
Nobody knew what was going to happen the next day. The man asked, “Why not today?”
Al-Hillaj said, “Just wait. It is going to happen tomorrow – the ultimate.”
The next day he was crucified. And when he was crucified he shouted loudly for his friend who had asked the question. He said, “Where are you hiding in the crowd? Now come on and see the ultimate in Sufism. This is what it is.”

If you start living in God you become intolerable to the so-called society. The society lives in hypocrisy, it cannot tolerate truth. Truth has to be crucified. It can love the Church, but it cannot love Christ. It can love the Vatican pope, but it cannot love Jesus. When Jesus is gone then it is good – you can go on worshipping him. When Mansoor is gone you can go on talking about him. But when he is there he is a fire. Only those who are ready to be consumed by the fire will be ready to fall in love with Mansoor.
Sufa means purity; purity in the sense that there is no content in the mind anymore. The mind has disappeared. There is no-mind, no thinking, no thought. It is a state of satori, samadhi.
There is another possibility and that too is beautiful. And I accept all these possibilities. The third possibility is from another word, sufia, which means: chosen as a friend by God.
Sufis say that you cannot search for God unless he has already chosen you. How can you search for God if he has not already searched for you? All initiative is from the side of God. He is searching for you, he is desiring you, he goes on groping for you: “Where are you?” When he chooses somebody only then do you start choosing him. You may not know it – because when he chooses, how can you know?
The same is true about a master. You think that you choose a master? Nonsense, just nonsense! It is always the master who chooses you. The very idea that you choose the master is egoistic. How can you choose the master? How will you know in the first place who the master is? How will you decide? What criteria have you got? You cannot choose a master, the master chooses you.
You have come to me from faraway lands – many more are coming, they are on the way. Soon this place is going to become really crowded because I have chosen many who are not yet even alert about it. But they have started moving. They think they are searching for a master; they think they are seekers. And it is natural. It can be forgiven. But they have been chosen by somebody.
And so is the ultimate case with God. God chooses first, then you start feeling a hunger for him. And it is only Sufis who have said this. No other tradition has said so clearly that man cannot choose God, it is God who chooses man. It is a blessing. Even to feel a thirst for God is a great blessing. You should feel happy that you have been chosen, that God has already called you. The first call is always heard in the deep unconscious so you cannot figure out what it is, from where it is coming. You feel it as if it is coming from you. It is not coming from you.
Man cannot take the initiative. How can man take the initiative? Man is so impotent, man is so helpless. Man cannot start the journey on his own unless he is pulled, unless some magnetic force starts pulling him toward some unknown goal.
You can choose only that which you know. How can you choose God? You can take the initiative for other things, the worldly things, because you know them. You can have an idea of how to purchase a beautiful house, or how to have this woman as your wife or this man as your husband, or how to have more money, more power, more prestige – you can choose these things. How can you choose God? You have not even had a glimpse, not even in your dreams. How can you choose something so utterly unknown to you?
But you are not unknown to God. He can choose you. Whenever he chooses, a great desire arises in you to find him. That is an indication that he has chosen you. You have become a Sufi – chosen as a friend by God. That is also beautiful.
The fourth possibility is from the Greek word sufiya. Sufiya means wisdom. Wisdom is not synonymous with knowledge – knowledge is through scriptures, through others, borrowed. Wisdom arises in your own being; you are a light unto yourself. Wisdom means that you know, not that you believe. Knowledge is belief. Somebody says, “God is” and you believe. You believe the man, hence you believe that he must be saying the truth. Jesus says, “God is” and you believe; I say, “God is” and you believe – then it is knowledge. You love me, you trust me, you start believing – but it is knowledge.
A man becomes a Sufi only when he has known. When he himself has known, when he himself has touched the reality, when he himself has seen the face of God, then he becomes a Sufi. He has become wise. He is no longer just knowledgeable, now it is his own experience.
The English term philosophy comes from the same root, sufiya, but it has gone astray. Sufi also comes from the same root, sufiya, but it has not gone astray. Philosophy became just speculation – thinking and thinking and thinking, never arriving at any conclusion. And if you don’t arrive at any conclusion your life is not going to be transformed. Just by thinking, nobody is transformed; only when you arrive at some conclusions through experience do you grow. Philosophy is a game with words and logic – a beautiful game. If you like it you can play it, but you remain the same. It never changes you.
That’s why science had to get a divorce from philosophy. The day science was divorced from philosophy it started growing. It became experimental, it became objective. Science does not depend on thinking anymore, it depends on experimentation. That is one possibility of getting a divorce from philosophy.
Another possibility of getting the divorce is Sufism. Science moves toward the object and becomes experimentation, Sufism moves toward the subject and becomes experience. But both are concerned about reality – science for the reality that is outside and Sufism for the reality that is inside. Both have divorced philosophy.
Science depends on experiment because with the object, experiment is possible; Sufism depends on experience because you can only experience the inner consciousness, you cannot experiment upon it. It is not an object, it is your subjectivity.
And the last possibility is from the Hebrew root ain sof, which means the absolutely infinite, the search for the absolutely infinite, the search beyond the relative, the search for the unbounded, the eternal, the timeless.
Yes, that’s exactly what Sufism is. Sufism is all these things and more. To indicate that “more” I will repeat the definition in the Persian dictionary: Sufi Chist – Sufi, Sufist. Who is a Sufi? A Sufi is a Sufi. Nothing more can be said about it. But you can enter the temple of Sufism and you can taste it.
Before we enter this small story of today, a few more things will be helpful to understand. They will become a background.
The Koran says there are three basic qualities that have to be in the heart of the seeker. The first is khushu. Khushu means humility, humbleness. The second is karamat. Karamat means charity, sharing, the joy of giving. And the third is sijd. Sijd means truthfulness, authenticity; not to pretend, but to be whatever you are. These three are the three pillars of Sufism.
Humility does not mean the ordinary so-called humbleness. The ordinary humble person is not egoless. He carries a new kind of ego – of being humble. He thinks he is humble, “Nobody is as humble as I am. I am the topmost in humility.” But he goes on comparing. The ego has not changed, the ego has only taken a new posture, a new gesture, more subtle.
First the ego was very gross. When you go on bragging about your money, it is very gross. One day you renounce your money and then you start bragging that you have renounced all. This is very subtle, but the bragging continues. First you say, “I am somebody.” In a thousand and one ways you try to prove that you are somebody. Then one day seeing the futility of it you drop the whole trip, you turn back, you take another gesture – you stand on your head and you start saying, “I am nobody.” But “I am” continues. The claim was for somebody, now it is for nobody. The claim was there, the claim is still there. Now it has taken a subtle form.
Humility, khushu, means a man who has understood all the ways of the ego. And by understanding all the ways of the ego, the ego has disappeared. There is no claim, not even of being humble. When there is no claim, there is humility, there is khushu.
This is one of the most essential qualities for those who want to move toward God – because if you are too much, you will not be moving. You have to be liquid, you have to melt; you cannot remain frozen in your ego. Only when you melt will you start moving. And when you start moving where else can you move? All movement is toward God. Only those who are ossified are not reaching toward God – otherwise, if you are moving, you are moving toward God. There is no other movement.
The second is charity – karamat. Charity does not mean that you give and you feel very good that you have given, that you give and you oblige the person to whom you have given. Then it is not karamat, then it is not charity. Charity is when you give and you feel obliged that the other has taken it; when you give with no idea that you are obliging anybody in any way; when you give because you have too much – what else can you do? It is not that the other needs.
Charity is when you give out of your affluence, when you give out of your abundance. It is not that the other is needy and you are helping him; the other is not the question at all. You give because you have – what else can you do? The flower has bloomed and the fragrance spreads to the winds – what else can the flower do? The lamp has been lighted and it shares its light, it spreads its light. The cloud is full of water and it showers – what else can it do?
When you give out of your abundance, only then is there charity. And then you don’t bother who is worthy of receiving it. That is not the point at all.
You must have read the beautiful parable of Jesus. Jesus is incomparable as far as parables go.

A rich man called a few laborers to work in his garden. By the afternoon it was felt that there were not enough and that the work would not be completed by the evening, so a few more laborers were called. But by the evening it was felt that even those were not enough so a few more laborers were called.
At sunset the rich man gave them money for all that they had done. But he gave equally to all of them: those who had come in the morning received the same, and those who had come in the afternoon they also received the same, and those who had come just when the sun was setting they also received the same.
Naturally, the laborers who had come in the morning were angry. They protested and they said, “This is unjust. We came in the morning, we did the whole day’s work and we received the same reward. These people have just come and they have not done a thing and they are also receiving the same reward. This is unjust.”
The master laughed and he said, “Whatever you have received is not enough for the work you have done?”
They said, “It is enough. But what about these people who have not done anything and who have also received the same reward?”
The master said, “I give to them out of my abundance. Can’t I give my money? It is my money. You have been rewarded for whatever you have done. Can’t I throw my money away? What protest is there? Why should you be worried?”

And Jesus used to say, ‘“This man is the man of charity. He gives out of his abundance.” This is what Sufis call karamat.
And the third is truthfulness. It does not mean saying the truth, it means being the truth. Saying is only halfway; being is the true thing. You can say the truth a few times when it doesn’t harm you – that’s what people go on doing. When truth is not going to harm them they become truthful. And sometimes, if truth is going to harm others, they persist in being very, very truthful. But when the truth is not going to help you then you drop it, then it is no longer meaningful.
That’s why people say, “Honesty is the best policy.” But the man who says, “Honesty is the best policy” is not an honest man, remember. Policy? – the very word is dishonest. Truth cannot be a policy and honesty cannot be a policy. They can only be your very heart – not policies. Policies can be used and dropped. Policies are political. When honesty pays, you are honest – that’s what it means. “Honesty is the best policy.” When it does not pay, you become dishonest. You have no relationship with honesty. You use it. That’s what it means when you say “policy.”
Sijd – the Sufi word means to be truthful, to be true. It is not only a question of policy. Whatever happens, whatever the result, not thinking of the result at all but just to be whatever is true. To risk all for truth – that’s what sijd is. It is to risk everything for truth. Because if truth is saved, all is saved, and if truth is lost, all is lost.
Now this small story.
Uwais was asked, “How do you feel?”
Uwais is a Sufi master.
He said, “Like one who has arisen in the morning and does not know whether he will be dead in the evening.”
The other man said, “But this is the situation of all men.”
Uwais said, “Yes, but how many of them feel it?”
Now many things have to be understood. First, when Uwais said: “Like one who has arisen in the morning and does not know whether he will be dead in the evening,” he is saying many things. It is a very pregnant statement. You will have to go deep into it.
First he is saying that a Sufi lives moment by moment; he does not bother about what is going to happen in the next moment. He has no plan for the next moment. A Sufi has no future. This moment is all. He lives in it, he lives totally in it because there is nowhere else to go.
You cannot live totally in the moment if you have a future – a part of your being will be flowing toward the future, naturally. If you have a past you cannot live in the present, part of your mind will be flowing toward the past. You will become fragmented. The major part of your being will remain hanging somewhere in the past and the remaining greater part will have already moved somewhere into the future. Nothing will be left for the present. And the present is so small, so atomic, that you can miss it very easily. People are missing it. People have pasts and people have futures, people don’t have any present.
The Sufi lives in the present. To live in the present, the basic need is to withdraw yourself from the past, to withdraw yourself from the future. Then there comes a concentration of energies, then this small moment becomes luminous, you pour your total energy into it – then there is joy and benediction. If you are miserable, it is only because you live in the past and in the future. A miserable man has a past and a future, a man who lives in bliss has only the moment, this moment. He lives in the now.
Ashley Montagu has coined a new word – it will be very, very helpful to understand. He says that this newness, this constantly being new in the moment, this constantly dropping out of the past and not jumping into the future is a great art. He calls that art, neoteny. Neo means new, teny means stretched out, extended.
A man can live his whole life in newness, a man can live his whole life like a child, a man can have the quality of a child extended all over his life – the art is to live in the moment. The person who lives in the moment never grows old. He matures, but he never grows old. He really grows. Growing old is not really growing. Growing old is only dying slowly; growing old is only slowly committing suicide. The man who lives in the moment never becomes old in the sense that people become old. He never becomes knowledgeable. He is always innocent, curious, thrilled, full of wonder. Every moment brings a new surprise. He is ready to explore new dimensions of life. He is always on an adventure. He is an explorer. He is never fed up with life. He is never bored.

In a church, the priest declared that after the services there would be a meeting of the Board. Everybody left. Only the Board members were there. But a stranger was also sitting there just in the front row.
The priest was a little puzzled. He said, “Sir, have you not understood? I said there would be a meeting of the Board.”
The stranger said, “Yes. And who is more bored than me? You tell me.”

Look at people. Look at people’s eyes. They don’t have the glimmer of surprise. Look at their faces, their faces say that nothing is going to happen anymore. They are bored, utterly bored. If they are not committing suicide it is only because they are cowards. Otherwise, there is nothing to live for; there is no meaning, no significance. There seems to be no joy. Just go to any street and stand at the side and watch people. Just everybody seems to be so full of dust.
Why do people go on living? – because they are afraid to commit suicide. Otherwise, life has no joy. Or maybe they are so bored that they don’t feel that anything is going to happen even in death. They are so bored, nothing is ever going to happen. Nothing ever happens. And the reason? The reason is that they are burdened by the past.
Sufism says, “Don’t be burdened by the past and don’t be burdened by the future either. This moment is precious, why waste it in thinking about things that are no more or in thinking about things that are not yet?”
Let this moment be one of great joy, and that joy becomes a prayer, that joy becomes zikr, that joy becomes a remembrance of God. It is no use just repeating, “Allah, Allah, Allah”; it is no use just repeating, “Rama, Rama, Rama.” When you are full of joy then you remember Allah in the deepest core of your being. It is not that you repeat it verbally; your whole existence says Allah, your every cell, your every fiber of being, says Allah. It is not that you repeat it; it is not verbal, it is existential. It is there, it is constantly there. It becomes a climate inside you. You start living in that juice, in that joy.
So the first thing Uwais says is, “This is my feeling. I live moment to moment, without any plan or future. I don’t know what is going to happen this evening – maybe death.” By death he simply means that anything is possible, even death is possible. “I live in surprise, I live in wonder, I live in mystery. And the greatest mystery is death.”
There are only two mysteries: life and death. And the greatest is certainly death – because life is spread out and death is very intense. Life happens in seventy, eighty, a hundred years. Naturally it is spread out. Death happens in a single moment, it is very intense. Death is the culmination, the crescendo. Death is the greatest orgasm there is. Hence along the way, people are afraid of orgasm also because they are afraid of death. Many people don’t have orgasms. Or even if they do, it is a local orgasm, not very orgasmic – because of fear. The orgasmic moment is a death moment. And in death happens the ultimate orgasm. In that moment you utterly disappear into nothingness. It is the greatest experience.
Uwais says, “I don’t know what is going to happen – maybe death.” Death is a door to God. Those who know how to die know how to enter God. Clingers, clinging to life, never know what God is because they don’t allow death. And death comes every day; as each moment passes by something dies. If you are thirty years old you have been dying for thirty years continuously. If you gather those moments of thirty years, those dead moments that you have already lived, if you gather them, then you are burdened. Then you start growing old. Then you are carrying such a load – how can you be in a dance? That load won’t allow it.
If you can drop that load every day and you are again fresh, again innocent, again a child, then you know that death is also happening every day. Life and death are happening together. Then one day comes the ultimate death and one accepts it, welcomes it, celebrates it, disappears into it dancing. How you behave at the moment of death will show how you have lived. Your death moment will be a testament.
Uwais is saying, “I am always facing death and waiting for it. And I am thrilled by the possibility of it.” But to face death means to live courageously. People avoid death, they have even avoided the very idea of it. They think, “Everybody else dies, but I am not going to die.”
If you live in such innocence you live in ignorance. Ignorance is a great religious quality. A man of knowledge cannot become religious, but an ignorant man can easily become religious.
Uwais says: “Like one who has arisen in the morning and does not know whether he will be dead in the evening.” Nothing is certain, nothing is predictable; everything remains open. For a Sufi all is possible. Nothing is absolutely certain, everything is possible – that is what opening means; an open mind.
The other man said, “But this is the situation of all men.” Everybody is going to die but nobody knows when. The other has not understood the statement of Uwais. We understand only at our own plane.
Uwais said, “Yes. But how many of them feel it?” They are going to die. Every moment the unknown penetrates life – that’s what death is. But they don’t feel it. They are not aware of it. People live in a kind of sleep, in a kind of slumber. People are almost sleepwalkers.

The passenger in the taxi cab was more than slightly inebriated. Glancing at his watch he saw that the time was 7:00. Shortly afterwards he glanced at a clock in a jeweler’s store that registered 6:55.
“Hey, what’s the time?” he asked the cabbie.
“It’s 6:50,” the cabbie replied.
“Stop and turn around,” he demanded, “we’re going in the wrong direction!”

People are almost asleep, drunk; there is not even a ray of awareness.
It happened…

It was the first part in any play that he had managed to get in the last five years. True, it was only a small speaking part, but it was a start. The hero was to come on the scene and say, “Did you see this man get killed?” His part was simply to look the hero straight in the eyes and answer, “I did.”
For weeks he practiced with those two words: “I did, I did, I did” – studying elocution, practicing facial expressions and intonations. Then came the big day. The hero walked in, glanced at the body on the floor, looked at the actor and asked, “Did you see this man get killed?”
Looking full into the eyes of the hero, he answered clearly, “Did I?”

People are not alert at all. They are asleep. A kind of dullness, a kind of fog surrounds your being. It is very foggy and confused. Very rarely do you become alert, very, very rarely. Rare are those moments. Gurdjieff used to say that if a man had them seven times in his life it is more than you can expect. Very rarely.
In very great danger, sometimes you become alert. Somebody comes to kill you and puts a revolver on your chest – then for a single moment the fog disappears. Death is there. Or, if you are driving at ninety, ninety-five, a hundred miles per hour and then suddenly at a turn you see that now everything is gone, for a moment the accident seems to be certain, absolutely certain – the fog disappears. Hence the appeal of danger: because only in danger do you sometimes feel that you are. Hence the appeal of war: when people go to war and move into the clutches of death, sometimes rare moments come. But otherwise, in an ordinary comfortable, convenient life, people go on snoring.

A traveler inquired the way to the post office from a drunkard. The drunkard was an old inhabitant of the town.
“Well, you go down two blocks and turn right… No, you go down two blocks and turn left… No, that ain’t right either, you go up this street one block, turn right and go one block. Truth is mister, I don’t think you can get to the post office from here at all.”

People are living in that fog. And it is not only that when you drink you become foggy – you are drinking a thousand and one kinds of alcohol every moment. Somebody is money-mad – then money is his alcohol. Somebody is power-mad – then he is drinking power and will become a drunkard. And there are different kinds of mad people. But everybody has his own particular kind of alcohol that makes him drunk.
Have you seen the eyes of a miser looking at his money? He looks at the money as if he is looking at his beloved. He touches money with such tenderness. He feels one-hundred-rupee notes with such love and care. When the money is there he forgets the whole world.
Watch a politician – power-mad. He is drunk. He need not have any other alcoholic beverages, he need not have any drugs, he is already drugged by power. He may even be against alcohol and against drugs, he may try to bring prohibition to the country, but he himself is drunk. And certainly the alcohol that is created out of power is more dangerous than any alcohol that comes out of grapes. These power maniacs are the really dangerous people of the world.
But everybody is drunk. They drink different kinds of drinks, but they are still drunk. A Sufi is one who is not drunk. That’s what Uwais means when he says: “Yes, but how many of them feel it?”
Remember, there is a difference. If the same question was asked of Bodhidharma or Rinzai they would have said, “How many of them are aware of it?” Uwais says, “How many of them feel it?” That’s the difference between two basic paths – the path of awareness, meditation, and the path of love, feeling.
Sufism is the path of love, feeling. If Bodhidharma had been asked he must have said, “How many are aware of it?” He would have used the word aware, not feel. No Zen master would use the word feel – that is the basic difference, otherwise there is no difference.
Sufism is heart-wakefulness – the arising of feeling. The Koran says: “It is not the eyes that are blind but the hearts.” By heart is meant the faculty that perceives the transcendent, the beloved. Sufis are known as those who have hearts. Says al-Hillaj Mansoor, “I saw my Lord with the eye of the heart. I asked him ‘Who art thou?’ and he answered ‘Thou.’”
The eye of the heart… Remember this: Sufism is the path of love. It is more dancing than Zen, it is more singing than Zen, it is more celebrating than Zen. That’s why the countries where Sufism has existed have created the best and the most beautiful poetry that has ever existed in the world. The Persian language became so poetic, and it has created the greatest poets of the world. The very language has become poetic, the very language has become very juicy – because God is thought of as the beloved.
That too has to be understood – the last thing today. For Zen people there is no God, your own awareness is the ultimate. Zen comes out of Gautam Buddha’s insight. Sufism comes out of Mohammed’s love affair with God.
It happened…

The year was 610 AD. Mohammed was in the cave on Mount Hira. He received his first spiritual experience and feared that he had become either mad or, as he said, a poet. He went to his wife trembling with fear saying, “Woe is me. Poet or possessed?” He had even thought of casting himself down from the high rocks to kill himself. It was such a shock, it was such a great voltage of love. For three days he was trembling constantly as if in a deep, dangerous fever.
The fear was that he thought that he had either become a poet or he had gone mad. Out of this experience of Mohammed’s starts the river of Sufism. It has always remained both poetic and possessed. He was both. He had become a poet and he had become possessed. He had gone mad and he had become a mystic.

You must have heard about the beautiful Sufi legend of Majnu and Laila. It is not an ordinary love story. The word majnu means mad, mad for God. And laila is the symbol of God. Sufis think of God as the beloved; laila means the beloved. Everybody is a Majnu, and God is the beloved. And one has to open one’s heart, the eye of the heart.
That’s why Uwais says: “Yes, but how many of them feel it?” People have become completely unfeeling, they don’t feel at all. They have bypassed their hearts. They don’t go through the heart, they have reached the head. They have avoided the heart. Hence there seems to be no benediction in life. It is only through the heart that the flowers bloom and it is only through the heart that the birds start singing, and it is only through the heart that you come to realize life not as a dry awareness, but as a celebration.
Sufism is great celebration. I invite you to celebrate it with me.
Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
Has Sufism arisen as a rebellion against the establishment of Islam? Or is it pre-Islam?
It is both. Anything that is alive is both. It is very ancient and it is very new – together, simultaneously.
Sufism is pre-Islam and yet it is a unique, new phenomenon too. It is the essential core of Islam and yet it is a rebellion against the establishment of Islam too. That’s how it always is. Zen is also both – the essential core of Buddhism and a rebellion against the establishment.
It has to be understood. Whenever a man like Buddha or Mohammed happens, the essential flowers. But sooner or later the human mind will make an establishment out of it. That too is natural because man needs something to cling to. Man needs something pseudo because the real transforms him. The real is dangerous. He needs something that only looks real, but is not real. He needs a toy to play with. That’s what the Church is, the establishment is; it gives an appearance of doing the real thing. So you can enjoy doing it and you can enjoy the ego trip and yet you remain the same. It does not penetrate you, transmute you, at all. Nothing is at stake.
If a man really goes into prayer he will die. He will never come back the same again. He will come back, but as a totally different person. The one who has gone into prayer will never come back. Something new, something that has never existed before, something that is discontinuous with the past will arise. You will be lost, and only then will you find the real you. Real prayer is dangerous; it is a death and a resurrection.
So man is very tricky – he creates a false prayer. He makes a ritual out of prayer, he pretends to pray. He only goes through the gesture, through the empty gesture – his heart is not in it. He goes to the mosque, to the temple, to the church; he prays. And he knows that he is deceiving, he knows that he is not in it. Yet it gives him a certain respectability. People think of him as being a religious man. That gives him a certain credibility. It is a formal gesture, it makes his social life smooth, it creates a kind of lubricant – but it doesn’t change him.
So whenever a Mohammed or a Buddha happens, the real is brought into the world. But the real drives you mad, the real starts killing you. Only very rare people, courageous people, can have that date with the real.
What about the cowards? They would also like to enjoy at least the idea that they have seen God, been into prayer, at least the idea that they are also religious. What about these cowards? And they exist in great numbers; the majority of humanity consists of cowards. These cowards sooner or later create a false religion. Christ is real religion, Christianity is false religion. Mohammed is real, Mohammedanism is false. When this false religion, this established religion becomes too much, again and again there will come people – courageous people – who will assert and who will say that this is all wrong. So these people will look rebellious. In fact, they are asserting the very spirit. The spirit of Mohammed is asserted by Mansoor; the spirit of Mohammed is asserted by Omar Khayyam; the spirit of Mohammed is asserted by a thousand and one Sufi mystics again and again.
But now you can see what the problem is. Whenever somebody asserts the same spirit he is bringing the essential religion back – but he will go against the establishment, against the false religion. And the false religion has great power – the mass madness is behind it. The mass neurosis supports it. It can kill, it can destroy. It cannot create, but it can destroy a Jesus, a Socrates, a Mansoor. That is very easy for it.
These people are like flowers, very fragile, and the mass neurosis is like a rock. If you throw a rock at a flower nothing is going to happen to the rock, only the flower will be destroyed. Remember, the higher is always destroyed whenever there is a clash with the lower. If there is a clash between poetry and prose, poetry will be destroyed, not prose. If there is a clash between God and the world, God will disappear, not the world. If there is a clash between lust and love, love will be poisoned, not lust.
When the unknown descends, when the superior comes into this world, it comes like a flower.
Yes, it is very rebellious. It is rebellious because it is essential. The essential is always rebellious. Mohammed was a rebellious man – his whole life he was haunted by enemies. Many times he was just on the brink of being killed. He had to fight his whole life – a mystic had to become a warrior, a mystic had to waste his whole life in being a warrior. He had to carry a sword. And you can see the contradiction, the paradox – on his sword he had written the words: peace, love. Love had to carry a sword because of mad people. Peace had to carry a sword because of neurosis.
Mohammed had to wage war continuously; he was fighting and fighting. His whole life was wasted in fight. He could have brought more flowers from the unknown, he could have brought more of God into this world, but there was no opportunity.
Once Mohammed has become established sooner or later the enemy will win again: the enemy who was fighting against Mohammed will become the priest. Watch it! The priests were fighting against Mohammed – the priest of the old establishment. Mohammed brings the essential religion back again, the eternal. Then the priest who was with the older establishment fights with him. If Mohammed wins, then the priest changes party. The priest is always with those who are victorious; the coward is always with those who are victorious. The priest changes party. He says, “I am converted by you.” He moves into the camp of Mohammed.
But he has his old tricks, he has his old mind. He starts playing the same game. Maybe while Mohammed is alive he will not be able to do it, but once Mohammed is gone it will be very easy for him to have the same kind of establishment in the name of Mohammed. Then again whenever another Sufi mystic brings God back, he will be a friend of Mohammed and an enemy of Mohammedans. That’s why there is this paradox.
It is both; religion is always both. Look at me. Whatever I am saying to you is the essential religion. It is the religion of Buddha, Christ, Moses, Mohammed, and yet all the priests are against me – all the priests. They may not agree on anything else but they agree on one thing – they all agree on being against me. The Mohammedan priest agrees with the Hindu. They will not agree on anything else, but they both agree about me being wrong. The Christian agrees with the Jaina. They have nothing similar, not a single iota of doctrine that is similar, but on one thing they will agree: if they have to condemn me they will all be together.
Whatever I am saying to you is the essential core of all their religions, but they are against it. They pretend to be for it, they pretend to be the protectors – they are the enemies. The establishment is the enemy of religion. But it happens in the natural course of things because man is stupid. The establishment is bound to happen again and again. And again and again somebody has to assert and rebel.
There is a beautiful parable in Dostoyevsky’s Brothers Karamazov.

Jesus comes back to the world after eighteen hundred years to see how things are going now. He is very hopeful. He thinks, “Now almost half the earth is Christian, I am going to be welcomed and received. The first time I was there on the earth people were against me because there were no Christians, there was nobody to receive me. There were Jews, and they killed me.”
Now he comes with great hope. He descends into Bethlehem on a Sunday morning. Naturally he chooses Sunday – Christians will be free and they will be coming out of the church and he will meet them just in front of the church.
People are coming out and he is waiting with great hope. Then people come around him and they start laughing, they start ridiculing him. They say, “You are pretending perfectly well. You look just like Jesus.”
He says, “I am Jesus!”
They laugh and they say, “There is only one Jesus. This is sacrilege to call yourself Jesus. You look like him, but how can you be him? It will be better if you escape from here before the priest comes out. If he catches hold of you, you will be in trouble.”
But Jesus says, “He is my priest. If you cannot recognize me, it’s okay – you are lay people. But he is my priest, continuously reading my scriptures, thinking, meditating on whatever I have said before, continuously talking about me. At least he will recognize me. You wait!”
And they laugh and they say, “You are wrong. Just escape from here, otherwise you will get in trouble.”
Then comes the priest, and the people who have not even bowed down to Jesus touch the feet of the priest and give him a passage very reverently, very respectfully. And the priest comes in and looks at this young man and says, “Get down! Come follow me, come into the church. Have you gone mad? What are you up to?”
Jesus says. “Can’t you recognize me?”
Then the priest takes him into the church, puts him in a dark cell, locks the cell and disappears. In the middle of the night he comes back. The whole day Jesus thinks, “What is going to happen? Am I going to be crucified again by my own people, by Christians? This is too much!” He cannot believe it.
In the middle of the night the priest comes with a small lamp in his hand. He falls at the feet of Jesus and says, “I recognized you. But please, you are not needed at all. You have done your work and now we are doing your work perfectly well. You are a great disturber. If you come again you will disturb the whole thing. It has been hard work for us. For eighteen centuries we have struggled, and somehow we have tried to manage things perfectly well. Half of humanity is converted and half is on the way. Just wait. You need not come! Master, you are not needed, we servants are enough. Just send messages from there.”
Jesus says, “I’m happy that you at least recognized me.”
The priest says, “Yes, I can recognize you when we are alone, but in front of the masses I cannot recognize you. And if you insist on creating trouble then I am sorry but I will have to crucify you the same way that the Jews did with you – because a priest has to look to the establishment. I am part of an establishment – Jew or Christian does not matter. I have to save the Church. If there is any conflict between you and the Church, then I am for the Church – I serve the Church. It is perfectly good: you live in heaven, you enjoy there and we are enjoying here. Things are perfectly good. There is no need of your second coming, the first was enough.”

The essential religion will always go against the established religion. Sufis are the very heart, but the heart is bound to be against the mind, the intellect. The priest lives in the head; the man of prayer lives in the heart. They are two polarities, their languages are different. Their languages are so different that the priest cannot understand the language of the heart at all. He can spin theories; he has great expertise as far as doctrines are concerned. He has a very legal mind and is very knowledgeable. But as far as the heart is concerned there is a wasteland; nothing grows, nothing flowers, nothing flows.
The head cannot understand the heart. The heart can understand the head because the heart is deeper than the head. The man of the heart can understand the man of the head and can feel compassion for him, but the man of the head cannot understand the man of the heart. The lower cannot understand the higher; the higher can understand the lower. The man who is sitting in the valley cannot understand the man who is sitting on the top of the hill. But the man who is sitting on the top of the hill can understand the man who is living in the valley.
So people of the heart are very compassionate. They understand. They understand why the priest is against them; they understand why the majority of humanity is not able to fall in rapport with them.
Let me tell you an anecdote.

A man was walking along and he saw a snail lost in a crevice in a wall, and for no particular reason he said to it, “Hello snail.”
Oddly enough the snail could speak and the snail could hear, and it said, “Hello,” and it moved its eyes around as best it could on their stalks to try to see what it was that was confronting him.
So the man said, “Can you hear me?”
The snail said, “Yes, of course. Who and what are you anyway?”
And the man said, “Well, I am a man.”
The snail said, “Whatever is that?”
So the man said, “Well, we are something like you. For instance, you have eyes on stalks and we have stalks on the other end.”
The snail said, “The other end?”
The man said, “Yes, just a minute. It’s for putting our feet on, you see – and these feet…”
The snail said, “Whatever are these feet for?”
And the man said, “The feet are for moving along on very rapidly.”
The snail said, “Really, you amaze me. Is there anything else peculiar about you?”
And the man said, “Well, you know how you have your house on your back?”
The snail said, “Yes, yes.”
The man said, “Well, we don’t do that, you see. We have lots and lots of houses and we go in and out of them almost at will.”
The snail said, “You really are a most astonishing creature. Is there anything else strange about you?”
The man said, “Well, now, we are man, and a man can take a thing like a leaf – you know a leaf?”
The snail said, “Yes, yes, I know a leaf.”
And the man said, “Well he can make marks on this leaf and hand the leaf to another man, who could give the leaf to a third man, who could tell from the marks on the leaf what the first man was thinking.”
“Ah,” said the snail, “you are one of them, hm?”
And the man said, “What do you mean?”
“You are a liar!” said the snail. “The trouble with you liars is you tell one lie and then you tell a bigger one, and then finally you overreach yourselves.”

There are different languages at different planes. The Sufi speaks the language of the heart and the priest speaks the language of the head. The priest speaks the language of knowledge and the Sufi speaks the language of love. They don’t meet, they don’t communicate. Communication is impossible. The priest is blind – he has never seen the light, he only believes in it. The Sufi has seen the light; it is not a belief anymore. He knows it.
Try to understand this paradox. The people who think they know, don’t know; the knowledgeable people don’t know because they can’t see. And the people who love and don’t talk about knowledge at all, know because they can see. Love opens the eye of the heart. And when you have seen, you will be constantly in rebellion. When you have seen, then no belief can satisfy you. Then your very vision will become destructive to all kinds of beliefs.
When you have seen, then you cannot concede to and you cannot agree with stupid ideas about light. A blind man can only have stupid ideas about light. He cannot have the right idea. How can he have the right idea? He has no eyes. Whatever he knows about light is going to be wrong. He has not even seen darkness – what to say about light? A blind man cannot even see darkness.
Never have the idea that blind people live in darkness. No, they cannot. Even to see darkness one needs eyes. To see anything one needs eyes. And there is no way to explain to a blind man what light is. You cannot even use darkness, you cannot say, “Light is against darkness.” He does not even know what darkness is. There is no way to make it clear to a blind man. The only way is to help him to see, the only way is to help him to open his eyes. Or, if he needs some treatment for his eyes, then apply the treatment. Be a physician to his eyes. It is pointless going on giving him explanations, philosophical doctrines, scriptures. They will simply muddle him more, confuse him more.
The Sufi is rebellious because the Sufi has seen it. And naturally he will always find it difficult to explain it to people. That’s why Sufis don’t believe in explanations. If you go to a Sufi he starts giving you methods, not doctrines. That’s why they are called the people of the path. They give you a method. They say, “Work on the method. If the method goes deeper, changes your heart, opens your being, you will know.” They will not give you a single doctrine, a single principle – they have none. They have only methodology. It is very scientific. They give you a taste. It is hard, arduous work.
If you come to me and ask “What is truth?” I can say something – within minutes the work is done. I have told you, you have known, and it is finished. I have neither told you nor have you understood anything, but the idea has arisen in you that now you know, and now you will carry this idea.
If you are really interested I will have to give you a device, not a doctrine; I will have to give you a meditation, not a principle; I will have to initiate you into your inner lab. I will have to take you slowly, slowly into the deeper waters of your being. By and by you will start feeling, seeing – you will become more sensitive, more alert, more aware, and things will start penetrating your thick layer of unconsciousness. A few rays will start entering your dark night of the soul, and then you will know.
The work of the Sufi takes years. Sufis don’t preach. They teach, certainly, but they don’t preach. And when they teach, they teach methods, not principles. To follow a method one needs to be really in search – because sometimes it takes twelve years, sometimes twenty years, sometimes your whole life. Sometimes many lives are needed.
The people who are in search of instant enlightenment cannot have contact with a Sufi. That’s why Sufis go on hiding themselves. They don’t declare themselves, they remain invisible. They are available only to those who really search, who really seek.
It is very difficult to find a Sufi master, and he may be living just in your neighborhood. He may be doing such an ordinary thing that you cannot believe. He may be a weaver, or he may be a shoemaker, or he may be running a hotel, or any other kind of work. You cannot even suspect that a Sufi master lives just by the corner. You may come across him every day and you will not have any idea who this man is – unless you are a seeker. If you are a seeker, then by and by you will be led to him. In fact, if you are a seeker he will start choosing you. He will be watching you. He will not allow you to watch him; he will be watching you, he will be seeing. And if he feels that there is a seeker, then by and by he will make it possible that you can see him. He can become visible if he wants to.
There is a famous story.

It happened that a well-known Sufi was asked, “What is invisibility?”
He said, “I shall answer that when an opportunity for a demonstration occurs.”
They believe in demonstrations and they believe in opportunities. They will not say a single word if the opportunity has not occurred, if the right situation is not there. You can ask the question to a master and he will say, “Wait, when the right opportunity occurs then I will show you” – because he does not believe in saying, he believes in showing.
He said, “I shall answer that when an opportunity for a demonstration occurs.”
Sometime later, the man and the one who had asked him the question were stopped by a band of soldiers. The soldiers said, “We have orders to take all dervishes into custody – for the king of this country says that they will not obey his commands and that they say things which are not welcome to the tranquility of the thought of the populace.”
The Sufi said, “And so you should, for you must do your duty.”
“But are you not Sufis?” said the soldiers.
“Test us,” said the Sufi.
The officer took out a Sufi book…a book that is tremendously respected by the Sufis. It is called The Book of the Books. It has only a few sentences written in it, otherwise it is empty.
“What is this?” the Sufi master said, as if he had not even recognized the book. The soldiers had brought the book that would be a sign of a Sufi – the moment the Sufi sees The Book of the Books he will bow down. It is a great treasure.
The Sufi master said, “What is this?” – as if he did not recognize the book. The Sufi looked at the title page. “It is something that I will burn in front of you,” said the master, “since you have not already done so." He set light to the book and the soldiers rode away satisfied.
The Sufi’s companion asked, “What was the purpose of that action?”
“To make us invisible,” said the Sufi. “For to the man of the world, visibility means that you look like something or someone he expects you to resemble. If you look different, your true nature becomes invisible to him.”
The Sufi master is saying, “I have become invisible to these soldiers because they could not believe that a Sufi could burn the book. They have a certain expectation – that the Sufis revere this book. The moment I burned the book we were no longer Sufis. I had become invisible to him.”

And that’s how Sufis become invisible to people. They do the unexpected. Gurdjieff learned his methods of invisibility from Sufi masters. Gurdjieff was a Sufi master in the West, one of the most important Sufi teachers who has penetrated the Western consciousness. He remained invisible to the masses, and he had such techniques to become invisible that in just a single second he could become visible and in a single second he could become invisible. Sometimes it used to happen that two people would come to see him. If he wanted to, he would become visible to one and remain invisible to the other. And both were talking to him, together. He had become so practiced that he could show one kind of emotion from one side of his face and another kind of emotion from the other side of his face.
For example, if he did not want to become visible to you he would look so cruel, so murderous, that you could not believe that a Sufi master or any kind of master could be so murderous. And if he wanted to remain visible to you he would look so compassionate, so loving. And he could do it together, simultaneously, to two people. And one would go away with the idea that “Here is the master,” and the other would go away with the idea: “Never again am I going to see this man. This man seems to be a murderer, and it is dangerous to be with him.”
Sufis live a very, very hidden life, for a certain reason – because they only want to live the essential religion. If you want to become visible you have to do many things. For example: I am here, but to Pune people I am invisible. I have made myself completely invisible, even to the people who live just in the neighborhood here. I am invisible to them. They cannot see. It is impossible for them to see. I am visible only to those who are seeking. Those who are seeking can come from thousands of miles, and those who are not seeking can live just by the side and will remain there and will be convinced that I am a wrong man.
It is good that it is so, because it helps me to work only on those people who need work. Energies are not wasted.
Sufis are not interested in the masses. No master has ever been interested in the mass. Masters are only interested in individuals, and only in those individuals who are really in search, in authentic search. It is simple to avoid the unnecessary people and it is simple to attract the necessary people who need help with just a few things. People are so insensitive – with just a small thing you can become invisible, because they don’t look deep, they only look on the surface.

The second question is exactly what I have been talking to you about:
Osho,
Why do Sufis deliberately disguise and hide themselves?
They want their energies to be used rightly because they are creative people. They are not interested in name and fame, they are not interested in anything else; they are only interested in giving a new life to people who desire God, long for God. Why should they waste their time and energy?
There are many kinds of people in the world. A few are curious people, they come just out of curiosity, they are wasting their time. Then there are a few who come with inquiry. They are better than the curious people, there is some possibility that they may grow, but that is only a possibility. Then there is a third kind who is really a seeker, who is ready to stake his life, who is ready to lose something for it, who is ready to pay the price for it.
The Sufi will work with the third person, he will remain available to the second kind of person, and he will become absolutely invisible to the first kind of person – the curious.
The Sufi is very economical about his energy. He knows he cannot exist here for long, his days are numbered. In those few days that he will be here on the earth… An enlightened person will not be coming back again, he is here for only a short time – even if it is thirty, forty, or fifty years it is a very short time if you look at the eternity of time. What is fifty years compared to the eternal procession of time? He will be here for only a few days, a few months, a few years, and he can work on only a few people. If he becomes surrounded by curious people his energies will be wasted. Then he will be sowing his seeds in a desert. That will be foolish, stupid.
Sufis are not stupid people, they are very wise people. They know how to use their energies, that’s why they deliberately disguise and hide themselves. And small things become helpful.
This has been my own method. Whenever I see that there are too many of a certain kind of people around me and I want to drop them – just a single hint, just a single hint, and they disappear. Once it happened that I was surrounded by many Jainas – just because of my birth, the accident of my birth. I was born in a Jaina family so naturally Jainas were interested in me. Not in me – they were interested in a Jaina. They were happy that here was a Jaina who had become enlightened. They were not interested in me or in my enlightenment, they were on a kind of ego trip.
Then it became too much; they were wasting too much energy and too much time. So I delivered one talk: “From Sex to Superconsciousness” – and they all disappeared. Just a single talk and they all disappeared. Then I didn’t see them. And since then, for fifteen years, I have not seen them.
Then by and by many Gandhians started coming around. And I saw that again a desert was growing. These are the weeds; you have to be constantly uprooting them. You cannot rest if you are really interested in the garden and the roseflowers – and the orange people are my roses. If you are really interested in the roseflowers you will have to constantly uproot the weeds. They will come again and again.
Gandhians gathered. Then with just a few statements against Gandhi they left me. It is so easy to become invisible to people. Now I almost don’t exist for them at all. They have forgotten all about me. Weeds have to be dropped.
A master has to become invisible again and again to certain kinds of people so that he and his energies remain available to those who are really seekers.
What do I mean when I say real seekers? I mean one who is ready to stake whatever is needed to stake, who does not just have an "itch" in his head, who is not only curious, but whose problem is that of life and death. Even if I demand that your life will be needed, if you are a seeker you will say, “I am available. Take this life, but give me God. If by giving my life God can be attained, then I am happily ready.” Life is worthless for a seeker; everything is worthless – except truth.
That’s why Sufis are constantly in hiding. And remember, this is only half the story. On one side they constantly go on hiding themselves, on the another hand they go on making themselves available to those who are in search. The other part has not been discussed much. That other part is very essential. In fact, the first part is necessary only for the other part, otherwise what is the use of becoming invisible? If you simply become invisible to all people then you are almost dead, then you are in your grave. So you have to become invisible from one side – to people who are not the right people – and you have to become more and more visible to those who are in search. These both go together in a kind of balance.
I don’t move in Pune, you will never see me on Pune streets, I don’t go anywhere. I am not interested in the masses. I have simply disappeared from the world. I have created my own small world – an alternative society. Soon the days are coming closer when I will absolutely establish my own small world, where every person will be a seeker – only a seeker will be allowed in. And then that small commune will become invisible to the whole world and we will disappear into ourselves. We will then start working in the deepest realm of being.
One has to drop many things to go in. One has to gather one’s total energy to go in.

The third question:
Osho,
Why don't people believe in the things that all the great mystics have always been preaching?
They don’t understand and they don’t want to understand. The language is different, the approach is different, the longing is different.
People understand only that which they long for. Your language is basically rooted in your longing. Your longing becomes your language.
A man who is sexually obsessed only understands the language of sex. A man who is sexually obsessed, perverted, repressed, only understands pornography. To a man who is sexually satisfied, pornography will look absurd. He will not understand why people are so mad about it.
A man who wants to forget himself will be interested in drugs, but a man who knows the beauty of remembering himself will not be able to understand at all why people should drug themselves, why they should try to forget. It is tremendously joyful to remember.
Sufis say there are two types of people, or two states of humanity. One they call gofil – the people who are utterly oblivious of themselves, asleep, unconscious – and another, the people who remember, the people who have a certain remembrance of their being. Now, those who are searching to remember themselves will have a different kind of language. One who is searching for money knows only the language of money, and one who is searching for peace has a different kind of language. There are many languages in the world; they depend on your desires.
The man who has started searching for God, truth, is mad in the eyes of the so-called worldly wise. The mystics have always been thought to be mad. You tolerate them at the most. And if they are very persistent then you start worshipping them – but either you tolerate or worship, you don’t become affected by them. You remain aloof, untouched. You keep a distance.

The story is told of a preacher who went to the mountains to preach, and upon arriving struck up a conversation with the first old man he met.
“Are you a Christian?” the preacher inquired.
“Nope, Mr. Christian lives up the holler,” answered the old mountain man.
“What I mean is, brother, are you lost?” persisted the preacher.
“Well, I reckon not,” replied the old man. “I have been here nigh on for thirty years and I know every cow path in these here hills.”
“You don’t understand,” said the preacher. “I mean are you ready for the judgment day?”
“When’s it comin’?” asked the old man.
“Well,” said the preacher, “it might come today or it might be tomorrow.”
“For goodness sakes, don’t tell my missus,” cautioned the old man. “She’d want to go both days!”

There seems to be no communication. The preacher is speaking one language, the old mountain man is speaking another kind of language, and they both seem to speak plain English.
You may speak the same language, but in one language there exist many languages – within one language another, and within that another. A poet speaks one language, a scientist speaks another, a businessman still another.
And a mystic? A mystic speaks a very absurd language, that’s why he is not understood. He speaks nonsense, exactly nonsense – because he says things that are not sensibly comprehensible. He says things that are not available to the senses. He says things that are not even possible to put in a logical form, that cannot be formulated in a rational way. He talks about some mysteries, vague, cloudy, and in an absurd way – because he talks in paradoxes.
All true religion is paradoxical. A mystic uses contradictory terms so much that in the end nothing is left in your hands. If you ask a mystic if God is near or far, he will say, “Both. He is the nearest and he is the furthest.” Now what are you going to make of it? If you ask him, “Is God in the world or outside the world?” He will say, “Both, or neither.” What are you going to make out of it? Or he may laugh. Or he may remain quite silent. He may not say a single word.
To understand a mystic you will have to become a mystic yourself. To understand a mystic you will have to be initiated in mysticism. To understand a mystic you will have to drop your old patterns of the mind, the old ways of thinking. Logical thinking has to be dropped. You will have to become illogical. You will have to be ready to accept the irrational too – because life is irrational and life is mysterious and you cannot put life in dogmatic forms.
You cannot even say “God is,” you cannot say “God is not” – because God is both. He is so comprehensive that “is” and “is not” are both implied in his being. “Isness” is his periphery and “is not-ness” is his very center. At the very center God is nothing but pure nothingness. Out of that – ex nihilo – everything arises. The world is just on the circumference; at the center there is nothing, or, there is only no-thing.
When mystics say these things you can hear, but how are you going to understand if something like this has not started happening in you already?
You ask, “Why don’t people believe in the things that all the great mystics have always been preaching?” Another reason: How can you believe? You have to know. Belief is not going to help at all. Even if you believe you will suspect deep down, you will doubt deep down. Every belief carries doubt within it. Belief is not going to help.
And belief will create just the opposite. For example, people who believe become very serious. You can find them in the temples, in the churches, in the mosques. People who believe become very serious, and people who know become very celebrating. The mystics don’t believe; they know. They have seen. They have experienced. And because they have experienced God there is a kind of playfulness around them. They exist in joy. You will find a dance around them. If you look into their eyes you will find cheerfulness, ecstasy. If you go and look at a person who believes, you will always find a long face.
I have heard…

A very young niece was visiting a holier-than-thou aunt in the country for the summer. Her puritanical attitude was in constant evidence. Every time the little niece wanted to do something, the long-faced aunt would say, “Don’t do that…you can’t do that.”
One day the little niece was walking down the road, very unhappy, when she came upon a long-faced mule near the fence. She walked over, patted its head, and said, “Don’t feel bad, Mr. Mule, my aunt has religion too.”

Religious people become very long faced. Religious people become very sad. Religious people have stopped living in the world and have not started living in God. They are stuck; hence the sadness. And religious people are not only sad themselves, they create all kinds of sadness in other people too. They cannot tolerate anybody happy. Wherever they find something happy they will be there to destroy it, to condemn it. They are against all joy. They are against all innocent joy. These people have poisoned humanity.
Belief is not going to help. Become a mystic, but don’t believe in mystics. Become a Sufi, but don’t believe in Sufis. Become me, but don’t believe in me. If you believe in me you have gone astray.
What is the need to believe? When you can have the taste, why believe in it? Belief means you are postponing. You are saying, “Yes, today I will believe, tomorrow I will taste.” But why not today? Why not now? If you feel my vibe, then rather than thinking in terms of belief, start thinking in terms of living it. And don’t believe a thing unless you have experienced it, otherwise you will become a hypocrite.
This should be used as a criterion: a man of belief is sad and a man of knowing is tremendously happy. A man who only believes is just dull, dead, shrunken, frozen, ossified. And a man who knows, flows, flowers; much fragrance comes from his being. He is constantly flowing. He is never stagnant. He is always new.
Let religion be lived, not believed.

The fourth question:
Osho,
Once I loved a woman but she refused me, and ever since I have been miserable. I have lost all hope in life. What should I do?
Meditate on this story:

A visitor to an insane asylum found one of the inmates rocking back and forth in a chair in a contented manner, cooing repeatedly, “Lulu, Lulu…”
“What’s the matter with this man?” the visitor asked the attendant.
“Well, you see, sir, Lulu was the woman who jilted him,” the attendant explained.
Baffled with the explanation, the visitor proceeded on the tour.
Later he came to a padded cell, where an inmate was batting his head repeatedly against the wall and crying, “Lulu, Lulu…”
“Now why is this man crying ‘Lulu’?” asked the visitor.
“Oh, he’s the fellow Lulu finally married,” the attendant explained.

Don’t be so miserable. Just find the man whom Lulu has married and all misery will disappear.

The last question:
Osho,
I believe very strongly in religion. I follow all the prescribed rules
of morality. I have always lived a life of discipline – then why am I always unhappy?
What else are you expecting? Are you expecting some miracle? If you were happy it would be a miracle – and miracles don’t happen.
It is a natural consequence. Just try to analyze your question. “I believe…” – this “I” is too much. “I believe very strongly in religion. I follow all the prescribed rules of morality. I have always lived a life of discipline – then why am I always unhappy?” This “I” is too much. And “I” is misery. When I disappears, misery disappears. Bliss is the absence of the ego and nothing else.
But if you believe too strongly in religion, your “I” will become very, very strengthened. If you live a life of discipline, a life of control, your ego will become very decorated. If you follow all the rules of morality, naturally your ego will become very holy, pious. And when a person is very pious it is very dangerous. This “I” has to be relaxed – that is one thing.
And the second thing: there is no need to believe strongly in religion. Belief simply shows that you don’t know, and deep down somewhere there is bound to be doubt. How can you dissolve the doubt without knowing? You can go on believing as strongly as is humanly possible, but all your strength will only repress the doubt, it cannot destroy it.
Remember, a doubt is never destroyed by strength. By strength you can force it into the unconscious, you can go on forcing it into the basement of your being, you can force it so deep that you completely forget about it – but it is there. And the deeper it goes, the more dangerously it is there. It will affect your total being, your very quality, and it will affect it in such an indirect way that you will not even be able to detect it. It will become a cancer in the soul. No, unless you know, doubt remains.
I have heard…

When the late King George VI was a lad, he stood one winter morning with his older brother Edward, their noses pressed against a window of the palace, looking enviously at a group of cockney urchins playing snowball outside the palace.
Finally, the temptation became too great for them and, seeing an opportunity as the governess left the room, they put on hats and coats and slipped outside to join the happy group.
Soon a badly aimed snowball smashed right through the window of the palace and brought the palace guard running on the double. In no time at all the sheepish group of youngsters was ushered into the presence of the precinct sergeant.
“What’s your name, boy?” the sergeant asked the first in line.
“My name is Edward, Prince of Wales,” said the boy, standing haughtily at attention.
“A smart guy, eh?” said the sergeant. “And what’s your name?” he asked the second in line.
“My name is George, Duke of Windsor,” said the second lad.
By this time the sergeant was furious. “I’ve never seen such a bunch of liars in all my life,” he exploded.
“And what’s your name?” he asked the next little fellow.
The little boy hesitated a moment, then wiping his nose on his sleeve, he replied, “I’m going to stand wiv’ my buddies, guvnor. I’m the Archbishop of Canterbury.”

Yes, you can say you are the Archbishop of Canterbury, but deep down you know you are not. And the significant thing is what you know deep down. If you are, you are. Then there is a totality, no hesitation. Then you are totally into it.
But when you only believe, you know it is not so. That creates a split, you become two. A duality arises. All belief creates schizophrenia. How can you be happy with schizophrenia? It is not possible.
And you say, “I follow all the prescribed rules of morality.” Religion has nothing to do with morality. A religious man is moral, but he has nothing to do with morality. A religious man is naturally moral – it is not that he follows all the prescribed rules of morality, a religious man is naturally, spontaneously, moral. He has no idea of what is good and what is bad. He never chooses, the good simply happens. It is part of his religiousness.
The moment you understand that you are part of God, then all immorality disappears. Not that you have to drop it, it is simply not found. And when there is no immorality, what is the need to follow moral rules? Only immoral people follow moral rules, only immoral people need to follow. A moral person has no rules to follow; his morality is innocent. He is good because he feels that being good brings more and more happiness. He is good because he is happy. Happiness brings more good to his life; more good brings more happiness to his life.
You will be unhappy because really you want to be immoral. And you have to curb and cut and you have to always force yourself to be moral. You are not being natural. You will be unhappy, and these moral things will not satisfy you. They are false. They will not make you happier.
It is as if one is eating the menu rather than eating the food. Food satisfies, but the menu…you can go on eating it, it will not satisfy. It is not food. The rules that have been given to you by others are menus, they are paper food, not real food. The real morality arises in your being. Become more meditative rather than becoming more moral. Morality follows meditation. And then you will be happy.
And you say: “I have always lived a life of discipline…” The word discipline is very beautiful, but it has become very, very wrongly associated with the idea of control. Discipline comes from the same root as disciple. Discipline means, become a disciple. And disciple means nothing but the capacity to learn. A disciple is one who is ready to learn. A disciple is one who has an open mind. A disciple is one who has not become closed, who does not say, “I know.” He says, “I am open, available to learn, to know more. And I am ready to risk all that I know if something unknown can be known.”
A learner is a disciple, and a disciple is in discipline. You cannot be in discipline unless you are with a master. And remember the paradox of it: a master never enforces any discipline on you, a master simply makes himself available to you. Seeing him, loving him, feeling him, a discipline starts arising in you.
Remember, there cannot be a fixed discipline for everybody. Everybody has to find his own discipline because everybody is so unique, everybody is so individual. When you follow a dead discipline you will be putting a structure on your being. You will not grow naturally and you will not grow into yourself.
If you follow Mahavira’s discipline… It was good for him, certainly good, but you are not another Mahavira. There will never be another Mahavira again. Existence never repeats. Existence always creates a unique person. No two people are alike – they never have been, never will be. Yes, Mohammed had a discipline of his own. It was beautiful for him. It was beautiful for him only because it grew out of him; he never followed anybody else’s discipline. But if you follow it, then it will be just a dead structure. How can life be happy caged in a dead structure?
Hence the insistence of Sufism to find an alive master – because an alive master will not give you a dead structure. An alive master will give you only an insight into your own being. An alive master will give you only a vision of what is possible. And then you start working on your own. Everybody has to find his own discipline.
Remember another thing too. Even when you have found your discipline it is not going to remain like a character. It will change every day – new situations and new disciplines will arise. You will have to respond to new situations in a new way. You cannot just carry a guidebook in your mind and you cannot go on behaving according to that guidebook. Then you will not be responsible, then you will not be responding to the situation that is facing you, then you will have a ready-made rule – and then happiness is not possible.
Happiness is a function of freedom. Only free people are happy people. Let this be remembered always and always: freedom brings bliss, freedom brings benediction.
If you are unhappy, that is simply logical. You have earned it. Now drop your belief and drop your discipline and drop your so-called rules of morality.
And when I am saying drop it, don’t misunderstand me – because sometimes people misunderstand. Somebody has asked, “I understand you to say that knowledge is a barrier. Should I burn all the scriptures that I have always worshipped?”
I have not said that. There is no need to burn the scriptures, that will not help. Your mind is not going to change by burning the scriptures. Your mind will be the same and you will find another kind of scripture. Maybe I will become your scripture, but that will be the same. You will have something to cling to. Your mind wants to cling to words, principles, doctrines. Rather than burning the mind you are asking about burning the scriptures. What have those poor scriptures done to you? Why be so angry with them?
You remind me of a man, a man who came home on three occasions and, finding his wife on a couch with another man, decided he had had enough and threw away the couch. But what does the couch have to do with it?
You can burn the scriptures and you can throw away the rules, but again you will find something. The situation does not change so easily. Something has to change within you.
Always remember that whatever I am saying here concerns your consciousness, concerns your innermost center. Do something there; outer things don’t matter. Scriptures are so worthless that by burning them nothing will be attained. If something can be attained by burning the scriptures then they have some value. They don’t have that value. They do not have even that much value.
Burn the mind that clings to the scriptures, burn that mind that wants to depend on something, burn that mind that always avoids responsibility, burn that mind that seeks dead, fixed rules, is obsessed with fixed things and is afraid of free flow, is afraid of dynamism. Why not live a life with free consciousness? Why not live a life without rules? You have lived a life with rules and you feel miserable. Now if you are really feeling miserable and you want to get rid of that misery, then the only thing that can be done is a radical change. Now start living a life without rules.
Why do people cling to rules? Because to live in freedom means one has to be very aware. Those rules give you an opportunity not to be aware. You can depend on them, you need not be aware. If someone says something you have a ready-made answer. You need not be attentive to what is being said and you need not be creative in your response, you already have an answer. You can remain sleepy and still you can answer.
It happened in a church…

The priest asked, “Those who are ready to go to heaven or want to go to heaven should raise their hands.”
All raised their hands, except one man who was fast asleep and snoring.
Then the priest said even more loudly, to wake him up, “Now those who want to go to hell should stand up.” And he shouted so loudly that the man just jumped up.
He had not heard what had happened, but he looked around and he found himself and the priest standing. He said, “Sir, I don’t know what we are voting for, but we both seem to be voting for it.”

This is the situation. People are fast asleep and snoring and life can go on. With fixed rules there is safety, comfort, convenience. Drop that comfort, drop that convenience, drop that safety; start living a dangerous life. And a life is life only when you live it dangerously, when it is a great adventure, an exploration always into the unknown.
Don’t carry any rules – that’s what is meant by burning the scriptures. And don’t carry any fixed disciplines. Remain available and act, don’t react. Act out of your consciousness. Be a mirror and act out of that mirrorlike consciousness and you will be happy, you will be tremendously happy.
That happiness is yours, and just for the asking. “Knock and the doors shall be opened unto you. Ask and it shall be given. Seek and you will find.” It is all yours, and just for the asking.
Enough for today.

============================================================

Shah Firoz, who is remembered as the teacher of many very distinguished Sufis, was often asked why he did not teach them faster.
He said, “Because even the most dedicated will, until a certain point of understanding, not be teachable at all. He is here in the flesh, but absent in every other way.”
He also recited this tale.
There was once a king who wanted to become a Sufi. The Sufi whom he approached about the matter said, “Majesty, you cannot study with the Elect until you can overcome heedlessness.”
“Heedlessness!” said the king. “Am I not heedful of my religious obligations? Do I not look after the people? Whom can you find in all my realm who has a complaint against me on the grounds of heedlessness?”
“That is precisely the difficulty,” said the Sufi, “because heedfulness is so marked in some things, people imagine that it must be a part of their texture.”
“I cannot understand that sort of remark,” said the king, “and perhaps you will regard me as unsuitable because I cannot fathom your riddles.”
“Not at all,” said the Sufi, “but a would-be disciple cannot really have a debate with his prospective teacher. Sufis deal in knowledge, not argument. But I will give you a demonstration of your heedlessness, if you will carry out a test and do what I ask in respect to it.”
The king agreed to take the test, and the Sufi told him to say “I believe you” to everything that should be said to him in the ensuing few minutes.
“If that is a test, it is easy enough to start becoming a Sufi,” said the king.
Now the Sufi started the test. He said: “I am a man from beyond the skies.”
“I believe you,” said the king.
The Sufi continued: “Ordinary people try to gain knowledge, Sufis have so much that they try not to use it.”
“I believe you,” said the king.
Then the Sufi said: “I am a liar.”
“I believe you,” said the king.
The Sufi went on: “I was present when you were born.”
“I believe you,” said the king.
“And your father was a peasant,” said the Sufi.
“That is a lie!” shouted the king.
The Sufi looked at him sorrowfully and said: “Since you are so heedless that you cannot for one minute remember to say “I believe you” without some prejudice coming into play, no Sufi would be able to teach you anything.”
Religion exists in three dimensions. That is the original source of the concept of the trinity, or the Hindu idea of trimurti – the three faces of God.
Or we can say that religion exists on three planes – because man exists on three planes. Man exists in the body, in the mind, in the soul. Religion also has a body, a mind and a soul. If you only exist in the body you cannot relate to any other religion except the outermost. If you exist as a psychology – as a mind, as a psyche – then you can relate to the second layer of religion, otherwise not. And until you start existing as a soul, there is no possibility of coming to encounter the innermost core of religion – tasawwuf, the ultimate, what the Sufis are searching for.
The Sufis have three names for these three planes. They have to be understood; they are very significant.
The first is called sharia. Sharia means the body of religion. It may be alive, it may be dead – both are possibilities. When a buddha is alive, sharia is alive. When a Mohammed is alive, sharia is alive – because Mohammed breathes life into it. But when Mohammed is gone there will be a corpse. The corpse resembles the real body but it is not; it only resembles it.
When life leaves you, your corpse will look just like you – but it is not you. The real has left, the subtle has left. Only the gross is lying there on the ground. That creates trouble because people become so acquainted with the face that they go on believing that the corpse is alive.
Islam is dead. When Mohammed was there to breathe life into it, it was a totally different kind of religion. That is called sharia. Sharia means exotericism – the ritual, the formal, the Sunday religion. It does not affect you at all. It gives you a certain respectability in the society. It is more social than spiritual, and it is more political than religious. Islam without Mohammed and Hinduism without Krishna and Buddhism without Buddha are nothing but garbed political standpoints. In the name of religion, politics continues.
When God is not there to breathe into the body, the Devil starts breathing into it. So a dead body is not only dead, it is very dangerous. It can be possessed by the Devil. The politician is the Devil. When the saint is gone the body is there – somebody can enter it, somebody can start having that body. It resembles the real. When the saint is gone the priest will use it, the politician will use it, and many will be deceived by it because they know only the face.
Think of it in this way. When you look at another human being, do you know anything more than the face? Even your beloved, even your child – do you know anything more than the face? Have you ever penetrated farther than the face? Your acquaintance remains very superficial; it is not even skin deep. It remains formal – of the form. But the face is not the person, the personality is not the person. The outer shape is not the inner reality. Will you be able to recognize your woman if she comes as a spirit? You will not be able to. Will you be able to recognize your own child if the child comes as a spirit, not as a body? You will not be able to recognize your child at all. You will get so frightened, you will think that a ghost has come.

Once a woman was brought to me. Her husband had died. Three months had passed, but she was still in agony, tremendous agony – crying and crying and weeping and not eating and not sleeping. It was okay for a few days, the relatives tolerated it, but then it became too much – she was driving the other people of the family mad too. So they brought her to me.
I asked her what she wanted. She said, “I want my husband back. I cannot live without him. Life is meaningless without him.”
I said, “Okay, I will arrange for you to have a meeting with your husband.”
She could not believe what I was saying because she had said the same thing to many people and they had all consoled her – as people do console. But when I said, “Yes, I will arrange a meeting. Go into that room, close the doors, sit silently there and within half an hour your husband will be standing before you – as a spirit, remember.”
She said, “As a spirit? What do you mean?”
I said, “There will be no body. You have burned the body already. He will come as a ghost.”
She said, “I cannot go into that room. If he comes as a ghost I will be very scared. As it is I am already suffering too much – no more suffering! Please, don’t do it to me.”
I said, “But you loved the man so much…”
“Yes,” she said, “I loved the man, but not as a ghost!”
Nobody loves you as a spirit. That is why love never satisfies.
After that day she calmed down. I had told her, “Calm down within three days, otherwise I will persuade your husband to visit you.”
I went to her house every day to inquire whether she had calmed down or not. The third day she said, “Now you need not come. I have calmed down enough for my whole life! You have scared me so much, I cannot even sleep at night. A little noise outside, somebody walking, the policeman passing, and I become afraid. Maybe he’s coming!”

And for the same husband she was crying and weeping and calling; she was ready to die. But she was not ready to encounter him without his body.
But don’t laugh at her, you will not be able to do that either. We know people only by their faces. Why? Because we know ourselves only by our faces as seen in the mirror. You would not even recognize your own head if you had not seen it in a mirror before – or would you? If you had never seen yourself in the mirror, and some day somebody brought your head in front of you, would you be able to recognize it? You would not recognize it at all. Your acquaintance also with yourself is very superficial. It’s okay with others, you look at them from the outside; but at least with yourself you are not outside, you are inside – can’t you look at yourself from the inside? No, even to look at yourself you need the help of an outside mirror. So the mirror reflects, and you become an outsider to yourself – then you can see. And then you know that face, that body, that form.
Our so-called knowledge of ourselves and others is very body-rooted. Hence we never enter deeper into any other dimension than the body. That dimension is called sharia. It is the outer dimension of religion. When a Mohammed walks on the earth, or a Buddha, or a Mahavira, simply watch the body. Watch his behavior, how he sits, what he eats, what he wears, how he talks, his gestures – watch these things. And out of these things you create a certain discipline and you start following that discipline. This is a dead religion; this is a corpse religion. At this point Mohammedanism exists, Hinduism exists, Christianity, Buddhism, Judaism. All the “isms” exist at this point.
The crowd believes in sharia, that’s why the crowd always remains irreligious. The crowd as such is irreligious. You can find only individuals religious, never a crowd. A crowd, by its very nature, is insane; a crowd, by its very nature, is political, never religious. In fact, if you are alone you cannot be political.
Have you ever thought about it? If you are left alone on the earth you can’t be political. For politics the other is a must. If you are left alone on the earth you can be religious, there will be no hindrance, but you cannot be political. Politics needs the crowd, the collective mind. Religion needs only you – you are enough unto yourself. Your very aloneness becomes the passage toward religion. That’s why when a person wants to be religious he goes into aloneness, he seeks solitude. He goes to the mountains or to the desert. He wants to escape from the crowd because the crowd is basically mad. Søren Kierkegaard, one of the most perceptive thinkers of the West, has said, “The crowd is the untruth.”
Truth is always individual – a Buddha has it, a Mohammed has it, a Jesus has it. Truth is always a flowering of the individual consciousness. But the crowd never has it, the crowd always has the untruth. Even from a Buddha or a Christ or a Mohammed the crowd gathers the superficial: what he eats, when he goes to sleep. People even come and ask me. They say, “Osho, when do you go to sleep? What time exactly? – because we would also like to follow it.” For what? “What do you eat – which vegetables, which fruit? – because we would also like to eat in the same way.” For what?
But that’s how the mind of the crowd functions; it always goes for the nonessential. What I eat is meaningless, what I am is meaningful. What I do is irrelevant, what I am is relevant. Man is not equal to his behavior, he is more than that. And the greater the man, the bigger the difference.
Ordinarily a man is exactly like what his behavior is. What you do, you are. But when a buddha is there then the difference is tremendous, the distance is vast. What he is doing is very, very ordinary and what he is, is tremendously extraordinary. The distance is so vast that you cannot fathom his being through his behavior.
But the modern mind suffers so much from this disease. You can go and see B. F. Skinner and other psychologists – Pavlov and others – just watching the behavior of rats to decide what the human mind is. Watching the behavior of a rat to decide about man…!
A rat is just his behavior. He has not yet grown an individuality, he has not yet grown a self. But one thing has to be said in favor of Skinner and others of his kind: about the masses they are right, about the crowd they are right. The crowd has the same state as the rat. But they miss the exceptional, and the exceptional is the essence of humanity.
They can explain your behavior through the study of rats, but they cannot explain a Buddha or a Mohammed. But they try – and there they go berserk.
The sharia is created by watching the behavior of the enlightened person. It is okay when the enlightened person is in his body, but when he has disappeared from it then what will you do? You will start worshipping the body, the clothes… And sometimes it happens that when a great man dies – like a Mohammed or a Buddha – for a few days something hovers around him, as if he is still alive. That also creates trouble.
You must have heard the famous Greek story: the story is told that the runner of a marathon was dead an hour before he reached Athens. He was dead, yet he still ran. And as a dead man he announced the victory of the Greeks.
It is a beautiful myth. It shows that the dead masters act for a while as if they were still alive. But only a little while – one year, ten years, fifty years perhaps. In any case, a finite period. Yes, this happens.
When a Mohammed disappears from the body, the body has tasted so much joy, the body has known so much celebration that it goes on dancing – the runner goes on running. That myth is really beautiful and meaningful.
At least about the great masters it is true. For a few years things go on happening as if they are still alive. This happens because of the tremendous energy released by the dying master. His very place becomes a sacred place for pilgrimage. That’s how a Mecca is created; that’s how Kailash becomes of great significance; that’s how Jainas have Girnar and Shikharji. On the mountains of Shikharji, twenty-three Jaina tirthankaras have died – out of twenty-four. Out of twenty-four great masters, twenty-three masters have died on a small hill. The whole hill has become suffused with the vibe of the beyond.
But that continues only for a while. That also creates a problem; then the disciples think that the corpse is still alive because things go on happening. When I am gone things will go on happening for a few years, and for those who are deeply in love with me it will be as if I am still alive. Naturally, they will think that everything is as it was before.
But that is a fallacy. Once the man is gone, within a few years those vibes that were created, and the echoes of those vibes that were created, will by and by disappear into nothingness.
The sharia is the superficial core of religion – the body. Beware of sharia.
The second layer is called haqiqa. The sharia is the circumference of a circle – haqiqa. The word haqiqa comes from haq. Haq means truth – pure truth. Haqiqat! That’s why Mansoor declared, “Ana’l haq! – I am the truth.” Haqiqa means the truth; pure, uncontaminated by anything. Haqiqa means the center of the circumference, the very soul of religion.
At the point of sharia there is Mohammedanism, Hinduism, Judaism, Buddhism; at the point of haqiqa there is Sufism, Zen, Hasidism, Yoga. Remember, to become a Mohammedan is not of much use, but to become a Sufi is immensely valuable. To become a Buddhist is just changing your clothes, but to become a follower of Zen is really moving toward transformation. To remain a Jew is nothing, but to be a Hasid is great splendor. This is the second point: the innermost core.
At the first, sharia, there is politics, society, morality and a thousand and one things. Because of sharia the Koran is so full of social rules – so full of social rules. Because of sharia the Vedas are so full of rubbish. Because of sharia Manusmriti reads only as if it is a treatise on law. Only few and far between will you find real statements about religion. They are there – even in Manusmriti they are there. In the Vedas they are there, in the Koran they are there, but only few and far between. Only if you are really in search of them will you be able to find them, otherwise the diamond is lost in the mud – the mud is too much. The mud is sharia; the diamond is Sufism.
Always rush toward the center; never become too attached to the body. Create this continuous awareness of looking into depth, of looking into the center of the circumference. And the circumference is big, the center is very small.
Islam is a great crowd, so is Hinduism, so is Christianity. Sufis you can count on your fingers; yogis you can count on your fingers; Hasids or Zen masters you can count on your fingers. They don’t exist like the crowd, you will have to search for them. And if you have a real desire to find them, only then will you find them – otherwise you will miss.
For the sharia you need not go in search anywhere, the sharia comes in search of you. The mullah comes to convert you to Islam and the Buddhist monk comes to convert you to Buddhism. But if you want to search for a Sufi or a Hasid you will have to move, you will have to become a sincere seeker. And you will have to learn many things on the way – because for one real master there are ninety-nine false masters, and the false will appeal to you more because you are false. The false will appeal to you more because you understand the language of the false. The real may not appeal to you at all, the real may even sometimes create fear in you.
You will resist the real master and you will fall and become a victim of the unreal. Beware of that! You are unreal so naturally you are attracted by the unreal. The unreal promises you things that you want. He will say, “If you follow me, you will have more wealth, you will have more power, more prestige, this and that…” That’s what you are seeking.
The real can only promise one thing: “If you come close to me, you will die.” The real can promise only death. The real can promise only one thing: “I am going to destroy you utterly” – because only after death is the resurrection. The real master is a cross; the real master is a door into death. You disappear into him. Yes, you will come out, but you will come out a totally new being. The real master is a fire – one gets frightened, one feels very afraid, one remains aloof. One watches a real master from far away.
Just the other day there was a young man – he was very young – who said that five or seven years before he had promised Guru Maharaji that he would devote his whole life and his work to him. Now he is in trouble. He does not feel that he is growing in any way. He has not gained a small, even the smallest, insight through this contact or relationship. But now the promise that he has given… Now he thinks that he is being very religious because he goes on clinging to his promise. It is not religion, it is the ego. Now he cannot accept the idea of dropping his promise because that hurts the ego: “You are a man of your word. Once you have given your word you have to follow.”
But this seems to be stupid. If you are not getting well, getting integrated, if you are not growing, then one needs the courage to drop it. And in these five years you have become wiser than you were when you gave the promise. A stupid mind gives a promise, and for five or ten or fifty years you go on following the same promise knowing perfectly well that nothing has happened – is it not suicidal? How can the past be binding?
I am not saying don’t give promises and I am not saying don’t fulfill your promises. Give promises, fulfill them, but when you come to see that nothing is happening, then be courageous enough to drop the ego. This is just egoistic.
I was reading a story:

A man lived a very religious life – religious in the sense of sharia. He followed all the rituals of his religion, he followed the moral precepts that his religion prescribed, he followed a master – and yet both were in the same boat. He followed the master because the master was very, very perfect in following the same principles that he was following. He was ahead. The master was an extremist; he was absolutely devoted to the dead word, the dead letter. The scripture was his soul. He would not move an inch on his own. He was already a dead man. But he was perfect as far as ritual was concerned; you could not find a single fault in him. He was faultless. And the man followed this master.
Then one night he dreamed a dream. He dreamed that he died and went up to meet St Peter, asking, “Can I come into heaven?” He was very confident about it because he had followed perfectly whatever had been told to him. He had followed all the commandments mechanically, never committing a single error. So he was very certain.
He asked, “Can I come into heaven?” That was just to be polite.
“Good heavens!” said Peter. “This is not heaven.” Peter then explained that the Pearly Gates were much higher up and could only be reached by a long ladder. He showed him a ladder which went up and up and disappeared somewhere in the clouds – beyond the clouds.
The man looked at the ladder and became frightened. The ladder seemed to be endless. The man asked, “When will I reach? This ladder seems to be endless!”
St Peter said, “Don’t be afraid. It depends how long it is. For each person it functions differently. I will show you the way. Take this chalk and start climbing. For each sin of adultery, fornication, lechery, or whatever you have committed or you have thought of committing, go on marking with your chalk. Each sin has to be marked on one rung. By the time when you have finished and you have made a mark for every single act or thought, you will come to the end of the ladder and the gate of heaven will be in front of you. So it depends. If you have committed many, many sins then it will be very long. If you have done very few it will not be so long. This ladder is flexible; it changes with the person who is climbing on it.”
The man was very happy. He took the chalk and started climbing the ladder. He kept on going for ages. His legs ached, his arms ached, yet he met no one. And no sign of any gate, and the ladder was still the same, going beyond and beyond.
Then one day he became very fed up with the whole journey. But now he was stuck because to go back would take those same ages again. “It is better to go on. One day, perhaps, there is a possibility, a hope.” And he was surprised – because although he had not committed any sins he had thought of committing all kinds of them, endlessly.

A ritualistic religion makes a man repressive. This sharia – the body, the dead body of a religion – makes you crippled in the body, but your mind becomes very, very imaginative about all kinds of wrongs. You fantasize; you commit them in the mind.
Your consciousness becomes more contaminated when things move in your mind than when you actually do them. When you actually do something, there is a possibility of getting rid of it by seeing it – its meaninglessness.
If you are angry, sooner or later anger itself will make you aware that anger is useless – not only useless, it is poisonous; not only poisonous, it is very destructive and suicidal. But if you go on only thinking of being angry, murdering people, destroying people, you will never come to an understanding. You will never become able to get rid of anger.
If you go into sex, sooner or later it will lose all the fantasies that you have been creating about it. Sooner or later it becomes a very ordinary thing. Sooner or later you start getting bored by it. But if you simply imagine, then you will never be bored. Then you are never going to become disinterested in it. One day or other sinners can drop it, but the saints, the so-called saints, they cannot drop it. They are sitting on a volcano.

This man was surprised, because he went on marking those rungs on the ladder for ages and still they were coming and still he went on remembering. It was as if he had never done anything except commit sins in his mind.
Then one day, all at once, he saw his guru descending the ladder. He was very happy to see his master.
“Ah, my master!” he said. “Are you by any chance going back for more disciples to bring to heaven?”
“No, you fool!” said the guru. “I am going back for more chalk!”

Beware of the false gurus – they are many. The false guru will promise you things of this world; even if he is promising them in the other world he is promising the same things. He will promise you beautiful women in paradise – firdaus. He will promise you streams of wine in paradise. But he is promising the same thing. He may promise you golden castles, palaces studded with diamonds in paradise, but diamonds and gold and silver and women and wine all belong to this world. He is simply titillating you; he is simply befooling you.
The real master only promises one thing: your death. So wherever you find death waiting for you, then gather courage. You have to disappear for God to be.
This is the second dimension or plane of religion: haqiqa.
The third dimension or plane is called tariqa. Tariqa means the path, the method – from the outer to the inner.
The outer is a circumference, the inner is a center, and tariqa is the radius proceeding from the circumference to the center – the initiative path that leads from outward observance to inner conviction, from belief to vision, from potency to act, from dream to reality.
This tariqa – method, technique, path, way, Tao, dharma – is the whole science of religion. The circumference is there, the center is there, but one has to move from the circumference, because we are there and we have to use a certain radius. Only a radius can join the circumference to the center. What is the radius that Sufis propose? They are called the people of the path, because they have devised many techniques.
They have the most potential tariqa – it can transform you, it can transform you utterly. They are not concerned with theology at all, they are only concerned with methodology. They are not worried about whether God is or is not. They say, “Don’t talk nonsense! Here is a way. Go through it and see for yourself. This is the way to develop your eyes – and then see whether God is or is not.”
They don’t argue, they don’t try to convince; they demonstrate. They say, “Come with me. I know a window from where you can look into the open sky. Remaining closed in this dark room, how can I convince you that there is open sky – infinite?”
It will be as difficult as it was for the frog you have heard about, who lived in a small well. It is a Sufi story.

One day it happened that a frog from the ocean came to the well – he must have been a tourist. He came into the well, introduced himself to the frog of the well, and said, “I come from the ocean.”
Naturally, the frog asked, “Ocean? What do you mean by ocean? What is it?”
And the frog from the ocean said, “It is very difficult to describe, sir, because you have never left this well it seems. It is so small. But still I will try.”
The frog of the well laughed. He said, “Nobody has ever heard about anything bigger than this well. How big is your ocean?” And the frog of the well jumped one-third of the space of the well and said, “This much?”
And the frog from the ocean laughed. He said, “No, sir.”
So the frog from the well jumped two-thirds of the space and said, “This much?”
Then he jumped the whole space and said, “Now it must be exactly like this well.”
But the frog from the ocean said, “It is impossible to describe. The difference is not of quantity, it is of quality. It is vast! It is not circumscribed!”
The frog from the well said, “You seem to be either a madman or a philosopher or a liar. Get out from here! Don’t talk nonsense!”

That’s what the man of the world has always said to the mystic: “Don’t talk nonsense! Be practical and talk the language that we understand.”
Sufis don’t say anything about God, they only talk about tariqa – they say, “This is the way to know. You will have to know to know. We cannot explain it to you. It is so mysterious that it will be almost a profanity to bring it to your level. Truth cannot be brought to your level; the only way possible, the only way left, is that you can be brought to the level of truth.”
That is what tariqa is. Philosophy is an effort to bring the truth to your level so that you can understand it. Tariqa is to take you to truth so that you can see – so that you can see it on your own.
Remember these three words. Everybody exists at sharia, and at sharia you will remain miserable because you are existing with only a dead body. Everybody needs to move toward haqiqa; only at haqiqa can you be fulfilled. And to reach the haqiqa you will have to follow a tariqa, you will have to follow a method, a discipline, a master.
And beware of the false masters. They are there and they speak your language. They can be very convincing. Be a little more adventurous, courageous – seek somebody who can absorb you, who can transmute you, who can consume you, who is like a flame. The moth comes to the flame and is consumed – so is the disciple. He comes to a master and is consumed.
And remember, before you reach the real master, the authentic master, the satguru, you will come across many false masters. So don’t get hooked.
Even if you promise, you have to be alert that no promise can be binding unless it is fulfilling you. If it is fulfilling you then there is no need. That’s what I wanted to say to the young man who said, “I have promised to Guru Maharaji” Then why are you here? There is no need. If you are really growing there, there is no need to be here. The very fact that you are here shows that you are searching. And now, if you remain hooked with your so-called Guru Maharaji, then there is no possibility. Then I cannot be of any help because you will not be able to take any help – because your heart will not be open, because you will not become part of me, you will not come close.
And another person has written to me that he has been following George Gurdjieff for a few years. Now Guru Maharaji is a false master; it is utterly stupid to follow him. But Gurdjieff was a real master – a satguru, a Sufi. If you are following Gurdjieff, perfectly good. But Gurdjieff is no more. Even if Gurdjieff is no more, a real master dead is more potent than an unreal master alive.
But remember, if you can find a real master alive you will not be going against Gurdjieff. No two real masters are enemies; they cannot be. If you really followed Gurdjieff for eight years – as the seeker has written to me – if you have really followed him, then he has brought you here. Now, in the name of Gurdjieff, if you want to create a barrier between me and you, it is for you to choose. But it will be your responsibility, don’t blame Gurdjieff. He has brought you here. He has already done too much for you.
What I am saying is exactly what Gurdjieff was doing. Of course I speak a different kind of language, I am a different kind of person. But only our fingers differ, the moon that we are pointing to is the same.
If you have been following a real master and the master is no more, then it is the responsibility of the master to send you to another real master so that your growth can continue. Now don’t be obsessed by the past. Gurdjieff is no more – I am.
Soon I will not be here either. And remember, I would like to remind my disciples especially: if you really love me, when I am gone I will direct you to people who will still be alive. So don’t be afraid of that. If I send you to Tibet or if I send you to China or if I send you to Japan or to Iran – go. And don’t say that because you belong to me you cannot belong to another real master. Just look in the eyes and you will find my eyes again. The body will not be the same, but the eyes will be the same.
If your journey is not complete with me while I am here, if something is still to be done, completed, then don’t be afraid. By dropping me you will not be betraying me. In fact, by not dropping me and by not following the real, the alive master, you will be betraying me. Keep it in mind.
Jean-Paul Sartre has written something that I liked: “People have often said to me about dates and bananas – you cannot judge them. To know what they are really like, you have to eat them on the spot, just after they have been picked. And I have always considered bananas a dead fruit whose real taste escaped me. The books that pass from one period to another are dead fruit too. In another time they had a different taste – sharp and tangy. We should have read Emile or the Persian Letters just after they were picked.”
I like this passage from Jean-Paul Sartre. Exactly so is the case with masters. When they are alive they have a taste, sharp and tangy. When the fruit is right from the tree it has a totally different quality to it. A dead master is like tinned fruit. You can open the tin and you can eat the fruit, but something will be missing. Be courageous and always trust in life. My love toward you or your love toward me should never become a hindrance. Love liberates. Love makes you free.
So don’t be worried. If you have been following Gurdjieff for many years and you have come here, and now your heart starts throbbing with me, don’t be worried. Gurdjieff was not very monogamous! I know him perfectly well. And if he gets angry or anything, that is my problem. I will take care. But don’t find excuses. When a master is alive his tariqa is alive. It has a taste – sharp and tangy.
Taste a master while he is alive. Fools worship death; wise people worship life.
Now the story.
Shah Firoz, who is remembered as the teacher of many very distinguished Sufis, was often asked why he did not teach them faster.
The same question is asked of me also, again and again. Many people come to me and they say, “Osho, do something fast!”
I can understand your desire, I can understand your thirst, your longing for it. But nothing can be done fast, there is no shortcut: shortcuts are promised only by false teachers.
There is no shortcut. Growth is arduous and nothing can be done faster than you can absorb. There is a certain limit to your absorption, there is a certain limit to your intelligence. Once you have absorbed something your capacities become bigger, then something more is possible. When you have absorbed that, then your capacities become still bigger and something can be done again. And that’s how it goes. Growth is slow.
Growth is not like seasonal flowers. Growth is slow. It is like great trees that take hundreds of years to grow; but then they can have a dialogue with the stars. Seasonal flowers are only there for a few weeks. They come fast, they go fast. They are like dreams, they are not really real. They only pretend to be here.
Be a real cedar of Lebanon. It takes time, it is hard. When you start rising toward the sky and the clouds and the moon and the stars, it is hard. It is hard because you have to grow roots, deep roots into the earth. The tree grows in the same proportion – if it has to grow a hundred feet into the sky, it has to grow a hundred feet underneath the earth. Those roots take time.
You don’t see the roots; roots are not visible. When you come to a master, the master sees your roots. He sees how many roots you have. If you suddenly grow too fast and the roots are not ready to hold you that tall, you will fall down, you will topple down. You will not be able to grow at all. And once you have fallen down it is very difficult to get rooted again.
So no master can help you grow faster. This speed mania has to be dropped. There is no need. Each step has to be enjoyed and celebrated.
Just the other night a young sannyasin came. She took sannyas in her own country. I had sent her a name – Yatra. Yatra means pilgrimage. Last night she came and she was a little puzzled and troubled. She said, “I did not enjoy the name so much. Just pilgrimage? No goal?”
She represents the Western mind – the goal is important, not the pilgrimage. Here in the East our perspective is totally different. The pilgrimage is important; the goal is just an excuse for the pilgrimage. Who bothers about the goal? Each moment passing on the way is so beautiful, it is so glorious – each tree and each bird that you come across is so infinitely beautiful, who bothers about the goal? Each moment is the goal.
But I can understand her worry. She must have started thinking in her mind: “Pilgrimage, pilgrimage, pilgrimage… Then when and where does it end?” It ends nowhere. In fact, if it ends somewhere it will be very sad. Then what will you do? Then what next? Then you will be stuck with God sitting before you and you sitting before God; you will become like wife and husband – stuck. What will you do next? There is no other God and there is nowhere to go. No, God is not a goal; God is a pilgrimage. Let it be understood well.
The idea of a goal is an idea of the greedy mind. And when you think of a goal, naturally you think of being fast. What is the point? Why go by bullock cart? Why not go with jet speed? And there are false masters like Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, who says that his method is a jet speed method.
No method, no tariqa, is a jet-speed method; no tariqa can be. But it will attract people because people want speed. They want something to happen immediately. So promise them that with ten or twenty minutes in the morning, ten or twenty minutes in the evening, they will be enlightened within two or three weeks. They will not become enlightened, but who bothers about their enlightenment; they have paid their fee. They can go wherever they want to go – they can go to hell! They have paid their fee… And there are other fools who will be coming. You can always depend on fools, they are very dependable people.
Speed is unspiritual. The very idea of speed is unspiritual. Why not enjoy each moment of life? Then each moment becomes a goal unto itself. Then each moment is intrinsically valuable; it cannot be sacrificed for anything else.
When you are going toward a goal you don’t look by the side – the trees are standing there and are waiting for a little caress from you, and the birds have been singing, singing for you – and you are hurrying. How can you look here and there? And a child was there smiling at you, and you missed. And a woman was crying, and you missed her tears. And a rose has flowered, and you were in such a hurry you could not see it.
Yes, you can go at jet speed. Where are you going? You will miss the whole pilgrimage. And if you miss the pilgrimage there is no goal, there is no other goal. Life is its own goal.
Shah Firoz, who is remembered as the teacher of many very distinguished Sufis, was often asked why he did not teach them faster.
He said, “Because even the most dedicated will, until a certain point of understanding, not be teachable at all.”
You can only teach so far – then you have to wait for the teaching to be absorbed. If somebody is ill you give him medicine in a certain quantity. You cannot pour in the whole medicine, the whole course, immediately. That will kill. Rather than bringing health it will bring more illness. You can give only in a certain quantity. The quantity, how much he can absorb, will be decided by the person’s capacity. When he has absorbed that, he will become a little healthier and then he can absorb a little more, and so on, so forth. That is exactly the case.
“Because even the most dedicated will, until a certain point of understanding, not be teachable at all.” So one has to wait until he grows again, opens a little more, becomes ready, has a little more space, then again he can be taught.
“He is here in the flesh, but absent in every other way.”
When the seeker comes to the master for the first time, he comes only as a body. “He is here in the flesh, but absent in every other way.”
So one has to start with sharia because you are in the body. People come to me: “Now what is the point of changing our clothes? Can’t we become sannyasins from within? What is the need for orange clothes, the mala and the new name? Can’t we become sannyasins from within?” Certainly, but you will have to wait. You are using the word within without even knowing the meaning of it. You have never been within. You have lived in the body, with the body. These are the same people who pay too much attention to their clothes. In fact, to protect their old clothes they are bringing in this argumentation: “What is the point of changing the clothes?” These are the same people.
One Indian woman wanted to take sannyas, but she said, “I am ready for everything, but I have three hundred sarees and I love them, they are my only love. I can leave my husband if you say so. I can leave my children – I am fed up and tired of them – but three hundred sarees? Just think.”
I know the woman. I have stayed in her house in the past and I know that she really has a great collection of beautiful sarees – the most costly possible. And it takes hours for her to choose which one to use that day.
It was really a problem for me too! – because I would be going to a lecture and the husband and I would be sitting there in the car, and he would be honking the horn, and she would not come. And he would say, “She must be choosing a saree.”
Now she says, “What is the point of changing the clothes? Can’t one become enlightened in any other color?”
Now this is argumentation. And I know this woman; she is a saree – nothing else. Within the saree you will not find anybody. She is just her body. For hours she stands before the mirror – they are very rich so she need not work. She has to do only one thing: to stand before the mirror. I told her once, “Even the mirror will be getting fed up with you.”

One day Mulla Nasruddin was catching flies, and he caught three. He told his wife, “I have caught three. One is male, two are female.”
The wife was surprised. She said, “How did you know that one is a male and two are female?”
He said, “Two were sitting on the mirror and one was sitting on the newspaper!”

That’s how things are. You ask me, “What is the point of changing the clothes?” You are clothes and nothing else – hence I have to change them.
Things start with sharia. Then, by and by, through tariqa, you will have to grow a psychology. People have a wrong notion that they have a psychology already. They don’t have. You don’t have a psyche, you have only heard the word. You have only a behavior, you don’t have a psychology yet.
That’s why Gurdjieff used to say that the psychology has to be born – the science has not yet been born, the psychology is waiting to be born. Man does not have an alert mind, how can there be a psychology? At the most there can be an engineering, a mechanics, a science of behavior, but there cannot be any psychology.
Only a buddha can have a psychology. Yes, Shah Firoz can have a psychology. You cannot have a psychology; right now you have only a behavior pattern, that’s all.
He says that the disciple: “…is here in the flesh, but absent in every other way.” So he has to be made present in other ways. Only then, slowly, slowly, can teaching go deep into him. First the way has to be created, the psyche has to be created, the mind has to be created.
Now, this is one of the most paradoxical efforts of a master. First he has to create a mind and then he has to destroy it. First he has to create a bridge from the circumference to the center, and then he has to destroy the bridge – otherwise you will start moving to the circumference again. Create the bridge, and then destroy the bridge behind you. Then one day one settles at the center. One becomes a Sufi. One has come to tasawwuf.
He also recited this tale.
There was once a king who wanted to become a Sufi. The Sufi whom he approached about the matter said, “Majesty, you cannot study with the Elect until you can overcome heedlessness.”
Heedlessness means absent-mindedness, lack of awareness or lack of alertness, consciousness.
“Heedlessness!” said the king. “Am I not heedful of my religious obligations? Do I not look after the people? Whom can you find in all my realm who has a complaint against me on the grounds of heedlessness?”
Now, this is the man of sharia. He says, “I fulfill all my obligations, my responsibilities, my duties. I am dutiful to my wife, to my children, to my people, to my country. Nobody has any complaint. Have you ever heard of anybody complaining against my alertness, awareness, responsibility? Who has told you that I am not heedful?”
This is what a Sunday churchgoer says: “I am religious.” This is what a Hindu says because he performs his puja every morning. This is what all the people who follow rituals say that they are doing. A Mohammedan thinks that he is a Mohammedan because he does his namaz five times every day. You can do it fifty times per day – it will not make you a Mohammedan. It will remain a ritual. You can perform it, you can perform it perfectly, you can repeat the exact words of the Koran, and still you will not be there. It will be just like a gramophone record unless your heart is in it, unless you do it with remembrance.
Just the other day I told you that Sufis talk about the state of ghafla – unconsciousness. Gurdjieff obtained the idea of man being asleep from Sufis. Gurdjieff used to say that man is a machine. Man is asleep; man is not – because awareness is not. This is a Sufi idea of tremendous value.
The state of ghafla, unconsciousness, has to be transformed into a state of zikr – remembrance. That’s what the Sufi meant when he said: “Majesty, you cannot study with the Elect until you can overcome heedlessness.”
“Heedlessness!” said the king. He must have become angry. He must have felt it as an offense against him, as a complaint.
The Sufi said:
“That is precisely the difficulty.”
Because you think you perform your obligations, you do your duties, do you think that you are a man of awareness?
“That is precisely the difficulty…because heedfulness is so marked in some things, people imagine that it must be a part of their texture.”
Unless awareness becomes a part of your very texture, unless awareness goes so deep that even while you are asleep you are aware, it is not of much use. Ordinarily people look alert and are asleep. They walk on the streets, go to their jobs, do their work, come back home, have children, have a wife, grow a family, and die. And they remain in the state of ghafla, they remain asleep.
A man is called aware when he can fall asleep and still remain transparently alert deep down. Only then do Sufis say that this man has attained zikr – remembrance. And in this remembrance of one’s being one starts feeling God, experiencing godliness – the window opens, the door is no longer closed.
But people who are dutiful, fulfilling their obligations, going to the mosque and the temple and the church regularly, start thinking that they are religious people. That is precisely the difficulty.
I have heard…

A farmer had a very sick mule so he called the veterinarian. The vet brought his little black bag and upon arrival took the mule’s pulse, temperature, and all the things that you do when you examine a sick mule.
The vet said, “This is a very sick mule and I want you to give it these little white pills immediately. These white pills are very potent and will cure practically anything a sick mule has. But just to be sure, wait four hours and give the mule one of those red pills. They are so strong, they will cure anything.”
The farmer and the doctor met in about two weeks, and the doctor asked the farmer what had happened to the mule.
“Well, I gave him the white pills like you told me, Doc. And I never saw so much reaction from one mule in all my life. He kicked down the barn door and the back fence and took off across the country. I thought I had lost my mule.”
“Did you lose him?” the doctor asked.
“You know, Doc, if I had not the presence of mind to take that red pill myself, the mule would have been long gone.”

But this man will start thinking that he has presence of mind, this man will start thinking that he has awareness.
In moments when a crisis arises everybody functions as if he is alert, then he falls asleep again. That’s what happens. If somebody comes suddenly with a sword and jumps on you, for a moment you will become alert – the shock will bring you out of your foggy night. For a moment you will open your eyes; for a moment you will forget your forgetfulness; for a moment you will forget that you are an asleep person. For a moment you will be dragged out by the sword, by death, by the possibility of danger, into awareness – but only for a moment. Then it is gone again.
Sometimes it happens to mountaineers climbing on a mountain. When they come to face real danger, when death and life are both facing them simultaneously – a single wrong step and they are gone forever – then they feel a new kind of awareness arising in them. That’s why so many people become attracted to mountain climbing. Mountaineering sometimes brings joy.
That’s why many people are attracted to gambling. When you risk all, for a moment you become aware. That’s why people are attracted to risky games – the car race. When you are really in danger you have to become alert because of the danger.
But the reason why people are attracted to these dangerous games – mountaineering, car racing, gambling, etcetera – is because of the joy that comes from those small moments of awareness. A man who has been practicing a tariqa to become aware need not go climbing mountains or competing in a car race or gambling. He can make himself alert without any outer situation forcing him to be alert. He can make himself alert without any cause from the outside. And then his joy is infinite. That’s what Hindus have called sat-chit-anand – utter bliss is his.
But awareness should become the very texture of your being.
“I cannot understand that sort of remark,” said the king, “and perhaps you will regard me as unsuitable because I cannot fathom your riddles.”
“Not at all,” said the Sufi, “but a would-be disciple cannot really have a debate with his prospective teacher.”
Remember, you can have a dialogue with your master, but you cannot have a debate. A debate from the very beginning, a discussion from the very beginning, prohibits disciplehood. You can have a dialogue; a dialogue has a different quality.
What is the difference between a debate and a dialogue? The difference is that in a dialogue you are not carrying any prejudice, you do not have some obsessions of your own. You put aside your concepts. In a dialogue you want to understand, not to argue. You don’t have an egoistic defense. In a dialogue you are open, you are ready to listen, to learn; you are ready to be transformed.
In a discussion, in a debate, you are resistant. You have armor, you are in a fighting mood. One cannot fight with one’s master – if you do you are not a disciple and that master is not your master.
“…a would-be disciple cannot really have a debate with his prospective teacher. Sufis deal in knowledge, not argument.”
A tremendously potent statement: “Sufis deal in knowledge…” Yes, they can show you the way to know, but they don’t argue because they don’t propose any philosophy. They have none. They are very nonphilosophical people, almost anti-philosophical. They don’t give you a dogma; not a single principle is proposed. They are physicians. They give you a medicine, and that medicine will open your eyes. They will give you a tariqa, and that tariqa will change you, will change your chemistry. Then you will be able to see something that you have never seen before.
By arguing, your chemistry cannot be changed, and without changing your chemistry you cannot be convinced of anything that you have not known already. God is unknown. You will need a different chemistry to know him. The Sufi provides you with knowledge of how to do it – knowledge about tariqa, about method. But he provides no knowledge about principles.
“But I will give you a demonstration of your heedlessness…”
Sufis are always giving demonstrations; they are very practical people, very scientific people. They say, “It will be difficult now. I can argue, but it won’t help, I will give you a demonstration. You can see yourself whether you are a man of heedfulness or a man of heedlessness.”
“…if you will carry out a test and do what I ask in respect to it.”
The king agreed to take the test, and the Sufi told him to say “I believe you” to everything which should be said to him in the ensuing few minutes.
Now, this is a small experiment in zikr, in remembrance. The king has to remember to say – irrespective of the statement made by the Sufi, he has to say, “I believe you.”
The king thought, “This is so simple. This man seems to be a little stupid. If a man can become a Sufi so easily, can start on the path so easily…” The king was suspicious.
“If that is a test, it is easy enough to start becoming a Sufi,” said the king.
He must have said it in a way to ridicule the Sufi master. But the master didn’t answer it.
Now the Sufi started the test. He said: “I am a man from beyond the skies.”
“I believe you,” said the king.
Listen. Each statement is significant. First the Sufi says: “I am a man from beyond the skies.” Now this is an utterly nonsensical statement, a very philosophical statement. There is no way to prove it or disprove it. He is talking absurd nonsense, but the king can remember to say “I believe you” because nothing is at stake. That is why people like metaphysics, philosophical argumentation. They are happy because nothing is at stake. How does it matter? If he says “I am coming from beyond the sky” – okay, it is perfectly okay. The king is not going to be changed by it, the king has nothing to risk in it.
That’s why people go to listen to great discourses on God, the soul, esoteric principles, astral bodies, subtle bodies, and enjoy them so much. For these kinds of people, theosophy has provided great literature. They are always talking about things that don’t matter.

Mulla Nasruddin was saying to me one day, “My wife and I never argue.”
I could not believe it! It seemed almost impossible that a wife and a husband did not argue. I said, “Mulla, how do you manage it?”
He said, “The day we married we decided one thing: I will only talk about great and lofty subject matters only, and she will take care of small trivia.”
I asked, “For instance?”
He said, “For instance, what house to purchase, what car to purchase, to what school to send the children, what kind of clothes I should wear, what kind of business I should do – these are small trivia. My wife settles them.”
And I said, “What are those lofty, great subjects?”
He said, “For example: whether God exists or not, whether war should be continued in Korea or not – things like that, great things. I decide great things, she decides small things.”

The king has no problem. This is such a great thing, let this Sufi say it. The Sufi says:
“I am a man from beyond the skies.”
“I believe you,” said the king.
The Sufi continued: “Ordinary people try to gain knowledge, Sufis have so much that they try not to use it.”
Now he is coming slowly down. It is a great statement still, but not as great as the first. But still the king is not touched. It remains outside the arena of the king.
“I believe you,” said the king.
Then the Sufi said: “I am a liar.”
“I believe you,” said the king.
He must have said it very happily because that’s what he wanted to say. When the master was saying, “I come …from beyond the skies” and when he said, “Sufis have so much knowledge that while ordinary people seek knowledge, Sufis try to find ways of not using it because they have so much,” he must have been thinking deep down inside that this man is a liar. And the Sufi has seen the point. He says: “I am a liar.”
It is a great experiment in mind reading. That’s what the king was saying inside – that the master was a liar. But the king still missed; he could not see the point.
“I believe you,” said the king.
The Sufi went on: “I was present when you were born.”
Now he is coming closer, but he starts from the very beginning, from the primal scream. He says: “I was present when you were born.” Now he is coming to the king, but he starts from the very beginning, from ABC: “…when you were born.” Still not much is at stake, maybe. Even if he was present, what does it matter?
“I was present when you were born.”
“I believe you,” said the king.
“And your father was a peasant,” said the Sufi.
“That is a lie!” shouted the king.
Now he forgot completely. This was the first statement really made about him – not actually about him, about his father, but it was coming too close. Now he forgot. Within a single minute he forgot that he had to remember to say “I believe you.” And nothing much was at stake, just a simple prejudice. What is wrong if your father was a peasant? Just a small prejudice: “I belong to a great family of kings. My father was a king, my father’s father was a king – we have always been kings!”
“I was present when you were born.” The Sufi is coming closer. Then he touches the boundary. “And your father was a peasant…”
He has not yet said anything directly about the king – otherwise the king would have taken his sword out of its sheath if the Sufi had said, “You are a thief!” He may have jumped on the Sufi.
“That is a lie!” shouted the king.
The Sufi looked at him sorrowfully and said: “Since you are so heedless that you cannot for one minute remember to say “I believe you” without some prejudice coming into play, no Sufi would be able to teach you anything.”
A beautiful parable. Meditate over it.
Yes, this is exactly the case with the greater part of humanity. You cannot remember for a single minute. One day, try a small experiment that Gurdjieff used to give to his disciples – a modern version of the same experiment. Put your watch in front of you and watch the hand that shows the seconds, just for a single minute. Remember only one thing: I am seeing this second hand… I am seeing this second hand… I am seeing this second hand. Go on remembering only this one thing. You will be surprised. Not even seven, eight, ten seconds have passed and you have forgotten. Again you come out of your sleep, you remember for a few seconds – again you have forgotten. In a single minute, at least three to four times you will forget. You will not be able to remember a simple thing.
And no prejudice is involved. Nobody is saying that your father is a beggar or your father is a thief. Nobody is saying that your mother was a prostitute, nobody is saying that you are a bastard – nothing like that. Nothing is involved. Just a simple, factual statement: “I am seeing the second hand” – and again and again you will fall asleep. Again and again you will start thinking of something else and you will not be heedful.
Now, the Sufis say that if a man has no awareness nothing can be taught. So the first thing to be taught will be awareness. And awareness takes a long time because you have lived many lives in unawareness. It has gone very deep in your blood, it has entered your very texture, into every cell of your body; every fiber of your psyche is full of sleep.
This sleep has to be broken. Once this sleep is broken, then… Then the disciple is ready to learn. It will depend on how aware you are. The master can pour in only that much.
A small parable…

There was a tradesman in a small village in the East who sat on his knees in his little shop, and with his left hand he pulled a strand of wool from the bale that was above his head. He twirled the wool into a thicker strand and passed it to his right hand as it came before his body. The right hand wound the wool around a large spindle.
This was a continuous motion on the part of the old man who, each time his right hand spindled the wool, inaudibly said, “La illaha illa’llah.” There could be no uneven movement or the wool would break and he would have to tie a knot and begin again. The old man had to be present every moment or he would break the wool.

This is awareness, this is zikr, this is life. “Sufi” means awareness in life, awareness on a higher plane than that on which we normally live. This old man was a simple man, but he taught his sons his trade, and his sons taught the trade to their sons and a silsila was created – a tradition of masters and disciples.
Out of such a small phenomenon he created awareness. You can create awareness in whatever you are doing. The only thing is: use it as a device. You are walking, walk – but be fully alert, remembering that you are walking. You are eating, eat – but be fully alert that you are eating. Taking a shower, let each drop of water fall on you fully alert, watchful.
Hindus call it sakshin, the witness. Buddhists call it samyak smriti, right-mindfulness. Kabir and Nanak call it surati, remembrance; and Sufis call it zikr. But it is the same tariqa.
Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
When I feel deep love, I feel sad at the same time. Why?
Real love always brings sadness. It is inevitable – because love creates a space that opens new doors to your being. Love brings a twilight situation.
In the moment of love you can see what is unreal and what is real. In the moment of love you can see what is meaningless, what is meaningful, and at the same time you see you are rooted in the meaningless – hence the sadness. In the moment of love you become aware of your ultimate potential, you become aware of the farthest peak, but you are not there – hence the sadness.
You see a vision, but it is a vision, and within a moment it will be gone. It is as if God has spoken to you in a dream and when you are awake you miss it. You know something has happened, but it has not become a reality. It was just a passing breeze.
If love does not create sadness then know well it is not love. Love is bound to create sadness – the greater the love, the greater will be the sadness in the wake of it.
Love opens the door to existence. Two hearts come close, very, very close, but in that very closeness they can see the separation – that is the sadness. When you are far away you cannot see it so clearly. You know you are separate, but when you desire to be one with somebody and you long for it and there is great passion for it, and you come close and you come close and then comes a moment when you are very, very close but beyond which you cannot go, you are stuck – suddenly you become sad. The goal is so close by and yet it is beyond reach.
Sometimes after love you will fall into a deep frustrating night. Those who have not known love have not known real misery, they have not known real anguish. They live a flat kind of life. They have not known the peaks so they are not aware of the valleys. They have not reached the maximum so they think that whatever they are doing is what life is supposed to be like. In love, for a moment you become that which you should be. But it is only momentary.
If you want it to become an eternal reality for you then love itself is not enough – then prayer will be needed. Love makes you aware of this need, and unless you start moving into prayer, love will create more and more sadness.
You cannot become one in love. You can only have an illusion of becoming one. And that is the great desire – how to be one, how to be one with the whole, how to fall into rapport with reality, how to disappear utterly. Because if you are, there is misery; if you are, there is anguish; if you are, there is anxiety. The very ego creates the problem. When you melt and disappear, when you become one, there is nobody left behind. You are just a wave in this eternal ocean of existence. You don’t have a center of your own; the center of the whole has become your center. Then anxiety disappears, then anguish disappears, then the potential has become actual. This is what is called enlightenment, this is what is called nirvana or God-realization.
Love is moving in the same direction, but it can only promise, it cannot fulfill. It cannot deliver the goods – hence the sadness. You feel you are coming very close to the point where you can disappear and yet you don’t disappear. Again you start falling away from your beloved. Again and again you will come close, and again and again you will fall back into your aloneness. But you will never become one. And unless you become one, ecstasy is not possible.
A very famous existentialist, Nikolai Berdyaev, has written a few very pertinent things, very relevant to the question. He says: “I have always been afraid of happy, joyful experiences for they have always brought me the most vivid memories of the agony of life.”
Certainly it is so. That’s why the really miserable people don’t rebel. The proletarians have never rebelled. Marx comes from a middle-class family, so does Mao, so does Lenin, so does Engels. All the revolutions and all the revolutionaries come out of the middle class, they don’t come from the lower strata. They cannot come from there. People are so miserable that they can’t believe that there is anything more. They have never tasted anything of joy. Because they have not tasted anything of joy, they cannot conceive of their life as being miserable. They have no comparison.
Unless you know what illness is you will never feel what health is. If you have been ill from your very beginning – if the day you were born you were born ill – and you have never felt that well-being called health, you will not be very miserable with your illness. You will be perfectly satisfied with it. You will think that this is what life is.
That’s why revolution does not arise from the lowest strata. It does not arise from the highest strata either because they have so much to lose. They cannot be revolutionaries; they have too much at stake. The poor have nothing to lose, but they cannot feel their misery; the rich can feel the misery, but they have so much to lose. Hence all revolutionaries are born from the middle class – those who have known both, a little bit of misery and a little bit of joy. Their perspective is very clear. They know joy is possible, and because they know joy is possible their agony is intolerable.
Berdyaev says: “On great feast days I almost invariably felt anguish, perhaps because I was awaiting some miraculous transformation of ordinary workaday life. But it never came.” Yes, on a feast day, one feels more anguish because one hopes more. When you hope more, naturally you will feel more miserable if that hope is not fulfilled.
In the moment of love there is great hope. You feel you have almost arrived – and yet you never arrive. You feel it is almost going to happen – now this is the moment – and the moment comes and passes by and you are left again in the same wasteland as you have always been in. The clouds gather and it never rains and the desert remains a desert. If those clouds don’t gather you will not be so hopeful. You know it is a desert. You accept it. You adjust to it. But one day suddenly you see great clouds gathering. You feel it in the winds that it is going to rain, you feel it all around that it is going to rain. Your heart starts pulsating that now this desert will no longer be a desert, now green trees will grow and birds will sing and there will be celebration. And those clouds start disappearing.
Have you not seen it? Whilst walking in a dark night on a dark street, suddenly a car passes by with a flood of light. And after the car has gone the darkness is more than before. What happened? You were walking in the same night in the same darkness, but those lights, those headlights of the car, suddenly filled your eyes with light for a moment. Now in comparison the darkness is greater. For a few minutes you may not be able to see at all. You will be left completely blind. This has been done by the light.
The situation is exactly the same: when you are in love you are flooded with light. But then it is gone – it comes and it goes, it is momentary. And in the wake is great sadness.
Even while love is there, those who are very perceptive know that it is not going to be there forever. It is momentary. They are still trembling. Love is there, but they know it is going to go – hence the sadness.
The question is from Abhinava. She must be very perceptive, intuitive. She must have a heart that can feel things even when ordinarily people don’t feel them. When there is love you enjoy; when it is gone you become sad. But if you are very, very perceptive you will become aware that exactly in the moment when love is there, just by the corner sadness is lurking.
Says Berdyaev: “Love in particular seemed to me to carry within itself the seed of anguish, and I have frequently been amazed that people could experience the exaltation of love as sheer joy and happiness.” He seems to be puzzled.
This man, Nikolai Berdyayev, was one of the greatest existentialists of this century. And existentialism has penetrated life’s mysteries very deeply – not to the very end, of course, but existentialism is a good beginning. One should not get stuck in it, because the beginning is negative. If you don’t go deeper into it, it remains negative. It starts turning into a positive quality only when you really go deep into it.
Buddha is also an existentialist, but he went to the very end. Sartre, Heidegger, Jaspers, Marcel, Berdyayev, they are also existentialists, but they are stuck somewhere in the middle, they have not gone to the very end. So they remain negative. But the insight is right – on the right line, in the right direction. The existentialists talk of despair, anguish, anxiety, angst, depression, sadness, misery – all that is dark, dismal. They never talk of bliss, they never talk of joy, they never talk of celebration. Yet I would like to tell you that they are moving in the right direction. If they move a little more, soon they will find joy arising.

I have heard about a very famous lady, a very respectable lady, well-known in the highest strata of society. In a get-together party, where all the prominent people of the country were present, she became too drunk. Somebody provoked her and she became so angry that she lost her usual control. She lost her temper and said some vulgar words. People were shocked, they could not believe such ugly words could come from such a respectable woman. They had never thought about it. They were so shocked that silence fell and then she was also shocked by their shock.
Then she understood what she had done. She smiled – a sweet smile that only ladies know how to do – and said, “I am sorry. It seems I am turning existentialist.”

Right now this is the situation. Existentialism has only been talking about vulgar things, the ill, pathological, negative – the dark side of life.
It seems as if death is the object of meditation. But if you meditate long enough on death you will be surprised that in the very center of death arises life.
Berdyayev says: “Love in particular seemed to me to carry within itself the seed of anguish, and I have frequently been amazed that people could experience the exaltation of love as sheer joy and happiness. Eros is in anguish for it is concerned with and deeply rooted in the mystery of time and eternity. It concerns time athirst for eternal fulfillment and yet never attaining it.
“Likewise there is anguish in sex. Sex shows man wounded, fallen apart, and never able to attain true fullness through union. It bids man to go out into another, but he returns once more into himself and the anguish of his longing for unity continues unrelieved. The desire for wholeness cannot be satisfied through sex; on the contrary, it only serves to deepen the wounds of disunity.”
The very word sex comes from a Latin root sexus, which means division. Sex divides. It promises to unite, but it never does. In fact, it divides. But there is a great desire in man to be united. The child in the mother’s womb is united with existence. He has no separate existence. He has no separate reality. He is part of the whole. He has no self, no higher consciousness. He is, but he is not yet an ego. And that remains our deepest longing – how to enter the womb of existence again.
Psychoanalysts say that man’s effort to penetrate the woman while making love is really an effort to enter the womb again. And there is some truth in it. How to enter that state of absolute calm, quiet, when the ego has not yet been stirred, when everything is in peace and harmony?
While a man and woman are joined in love they are trying to create a unity – hence the attraction of love and hence the appeal of sex. But it never happens. Or, it only happens for such a split second that it really doesn’t matter whether it happens or not. In fact, on the contrary, it creates more desire for unity – more desire and more longing for the ultimate union. And each time frustration comes to hand. If you have eyes to see and if you have a heart to feel you will become sad; whenever you are in love you will become sad. Again the promise and again you know it is not going to be fulfilled.
Then what to do? Let your sadness in love become a pilgrimage into prayer. Let this experience of sadness become a great meditation in depth. First you have to dissolve the ego in your own inner being; you cannot dissolve it in anybody else, it will come back. Only for a moment can you create a state of forgetfulness.
So sex functions like alcohol, a natural alcohol. It is provided in the chemistry of the body, but it is an intoxicant, it is a drug. It depends on chemistry. It is as chemical as LSD, marijuana – the difference is only that it is biochemical, it is already provided by nature in the body. But it is a chemical phenomenon. Through chemistry you attain a glimpse. That’s what happens when you take LSD – through chemistry you attain a glimpse. That’s what happens through all kinds of intoxicants – for a moment you forget yourself. Even that momentary forgetfulness opens a window.
But forgetfulness is not a dissolution. You are not dissolved. You are there, waiting. Once the drug has worn off the ego will grab you again. The ego has to be dissolved, not forgotten. That’s the sadness of love: the ego is only forgotten, and that too for a moment. Then it comes back, and comes back with vengeance. Hence you will find lovers fighting continuously. The ego becomes even more solid, crystallized.
That’s why you find lovers always thinking in terms of the other cheating them. Nobody is cheating. But you desired, you hoped, you fantasized a state of unity, and you were thinking that great ecstasy was going to happen and it didn’t happen – somebody has cheated you. Of course, naturally, the other becomes the object. And the other also thinks in the same way – that you have cheated him or her. Nobody is cheating; love has cheated you both, chemistry has cheated you both. Unconsciousness has cheated you both. Ego has cheated you both. If you understand this you will not fight with each other.
This revelation of sadness through love will become a revolution, a radical change in your life. You will start moving toward a new direction where the ego can be dissolved.
That’s all that Sufism is about – how to dissolve the ego.
And love gives great insight, hence I am all for love. But remember well, you have to go beyond it. I am all for it only so that you can go beyond it. It has to become a stepping-stone. I am not against it, because people who are against it will remain below it, they will never go beyond it. People who have not known the ecstatic moment of love will not know the sadness of it – how can they know?
How is a monk living in a Catholic monastery or a Jaina muni living the life of an ascetic going to know the sadness of love? They have renounced love. In that very renunciation they have renounced sadness also.
Without knowing the sadness of love you cannot take off into the world of prayer or meditation. That experience is a must.
A few more things: the sadness that love brings is very potential, it is very deep, it is very healthy, it is helpful. It will lead you to godliness. So don’t take it negatively, use it. That sadness felt in love is a great blessing. It simply shows that your aspiration is beyond the capacity of love, your aspiration is for the ultimate. Love can only give you a momentary satisfaction, but not an eternal contentment. Feel grateful that love gave you even that one momentary satisfaction and feel grateful that love made you aware of a tremendous sadness inside you.
When people are together in love they feel very alone. Nobody else ever feels such aloneness as lovers feel. Can’t you remember it? While sitting holding the hand of your beloved on a full-moon night, have you not felt it? – utterly alone. The other is there, you are there and you are both for each other, there is no conflict – yet there is no bridge. You are alone, she is alone; two alonenesses sitting together, and each making the other more aware of his own aloneness or her own aloneness.
Love is a great experience. It makes you feel one absolute truth – that you are born alone, that you live alone, that you die alone. And there is no way to drown this aloneness in drugs – whether those drugs are manufactured by nature in the trees, or by factories, or in the body. There is no way to drown this aloneness. One has to understand this aloneness, one has to penetrate this aloneness, one has to go into its very core. And when you have reached the very core of your aloneness, suddenly it is no longer aloneness, it is the very presence of God. You are alone because God is alone.
Mohammed says again and again, “There is no God but God. God is one.” Following Mohammed, a great Sufi mystic, Shapistari, says, “Know one, see one, love one, be one.” You are already that, but you have to penetrate inside yourself.
Your beloved will make you aware that there is no way to go out and become one. The way is inward. Go in. Love naturally leads people into meditation. Lovers become meditators – only lovers become meditators.
So, Abhinava, it is a blessing that you have felt sadness while in those beautiful moments of love. Take the hint. Understand the message. Your unconscious has given you the message to now turn inward. The beloved resides in you; the beloved is not outside. The beloved resides in your very heart. No other love and no other beloved is going to satisfy except God – hence the sadness.

The second question:
Osho,
Why is it thought that thoughts interfere in knowing the truth?
Because they do. A constant procession of thoughts in your mind makes you blind. You cannot see beyond them. They create a fog and you become clouded. It is just like dust gathers on a mirror; then the mirror cannot reflect that which is. The dust has to be wiped off, washed; the mirror has to be made clean – then it reflects. Otherwise how can it reflect? The dust will distort.
Thoughts are like dust. Thoughts are a continuous preoccupation. For example, you are sitting under a tree and suddenly a cuckoo starts calling – but you are absorbed in your thoughts. You will not hear the cuckoo. That beautiful song won’t enter you. You are too full of your own thoughts, you don’t have any space so it cannot enter you. It is simple arithmetic: if you want something to enter you, you have to give a little space. Your thoughts are filling your mind so much that nothing can enter.

A Zen master was approached by a professor of philosophy. The professor said, “I have come to understand what truth is. What do you say?”
The professor had come uphill, was looking tired, perspiring. The Zen master said, “Sit and rest a little and I will prepare tea for you. First things first. Then we can talk later on. And that is not important. Tea is more important than truth.”
The professor could not believe it. Is this man mad? Tea is more important than truth?
But the Zen master is right. What he means is, “You are too tired and too full of thoughts. Let me help you to relax a little bit. Cool down, please.” That’s what he is saying. He is saying, “Don’t be too much concerned about truth, otherwise you will miss it.”
And then he prepares the tea, he brings it and pours the tea – and goes on pouring. The professor is holding his cup and saucer, the cup is full and the tea starts overflowing into the saucer, but he keeps silent. But then he feels that now the tea is going to overflow onto the floor so he says, “Stop! What are you doing? Why do you go on pouring? My cup is full of tea and it cannot hold a single drop more!”
And the master said, “You are so careful about your cup, but you are not so careful about your mind. Your mind is so full. I see only junk and furniture in your mind, rotten furniture. And you want to invite truth? You will have to create a little space for truth to come in.”

Truth is the ultimate guest. You will have to empty yourself utterly, only then can truth come in. Thoughts are a preoccupation. People who are too much in thoughts remain in a private kind of world. They have their own world of thoughts and dreams and projections and desires. They go on rushing here and there, but they don’t look at the trees, the greenery, the flowers, the birds, the people, the children; they can’t see anything.
I have heard a very old joke, but one of tremendous importance.

Michelangelo was working on his famous ceiling in the Sistine Chapel. For seven years he worked on a high scaffold. He was lying there the whole day on his back, working on the ceiling. Many times he had seen that in the afternoons, when there was nobody in the church, a blind old woman used to come to pray. Somebody would bring her in and leave her there and for hours together she would sit and pray.
One day, one hot afternoon, he was not feeling like working so he turned on his scaffold and looked down. The old woman was there and there was nobody else, the church was utterly empty. She was doing her usual prayer, and tears were coming to her eyes. Michelangelo felt like joking; he was in a joking mood.
He shouted from the top, “I am Jesus Christ. What do you want? Just tell me and I will fulfill it.” He was expecting that the woman would say what she wanted.
The blind woman raised her face and her blind eyes and said, “You shut up! I am not talking to you. I am talking to your mother!”

This is preoccupation. Who bothers about Jesus Christ? “Shut up!” she said.
When you are in a certain thought or in a certain thought process you become closed. Only that much of a tunnel remains open. You move into that tunnel. And that tunnel of your thoughts has nothing to do with reality. It is your thought. It is just a vibe in your mind, just a vibration. That’s why it is said that if you are too much in your thoughts you cannot know the truth.
All kinds of meditations presuppose one thing – thoughtlessness. And this point has to be understood in reference to Sufism too. Just as there are thoughts in the mind so there are emotions in the heart. Thoughts have to go if you want knowing to arise, and if you want loving to arise in your heart then your sentimentality and your emotions have to go.
People are ready to accept that thoughts have to go – then your intelligence is pure. But they have not contemplated upon the second thing: that your heart is pure only when your emotions and your so-called sentiments have gone. Many people think sentimentality to be feeling; it is not. Thoughts are not intelligence, and sentimentality is not love. And there are only two ways. Sufis have two names; all the religions talk about two ways. Sufis say the first way is marifa; marifa means the way of knowing. And the second way is mahaba; mahaba means the way of love. These are what Hindus call jnana-marga and bhakti-marga – the way through intelligence or the way through love.
But both need one thing: if you are searching through intelligence then drop thinking so that intelligence can function unhindered; and if you are working through the path of love then drop emotionality, sentimentality, so that your love can function unhindered. Either you will see God through the heart, the mirror of the heart, or you will see God through the mirror of your intelligence. Both are perfectly good – whatever you choose or whatever you feel is more in accord with you.
Half of the people of the world will follow marifa and half will follow mahaba. It is exactly proportionate – just as there are half women in the world and half men. The yin and yang is divided that way in many dimensions. The path of the heart is the feminine path and the path of intelligence, meditation, knowing, is the male path. But remember one thing: you may be a male biologically, you may not be a male psychologically; you may be a female biologically, you may not be a female psychologically.
You have to look into yourself psychologically. The physiology does not decide; the physiology is not decisive about it. Many women will find through knowing and many men will find through loving. So don’t just take it for granted that because physiologically you have a male body then the path of knowledge is your path, no.
A man is both man and woman, and a woman is both man and woman. In many ways these two points meet. The only difference is of emphasis. And if you are a male in one way you will be a female in another way, to compensate. If you are a woman in one way you will be a man in another way, to compensate – because the total unity has to be absolutely in equilibrium. All your women inside and all your men inside – biological, physiological, psychological – have to come to a synthesis otherwise you cannot exist. They all have to be absolutely balanced.
So look into your own self. Find out who you are. What gives you enthusiasm – knowing or loving? What makes you ecstatic – knowing or loving? What gives you a song in your being?
Now, Albert Einstein cannot go through the path of mahaba. His joy is his intelligence. And you can offer existence only your joy, nothing else. That is the offering, the only offering. You cannot offer flowers from trees, you can offer only your flowering. Einstein has flowered as an absolutely beautiful intelligence – that is the flower that he has to offer to existence. That is his flower. In his own tree that flower has bloomed.
A Chaitanya or a Jesus, they are a different kind of people. Their hearts have opened. They have flowered in love – they can offer their flower. You can only offer your flowering. And to flower you will have to remember to remove hindrances. A real intelligence is without preoccupation with thoughts. That’s why all the great scientists say that whenever they have discovered something, they have discovered it not by thinking, but when the thinking had stopped and there was an interval, a gap. In that gap was the insight – the intuitive flash like lightning. When thought stops, your thinking is pure. It will look paradoxical. When thought stops – let me repeat – your thinking is pure, your capacity to reflect reality is pure. When emotions disappear, sentimentality disappears; then your love energy is pure.
Every seeker has to find it. If you cannot find it then ask your master – because sometimes it will be very confusing for you to decide. There are marginal cases who are forty-nine percent feminine and fifty-one percent male, or vice versa, and it is very difficult for them to decide who they are. And in the morning the proportion may be forty-nine percent man, fifty-one percent woman; in the evening the proportion may change. You are a flux. In the morning you may decide that you are on the path of love and by the evening you decide that you are on the path of knowing. In the morning everybody is more loving. By the evening it is very difficult to remain loving – the world is too much. By the evening everybody hardens, everybody becomes a more solid rock.
That’s why beggars beg in the morning, not in the evening. They don’t come in the evening because they know every door will be closed and they will be shouted down from everywhere. In the morning they can hope. People have relaxed in the night, dreamed beautiful dreams, have become children again, become lost in a dreamless state. The ego was forgotten. In the morning they are more fresh, innocent, young. You can trust that they will have some compassion. They may not give you anything, but they will not shout you down. Or they may give.
Hence all the religions have prescribed prayer in the morning. In India we call that special moment brahmamuhurt, the moment of God – just before the sunrise. That is the best moment to pray. Why? Because the whole night you were out of the world, out of the competition, jealousy, possessiveness, hatred, anger; out of the mathematical, out of the calculating mind. You had become part of nature for those seven, eight hours. Your eyes will be cleaner and your heart will be fresher – and prayer is possible. By the evening it will become more and more difficult. Seeing the people and their dishonesty and seeing the cutthroat competition all around, the violence, the aggression, the war, the exploitation – the misery that is being created by everybody for everybody else – one hardens, one loses heart.
If you cannot decide then ask your master. The master has many functions: one is – the first, the beginning thing – he has to decide for you because he can look deeper into you. He can see your potential. And sometimes it happens that on the surface you are one thing and potentially you are another. Sometimes it happens that a man looks very, very manly and deep inside he has a very soft heart. Maybe it is just because of the soft heart that he has created an armor around himself of strength, of aggression – he is afraid of his own softness. He is afraid that that softness will make him vulnerable. He is afraid that if he opens his heart he will be exploited and cheated by everybody else, he will be nowhere in this competitive world. Being afraid of his softness he has become closed, he has put a China Wall around his heart. He has become very aggressive. He has become aggressive in the same proportion that he feels he is soft and vulnerable.
So if he thinks, he will think he is a very hard man, a warrior type, a very calculative man, and he may be misguided by his own armor, he may be deceived by his own deception. He had managed that deception for others, but this is one thing to be understood: you dig a ditch for others and finally you fall into it yourself.
Or there may be somebody who looks very, very feminine – soft, graceful, elegant – and deep down he may be a very dangerous man, an Adolf Hitler or a Benito Mussolini or a Genghis Khan. That too is possible, that too happens. When a person becomes very afraid of his own aggression and violence he creates a soft armor around himself, otherwise nobody will relate to him. He is afraid that nobody will relate to him so he becomes very polite, he learns etiquette, he is always bowing to people, always smiling so that nobody can see his violence that he is carrying like a poison, like a dagger. If you have a dagger you have to hide it, otherwise who is going to relate to you. You show carry it, you have to hide it somewhere. And once you have hidden it somewhere, by and by you yourself forget about it.
The first function of the master is to look into your potentiality because that is decisive – not your armor, not your character, not you on the surface, but you in the deepest core of your being. You as existence has created you, not you as the society or you yourself have created you. Only from that point do things start growing.
If you start working on yourself with your armor you will never grow – because armor can’t grow, it is a dead thing. Only your being can grow. Structures don’t grow, they are not alive. Only the life in you can grow – life that has been a gift from existence. But how are you going to see it?
You will need somebody who can see to the very depth of your being. And you will have to allow somebody to go into your depth, that’s why surrender is needed. A master will not be able to function if you are not surrendered. You will not open up, you will not allow him passage; you will protect yourself even against him, you will be defensive even against him, you will keep a distance, you will not allow him too close an approach to you. Then there is no possibility.
What is surrender? Surrender is only a trust that you are going to open your heart. It is a risk. Who knows what the master will do to you? Certainly it is a risk. That’s why religion is not for those who are very cowardly. And cowardly people are very cunning people – they go on rationalizing. They say, “Why should I surrender? Why should I surrender to anybody?” They think that surrender is a kind of weakness.
They are absolutely wrong. Surrender is possible only if you are very strong. To surrender needs great strength, great courage, great risk. Weak people cannot surrender. They cannot trust themselves so much and they cannot be courageous enough to open their hearts before somebody else.
Weaklings can never surrender, remember. Weaklings continuously go on fighting. They are afraid of their weakness; they know that they are weak. They cannot afford surrender – only very strong people can. This is my experience here. Whenever a strong person comes to me he is always ready to take a jump, and whenever a weak coward comes he talks and thinks and broods and finds rationalizations and explanations. And you can always find explanations, the mind is very fertile for that. For lies the mind is very fertile; for truth it is impotent.
This is the beginning – the master has to look and decide what is your path; he has to decide what is going to be your tariqa, the method; he has to decide in what direction you are going to move and from what point in your being you have to work.
Then there are a thousand and one functions. On each step of the journey there are problems because this journey is not like a plain highway. At each point there are diversions, at each point there are bypaths. It is a very zigzag journey. It is almost a riddle; it is a labyrinth. Unless there is somebody who has gone the whole way and knows the way, there is a greater possibility that you will be lost somewhere, that you will take a wrong route. From each step the wrong route is available. And of a hundred routes, only one is right, ninety-nine are wrong. This is the situation. You will need somebody to help you at each point of the journey.
But as you grow, trust will also grow. When you take the first step with the master you will see something has happened. Then more trust naturally arises and something more becomes possible. Then something more happens, then more trust. By and by, trust becomes absolute and the disciple disappears. And the moment that the disciple has disappeared, the disciple is born. Now there is not going to be any trouble. Now things will become very smooth and the journey will be a joy, it will not be an anxiety. Alone, it will create anguish.
And then at the ultimate point the master is needed finally to give you a push – because at the ultimate point everybody hesitates. It is death. The Sufis call it the great death. It is no ordinary death – in ordinary death only the body dies. It is the great death. In this death even the self dies, you are utterly annihilated. That’s why Buddha called this state nirvana, the blowing out of the candle. You are utterly annihilated. But only out of that annihilation does something arise.
A great Sufi master, Master Farid al-Din’ Attar, relates the tale of the phoenix. It is a symbolic, mythological tale of the ultimate utter death of the disciple.
The phoenix is a wonderful bird. It has no mate and dwells in solitude. Its beak is long and hard like a flute, and contains nearly one hundred holes. Each hole sounds a different tone, and each tone reveals a mystery. A mystic friend of the bird taught it the art of music.
When the phoenix utters these sounds, all the birds of the sky and fish of the sea are affected. All the wild beasts are made silent by the entrancing music and experience of ecstasy.
The phoenix lives about a thousand years. It knows the time of its death, and when this knowledge is tearing at its heart it gathers a hundred trees, heaps them in one spot, and begins a fire. Then it places itself in the middle of the fire. Through each of the holes in its beak it sounds a plaintive cry, out of the depth of its soul it utters its dying lament, and then begins to tremble.
At the sound of the music all the birds gather. The wild beasts assemble to be present at the death of the phoenix. At this time they all become aware of their own death. When the moment arrives for it to draw its last breath, the phoenix spreads its tail and feathers and with these it kindles a fire that spreads swiftly to the woodpile and begins to blaze. Soon the fire and bird become one red-hot mass. When the glowing charcoal is reduced to ashes and only one spark remains, a new phoenix arises into life.
But how can you trust that the new phoenix is going to arise? You will be gone, you will be utterly gone. The Buddhists say: “Gate, gate, parasamgate – you will be gone, gone, gone forever.” But in that very going something is new. You release the energy, the old pattern disappears, but that eternal energy takes a new form, a birth. It is a resurrection. That is the last thing the master has to do – to help you die, to help you disappear.
Sufis say that without a master there is no way, because without the master it is almost an impossibility for a seeker to reach.

The third question:
Osho,
You said that life is a pilgrimage without a goal. Is this only for the unenlightened? When an enlightened being leaves his body, does the pilgrimage continue?
Yes, the pilgrimage continues, but the pilgrim is no more. The pilgrim disappears, the pilgrimage continues.
In you, just the opposite is the case: the pilgrim is there and the pilgrimage is not there yet. The pilgrim is too much, hence it obstructs the pilgrimage.
The dancer disappears, but the dance continues; the singer disappears, but the song continues. The song cannot die because the song comes from God. The dancer cannot live eternally because the dancer is only exists in your mind, just a fiction. The dance is the reality, the dancer is just a fiction – hence Sufis have developed many methods through dance: the whirling dervish, the turn.
What happens in the turn? What happens for the whirling dervish when he goes on dancing and whirling and whirling and whirling? What happens? A moment comes when the whirler disappears, there is only whirling; the turner is no more, there is only the turn. There is energy, but there is no center to that energy. In that very moment there is meditation.
Dance is one of the ancientmost methods, tariqa – hence my strong insistence for dance. Many people come to me – orthodox Jainas. Catholics, Buddhists – and they say, “Why is there so much dance?” Because they think that meditation can only happen when you sit silently under a tree with an absolutely unmoving body.
Meditation can happen in two ways. Either all movement disappears – then you sit like a Buddha, stonelike, statuelike. When all movement disappears the mover disappears, because the mover cannot exist without the movement. Then there is meditation. Or, you dance. You go on dancing and dancing and dancing and a moment comes of such ecstasy, of such extreme movement of energy, that in that movement the rocklike ego cannot exist. It becomes a whirlwind. The rock disappears and there is only dance. The movement is there, but the mover is no longer there. Again, meditation has happened.
For those who are following the path of love, mahaba, dance will suit perfectly. For those who are following the path of knowing, sitting buddhalike, in yoga postures, unmoving, will be helpful.

The fourth question:
Osho,
Often it seems that a successful therapeutic relationship results in spiritual growth for both client and therapist. Please explain: To what extent is the relationship between client and therapist similar to that of disciple and master?
It is not similar at all, for many reasons. But the most fundamental reason is that the client and the therapist relationship is a relationship, and a relationship between a disciple and master is not a relationship at all because the disciple has to disappear into it. The client, the patient, has not to disappear into the therapist; they retain their identities. They remain two. In the relationship with the master, the disciple has to disappear, and when there is no disciple, naturally the master has disappeared also – because the master cannot be there without the disciple.
The master is the idea of the disciple. When the disciple has disappeared the master has disappeared and there is only existence; one existence.
This is very significant. Remember it. If you are ready to disappear I am already not there. I exist only in your mind. As far as my own existence is concerned, it is not there. If you are ready to dissolve, suddenly you will become aware that you have dissolved into a nothingness; there is neither master nor disciple. How can there be a relationship? The relationship is possible between the teacher and the taught, yes, but not between a master and a disciple.
There are two kinds of people around here. Those who are disciples… For them there is no relationship with me – I am them, they are me. But there are a few who are students. Then there is a relationship: I am the teacher and they are the students. There may be a few who are here as patients too – then I am the therapist and they are the patients. It depends on you. But the relationship between a patient and a therapist is a relationship.
The second thing to remember: the patient and the therapist are not different as far as their beings are concerned. The therapist may be suffering from the same pathology as the patient, he may have the same problems. But he is an expert, a knowledgeable person. He knows more than the patient. He is not more than the patient, he knows more than the patient. He can be helpful.
He is like a plumber. The plumber knows more than you about your bathroom, but that doesn’t mean that he is more than you. When something is wrong – the heater is not functioning and the water is not flowing – you call the plumber. He knows more; he will be helpful, he is an expert.
The therapist is the plumber of the mind. Something is blocked – he knows, he will help you. I have many plumbers around here and they do good work, they really know what they are doing – but remember, a plumber is a plumber.
A master is not a plumber. A master is not quantitatively different from you; he is qualitatively different from you. Sometimes it can happen that the disciple may know more than the master. It is possible, there is no problem in it, but the disciple is not more than the master. And that is the difference.
The master has being; he has arrived. He has no problems, his problems have disappeared – because he has disappeared, the basic problem has disappeared. The problem-creator has disappeared. He has no problems. When you relate to a master you are relating to a person who has no problems. He is utterly quiet. There is absolute silence. No question, no problem, nothing to be solved, nowhere to go, nothing to do. All has already happened. There is no more to happen. Happening has disappeared. He simply is. It is a pure isness, a pure existence.
A therapist is a man just like you, but he has a certain expertise. He can help you so far.
I have heard…

A fellow had two parrots and he wanted to know which was the male and which was the female. A man standing near said, “I am a bird expert, and I can tell you.”
“If you look you will notice that every time the birds eat worms, the male bird always eats the male worms and the female bird eats the female worms.”
“Well, how do you know which is the male and which is the female worm?”
“Well, I don’t know that. I’m just a bird expert.”

A therapist can go so far, but don’t push him too much. Take his help. He knows much more about how the human mind functions and how man behaves than you know. He has studied it. He can be helpful. If your mind is not functioning well he can put things right. He can make you readjusted.
A master does not readjust your mind, he helps you to dissolve it. He is not concerned in adjusting you to the society, adjusting you to particular norms, standards, principles. He is not concerned with adjusting you at all – because this society is sick. It is as sick as it can be. To adjust you to this society is to adjust you to great sickness. This society is mad, it is neurotic. And all your psychotherapists are in the service of this neurotic society. When somebody starts going beyond the limits of the commonly accepted neurosis the psychotherapist has to be brought in – you are going too far. Come back. He helps you to come back to the accepted boundaries. He makes you normally abnormal, that’s all. He is in the service of the society.
That’s why psychotherapy is very anti-revolutionary. If it is a capitalist society, the therapist will adjust you to the capitalist society. If you live in America, he will adjust you to the American society, the American way of life. If you live in Soviet Russia, he will adjust you to the communist society, the communist way of life. He serves the state. He serves the status quo. Wherever he is, he is in the service of whomsoever happens to be in power.
A master serves no power. A master serves no society. A master is basically rebellious. Rebellion is his very flavor. He serves no imprisonments, he serves no conditionings. He makes you simply free – free of all conditioning, free of all societies, free of all man-made laws and disciplines. He gives you freedom.
A psychotherapist gives you a psychological readjustment so that you can function better, that’s all. The psychotherapist looks at you as a function in the society. You are a doctor, you were doing perfectly well, then one day you go cuckoo. Now the psychotherapist comes and helps you to get back to doing your things in the same way you were doing them. You were doing such a good service to the society, you were such a good physician, you were a good professor, and then something goes wrong. You were doing such a utilitarian thing, you were such a good commodity.

A professor of philosophy told his class that if any of them could answer one question he would allow that individual to forego the regular examination. The question was: “If a boat floats five miles downstream while a crow flies eight miles across an open field in the same time that a sparrow flies ten and half miles counter-clockwise, then how old am I?”
“You are forty-four years old, sir,” answered one of the pupils.
“Remarkable!” exclaimed the professor. “Tell me, exactly how did you arrive at that figure?”
“That was easy, sir,” replied the student modestly. “You see, I have a nephew who’s twenty-two, and he’s only half crazy.”

Now this professor will need a psychotherapist to bring him back. He has gone too far – far out.
The psychotherapist helps the society to remain as it is. Freudians, Jungians, Adlerians and all, they are all anti-revolutionaries because they all serve the society. Whatever they say, howsoever they guard their principles, basically they serve the status quo.
They are the modern version of the priest. In the ancient days the priest used to serve the same function. He used to keep people under rule, under control; he was serving the king. There was a conspiracy between the priest and the politician. The politician would touch the feet of the priest and the priest was enforcing a certain kind of society on people in the name of God. Then by and by God died. Naturally the priest became unemployed. The kings disappeared. Now there are only five kings – four of playing cards and one of England. The others have disappeared. The king disappeared, the priest disappeared, God disappeared, the society became democratic.
But the society needs the priest. Without the priest the politician cannot function. The priest has come back with a new name: the psychotherapist is the new priest and psychotherapy is the new religion, religion in the sense all so-called religions have been. It is not Sufism, it is not Zen, it is not Hasidism; it is Judaism, Mohammedanism, Hinduism, Buddhism. It is the new religion, and the psychotherapist is the new priest and they are serving old purposes – old wine in new bottles.
The master has always been against the priest and the master is going to remain against all kinds of priests, whatever their name.
The relationship between a master and a disciple is something utterly different. First it is not a relationship; second it has nothing to do with society, adjustment, normality. In fact, the master helps the disciple to go beyond the mind. The therapist keeps the person below the mind, in the mind. Their functions are almost contrary.

And the last question:
Osho,
Why did Gurdjieff use to say that if you want to get rid of religion, live close to a priest?
It is simple. The priest remains significant only if you don’t know his heart, if you don’t know his reality. If you start knowing his reality you will be surprised: the priest is the last person to believe in religion. He never believes, he only pretends. It is his profession to believe. The priest is the only person who knows that God does not exist, but he cannot say it because his whole business depends on it. It is his trade secret. Gurdjieff is right.
Listen to a few stories. That will do!

A member of the Catholic Church approached her priest and said, “Father, my dog died, and I want to know if you think it is all right to have a funeral for him.”
The priest said, “Yes, I think it’s all right, if you desire one.”
“And who do you think would be a good minister to conduct it?”
The priest wasn’t too happy with the thought of this funeral so he said, “I know a good Presbyterian minister down the street. I believe he will conduct it for you.”
“Oh, thank you, Father, and just one more question. How much do you think I should pay him for it – two hundred dollars or three hundred dollars?”
The priest’s eyes lit up, and as he slipped his arm around his parishioner, he said, “Why, my friend, why didn’t you say it was a Catholic dog?”

And another:

A Baptist Deacon had advertised a cow for sale.
“How much are you asking for it?” inquired a prospective purchaser.
“A hundred and fifty dollars,” said the advertiser.
“And how much milk does she give?”
“Four gallons a day,” he replied.
“But how do I know that she will actually give that amount?” asked the purchaser.
“Oh, you can trust me,” reassured the advertiser. “I’m a Baptist Deacon.”
“I’ll buy it,” replied the other. “I’ll take the cow home and bring you the money later. You can trust me. I’m a Presbyterian Elder.”
When the Deacon arrived home he asked his wife, “What is a Presbyterian Elder?”
“Oh,” she explained, “a Presbyterian Elder is about the same as a Baptist Deacon.”
“Oh dear!” groaned the Deacon, “I have lost my cow!”

Gurdjieff is right. If you want to remain religious in the old sense never go close to a priest, it is better to keep away. If you really want to become religious then it is very good to go and watch a priest as closely as possible. That will show you the reality of the so-called priests and the reality of their so-called religions. That will annihilate Mohammedanism, Christianity, Judaism, Hinduism in your mind.
And then for the first time you will inquire. You will start inquiring what true religion is beyond the dogmas and the churches and the creeds, beyond the conflicts, beyond the theologies. You will start inquiring what true God is.
And that makes a man a Sufi or a Zen seeker or a Hasid.
Enough for today.

============================================================

A man came to Bahauddin Shah and said, “First I followed this teacher and then that one. Next I studied these books, and then those. I feel that although I know nothing of you and your teachings, this experience has been slowly preparing me to learn from you.”
The Shah answered, “Nothing you have learned in the past will help you here. If you are to stay with us, you will have to abandon all pride in the past. That is a form of self-congratulation.”
The man exclaimed, “This is, to me, the proof that you are the great, the real and true teacher! For none whom I had met in the past has dared to deny the value of what I had studied before!”
Bahauddin said, “This feeling is in itself unworthy. In accepting me so enthusiastically and without understanding, you are flattering yourself that you have perceptions which are in fact lacking in you.
“You are still in effect saying, ‘I am of some worth because I have recognized Bahauddin as a great man.’”
A young man has asked why there seems to be no meaning in life. Because meaning does not exist a priori. There is no meaning existing in life – one has to create it. Only if you create it will you discover it; first it has to be invented. It is not lying there like a rock, it has to be created like a song. It is not a thing, it is a significance that you bring through your consciousness. Don’t wait for it. It never comes by just waiting. One has to become a lab, one has to become a womb, one has to give birth to it.
This is one of the most significant things to be understood – otherwise you will go on missing meaning. People have a wrong notion. They think that meaning is already there, existing somewhere. It is not so. Buddha creates the meaning and then he discovers it. That’s why his meaning will never become your meaning. The meaning remains individual. Each one has to create it for himself, it cannot be borrowed.
That’s the difference between the scientific truth and the religious truth. The scientific truth is a dead thing. Once discovered by one it is discovered for all. Once Newton has discovered something – for example, the law of gravitation – then you need not discover it again and again. Then it becomes a collective property. Newton may have worked for many years to discover it, may have devoted his whole life to it, but now a schoolchild will learn it within minutes. He will not have to go through all the bother.
Scientific truth is a dead thing – it is a thing. Hence once discovered, it is discovered forever. When one person has discovered it then it becomes the property of all.
Religious truth is not a thing. It is significance, it is meaning. Each one has to discover it, each one has to go on the exploration. Buddha’s truth disappears with Buddha. Mohammed’s truth disappears with Mohammed. It was the fragrance of a flower that had opened in the heart of Mohammed – how can the fragrance remain when the flower has gone? Now the Koran is dead, so is the Dhammapada, so is the Gita, and so are all the scriptures. A scripture is alive only when the flower is there. With the flower, the fragrance is alive; when the flower is gone, all is gone.
Scientific truth can be learned. You can go to school, you can learn it from a teacher. Religious truth cannot be learned. It has to be created, not learned. You cannot go to a teacher. It cannot be taught, there is no way to teach it. You will have to go to a master not to a teacher – and that is the difference between a teacher and a master: a teacher deals in dead things, a master lives his truth.
If you are in the presence of a master you will start vibrating, pulsating. Truth cannot be given to you, but you can smell the perfume of it and then you can start searching for it in your own innermost core, in your own being. It has to evolve. It is growth; meaning is growth. You will have to devote your whole life to it.
So don’t ask why there is no meaning in life. There is none because you have not created it yet. There is for me. I have created it. But my meaning cannot become your meaning. Even if I give it to you, in the very transfer the baby will die. You will carry a dead corpse. There is no way of transferring it.
The Sufis are very particular about it – that’s why they deny knowledge. They say there is no knowledge possible. Knowing is possible, but knowledge is not possible. What is the difference between knowledge and knowing? There is no difference in the dictionary, but in existence there is a tremendous difference. Knowledge is a theory, knowing is an experience.
Knowing means you open your eyes and you see. Knowledge means somebody has opened his eyes and he has seen and he talks about it, and you simply go on gathering the information. Knowledge is possible even if you are blind. Knowledge is possible… Without eyes you can learn many things about light, but knowing is not possible if you are blind. Knowing is possible only if your eyes are healed, cured, if you can see. Knowing is authentically your experience; knowledge is pseudo.
Don’t depend on knowledge, otherwise you will go on missing meaning. Knowledge can only give you a false promise. It is never fulfilled. Knowledge can only give you pseudo coins. They are worthless, beware of them. Knowledge can make you feel very, very good because it enhances your ego. You start feeling as if you know. But remember, it is “as if,” it is not really the case. And when you feel “I know,” “I” is strengthened.
Before a man can become a man of knowing he will have to drop all knowledge. That is the real renunciation. I have seen people renouncing their children – that is foolish because children are not standing in the way of God. I have seen people renouncing their wives, their husbands – that is stupid because God is present in the husband and in the wife, God is alive there. When you renounce your wife you have renounced God – God in the form of your wife. When you renounce your husband, you have renounced God who has come in the form of your husband.
I have seen people renouncing children, wife, husband, but people don’t renounce their knowledge. They go on carrying their knowledge which is the real obstruction, which is the real hindrance – the only barrier there is.
Look… A man renounces life, goes to the Himalayas, but if he was born a Jaina he remains a Jaina. He carries the knowledge. If he was born a Hindu he remains a Hindu. Even in the depth of the Himalayas, sitting in a cave all alone, he remains a Hindu.
If you are a Hindu you are still part of the society called Hindu, you are not in the Himalayas. How can a single man be a Hindu? To be a Hindu one needs to belong, to be a Hindu one needs a society; to be a Mohammedan one needs a sect, a crowd. Hinduism, Mohammedanism, Islam, Christianity, Jainism, Buddhism are all names of different kinds of crowds.
And you say you have left the world? Then why have you brought in this crowd and this belonging? And what do you mean by calling yourself a Hindu? You mean that you carry a certain kind of knowledge – knowledge imparted by the Vedas, the Gita. Or if you think you are Mohammedan, then it is knowledge imparted by the Koran. You have not renounced knowledge.
Sufis say that if you want to renounce anything at all, renounce knowledge. That is the greatest courage – because when you renounce knowledge, the ego starts disappearing. The ego dies of its own accord, it cannot exist. The moment you say “I don’t know,” have you felt the purity of that moment? Have you felt the innocence of that moment? Have you felt the silence of that moment? When you utter, “I don’t know,” this is one of the greatest statements a man can make – and this is the beginning.
The first step of Sufism is to come to know that you don’t know. And this should not be a mere idea, it should be a lived experience. You should not only say it, it should not be only on your lips, it should be deep in your heart. You should feel it from your very guts: “I don’t know.”
What do you know? Do you know God? Do you know truth? Do you know anything about death? Do you know anything about life? Yes, you are alive, but you don’t know anything about life. Yes, God is in you and has lived in you from the very beginning – the beginningless beginning – but you have not yet made any acquaintance with him. And truth is everywhere. You are surrounded by truth, you live in the ocean of truth, but you don’t know anything about it. You are as ignorant about truth as a fish is ignorant about the ocean.
But you go on thinking that you know because you have read a book, because you can recite the Koran, the Gita, the Bible. Not only do people think that reciting, remembering, is knowledge, they think this is the only kind of knowledge there is.
Remembrance, memory is not knowledge. What do you know by remembering something? A parrot can do that, a machine can do it – and in a far more efficient way than you can do it. What is there? A computer can remember the whole of the Vedas and the Koran and the Bible and all the scriptures and can present all its knowledge whenever you ask. But the computer has no consciousness, no awareness, no soul.
A man who trusts his memory too much and thinks that it is knowing starts disappearing as a man and finally becomes a mechanism. Memory is mechanical.
So Sufis say that if you want to renounce anything, renounce the knowledge that you have accumulated in the memory. That is the real barrier. Because of this idea that you know, you can’t become innocent, you can’t become like children. When you are a Hindu, how can you be innocent? You are already corrupted, you have already gathered opinions. Scriptures, ideologies, concepts and philosophies have already entered your mind. You have already become cunning. You are clever. How can you be innocent?
When a child is born and opens his eyes for the first time, is he a Christian or a Mohammedan or a Hindu? Those eyes are the real eyes. Soon dust will start gathering. Soon we will start throwing ideas into the innocent consciousness of the child. Soon the mirror will gather much garbage and will not reflect reality anymore.
This garbage has to be dropped. The memory has to be used, but one should not get identified with it. I am not saying that you have to drop your memory, just the identity has to be dropped.
You will be surprised. When the identity is dropped you can use your memory far more efficiently than before – because then it is just a mechanism, whenever you need it you can use it. But you remain aloof, distant, pure. You remain a child.
Jesus goes on saying, “Unless you are like small children you will not enter the Kingdom of my God.”

Jesus was standing in a crowd in a marketplace one day and somebody asked, “Who will be the worthy ones? Who will enter your Kingdom of God? Who will be the chosen few, the elect ones?”
Jesus looked around… Naturally the rabbi of that small village was present and he thought, “He must choose me and show that I will be the worthy one.”
But Jesus bypassed him. The rich man of the town was there and he bypassed him. And the professor was there and he bypassed him. And an ascetic was there and he bypassed him. And then his eyes fell on a small child who was just standing in the crowd, completely innocent. He took the child up and he showed the child to everybody saying, “Those who are like this child, innocent, mirrorlike, only they will be able to enter my Kingdom of God.”

That’s why it should not be a surprise if the rabbis were very angry with Jesus. If the learned people were against him, it should not be a surprise. If the religious priests were against him, it should not be a surprise. If they all gathered together to destroy this innocent man, this Sufi, Jesus Christ, it is logical.
Sufis talk much about Jesus Christ, and they talk in a far more loving way than Christians do because their understanding about Jesus is deeper. Christians’ understanding becomes again that of dogma. Sufis have an insight and the insight comes because they have come to know the moment of not knowing. Remember these words: the moment of not knowing. Attain it. From that moment the journey starts.
So a master has to take away all your knowledge. He has to destroy all ego in opinions, philosophies, creeds. He has to be very hard. He has to hammer you. Once knowledge disappears and clouds are not there and the sun of consciousness burns brightly, things start happening, miracles start happening.
The first miracle is that when you don’t know you start knowing. When your eyes are no longer full of opinions they become clear, transparent. You attain insight.
Before we enter this beautiful parable of one of the greatest masters, Bahauddin Shah, a few more things have to be understood – in reference, particularly, to the modern mind.
The modern mind is feeling more meaningless than has ever been the case because the past centuries lived in a kind of stupor, sleep. There was much orthodoxy. Convention was heavy and strong. The citadel of religion was very, very great, powerful, dictatorial. People lived for centuries in belief.
This century has dared to drop beliefs. Those beliefs used to give people a feeling that there is meaning in life. Now those beliefs have disappeared. This is good. As far as it goes, it is good that beliefs have disappeared. This is the first age of agnosticism. For the first time man has become mature, mature in the sense that he does not rely on beliefs, on superstitions. We have dropped all superstitious beliefs.
So a kind of vacuum has come into existence. The beliefs have disappeared – and with the beliefs the false sense of meaning has disappeared. An emptiness has settled in. We have done the negative part, we have demolished the old building. Now the positive part has to be done – we have to erect a new building. The old temple is no more, but where is the new temple? Belief has been destroyed, but where is trust? Belief has gone – this is good – but this is not enough. It is necessary, but not enough. Now you will have to grow into trust.
Let me explain these two words to you. Belief is borrowed; somebody else gives it to you – your parents, your society, your priest, your politician, they give it to you. Immediately the child is born we start – either we circumcise the child or we baptize the child. We do something. Immediately we start conditioning him. Before he becomes alert, beliefs have gone deep into his blood and bones, even into his marrow. Before he becomes alert and before he can think clearly, he is already poisoned. The beliefs have become unconscious. He has already been conditioned. He is not free to think.
That’s why all religions are so interested in teaching children religion. They are interested immediately: the first thing they want to do is to teach children religion. Psychologists say that the only possibility to teach a child religion is to teach him before he is seven. Once he has passed the age of seven then it will become more and more difficult to teach him because he will start questioning, he will start arguing. He will become doubtful, he will become skeptical. Up until the age of seven a child simply trusts the parents, he believes that whatever they do is right. He has no doubt. This is a natural phenomenon. The child has to trust the mother. The child is so helpless that he cannot exist on his own. It is a necessity, a must for his survival, to trust the parent. And he trusts.
Religions use that natural trust to condition the child. The mother takes him to the church or to the temple, to the priest or to the minister, and the child follows the mother and the parent and the family. By the very atmosphere of the family a subtle conditioning starts going in. By the time the child can think, can formulate, he is already conditioned. Those conditionings have gone so deep now that he will never be able to drop them easily.
A master will be needed to hammer. You will need somebody whom you can love more than you love your father, whom you love more than you love your mother. You will need a master – only then. The master can go to those deepest layers of your being where conditioning has happened, and he can destroy. Unless the master becomes more significant than your parents it is not possible, it is not psychologically possible.
That’s why Buddha says, “Until you destroy and kill your father and mother, you cannot come to me.” A strange statement. Jesus says, “If you don’t hate your father and mother you can’t follow me.” It does not look very good. Jesus, the apostle of love and peace, Buddha, the most compassionate human being that has ever walked on earth, talking about hating? Not only hating, but killing?
What do they mean? They don’t mean your actual parents, they mean the parents that have gone deep into your being, that have become your base. That base has to be destroyed. Once that base disappears you will become again a child. Once that conditioning has been dropped you will suddenly become again a child, innocent. And this time you will be in a far better situation because you will not be helpless, you will be on your own feet – and innocent like a child.
This is the meaning of sannyas. This is the meaning of initiation. This is the meaning when Sufis say that somebody has become a sadhaka, somebody has become a disciple.
In this age, slowly, slowly belief has disappeared. And nothing has appeared in its place.
You must have heard about a German thinker, Ludwig Feuerbach. He seems to be the herald of the contemporary mind. Feuerbach explained God away in terms of the infinite desire of the human heart. He said, “There is no God. God does not exist as an objective reality. It is only a wish-fulfillment. Man wants to become omnipotent, omnipresent, omniscient. Man wants to become God – this is man’s desire, the desire to become infinite, the desire to become immortal, the desire to become absolutely powerful.”
This was the first hammering on the belief of God: that God is not objective; that God is not there; that God is just a projection in the human mind; that God has no ontology, he is only a psychological dream; that man is thinking in terms of God because he feels himself impotent. He needs something to make him complete. He needs an idea that gives him a feeling that he is not a stranger here; that in this world there is somebody who looks after him. God is nothing but a projected father. Man wants to lean upon something. It is just a pure desire. It has no reality.
Then came Karl Marx. Marx explained God away in terms of an ideological attempt to rise above the given reality. Marx said that because people are poor, in suffering, in misery, they need a dream – a dream that can give them hope. People are living in hopelessness, in such utter misery, that if they cannot dream that somewhere in the future everything will be perfect they will not be able to tolerate this intolerable reality. So God is the opium.
Religion is the opium of the masses. It is a drug. It helps, consoles. It is a kind of tranquilizer. You are in such pain that you need a painkiller. God is a painkiller: the idea that today, yes today is miserable, but tomorrow everything is going to be good.
Marx says that’s why Jesus’ beatitudes have become so important: “Blessed are the poor.” Why? Why, “Blessed are the poor”? Because “They shall inherit the Kingdom of God.” Now the poor can hope. Here he is poor, but there he will inherit the Kingdom of God. Not only that, Jesus says, “Those who are the first here will be the last there and those who are the last here will be the first there.” Now the poor man feels really happy. He forgets his poverty. He is going to be the first there. Jesus has different meanings for these statements, but Marx thinks these are just drugs.
Marx also looks very logical. When people are in misery they have only one way to tolerate it: to pass the time away they can imagine a better future. You are in hospital – you can imagine that tomorrow you will be getting out of hospital and you will be going home and everything will be okay. It is only a question of a few hours more. You can tolerate it.
This world is a question of a few years, don’t be worried about it; soon paradise is waiting for you. And the poorer you are, the higher you are going to be in paradise. And all that you are missing here is abundantly supplied there. You don’t have a beautiful woman? Don’t be worried. In paradise everybody will be having as many as they want – and the most beautiful women you can conceive of, apsaras. They are so beautiful that they never age, they never become old, they have golden bodies and they always remain stuck at the age of sixteen. They never grow beyond that. These are the dreams of man.
Here you can’t get alcohol – or even if you can it is difficult or it is costly, or there are a thousand and one problems in getting it. The politicians are always thinking about prohibition. But in firdaus, in paradise, there are streams of wine, alcohol – all kinds. You can drink as much as you want, you can swim, you can absolutely soak yourself in it.
These dreams are just consolations for those who are downtrodden, oppressed. So Marx says that religion is just a trick, a trick to exploit people, a trick to keep them under rule, a trick so that they cannot rebel. He hammered very hard on the old beliefs.
And then the third hammerer came in with Friedrich Nietzsche. He said, “God is nothing but a weakening of the will to live.” When a person becomes old or a society becomes old, rotten, dull and dying, it starts thinking of God. Why? Because death is coming close by and you have to accept death. You are going to renounce life, life is slipping out of the hands, you cannot do anything about it – but you can accept death. God is a trick to accept death. And death is accepted only by those who have become weak, weaklings.
Nietzsche used to say that the very idea of God comes out of the feminine mind. He used to say that Buddha and Christ are both effeminate. They are not really masculine, they are too soft. They are the people who have accepted defeat. They are no longer fighting, they are not fighting for survival. When a person stops fighting for survival he becomes religious. When the will-to-power is no longer functioning, you start shrinking and dying and you start thinking of God and other related things. God is against life. Life is the will-to-power. Life is struggle, constant struggle. Life is conflict, and one has to win. When people become too weak and cannot win, those defeated minds start becoming religious. Religion is defeatism.
Feuerbach, Marx, Nietzsche, these three together created the atmosphere where it could be declared that God is dead and man is free.
This is the situation in which you have been born. If you are contemporary at all, this is the situation. You are more in tune with Feuerbach, Marx, Nietzsche than you are in tune with Patanjali, Kapila, Kanada. They are far away; we don’t belong to them, they don’t belong to us. The distance is too much. Our real prophets are these – Feuerbach, Marx, Nietzsche, Freud, Darwin. And these people have destroyed the whole fabric, the whole structure, the pattern of belief. And I would like to tell you that they have done a great service to humanity.
But don’t misunderstand me. They have cleaned human consciousness completely of belief, but this is only half the job. Now something is needed. It is as if you are preparing for a garden and you prepare the ground and you throw away all the weeds and you throw away all the stones and the ground is ready – and then you simply wait and you don’t bring the rosebushes and you don’t sow new seeds.
These people have done a great service to humanity. They have uprooted all the weeds. But just by uprooting the weeds the garden is not ready, cannot be ready. It is part of preparing a garden to uproot the weeds, but this is not the garden itself. Now you have to bring the roses. Those roses are missing, hence the meaning is missing.
People are stuck. Either they have become communists or they have become Freudians or they have become fascists. And they think that this clean patch of ground where no belief grows, where no desire springs up about the unknown and the beyond, is the garden. Then you are looking all around and there is nothing, it is a desert. These people have cleaned the ground, but have only created a desert out of it.
Man has become very, very anxious. Anxiety has been created. The anxiety has been repressed for centuries because of conforming with the political party, with the religion, with the sect, with the society. For thousands of years the anxiety has remained locked. Man has functioned as a slave. Now the lock has been broken, man is no longer a slave and the whole anxiety, repression, of thousands of years has broken loose. Man is turning mad.
What these people have done can turn into a great liberation or it can become just a loss. It depends. If you use this situation rightly and you start growing rosebushes in your heart, soon you will find a great thankfulness toward Feuerbach, Marx, Nietzsche, Freud, and all the people who have destroyed belief, who have destroyed the old religion. They have prepared the way for a new kind of religion – more mature, more adult, more grown up.
I am all for them, but I don’t stop with them. If you stop, meaninglessness will be your destiny. Yes, it is good that there exists no God – the God of belief – but then, then start finding what exists in your inner being. Then go on an exploration and you will stumble upon God. And this God will not be the God of the belief. This God will be the God of your experience.
They have created a situation in which you can say, “I don’t know” – that’s what agnosticism is – now use this as a jumping board to go into the unknown. You are ready to go into the unknown. Knowledge is not binding, nobody is fettering your feet. You are free for the first time – but what are you doing standing there? You were standing there because you were chained and now you are still standing there although the chains have been removed. Move forward. Now explore! The whole of existence is yours. Explore it with no concept, with no prejudice, with no a priori philosophy. Explore it with an open mind and you will be surprised to find that God is.
But this will be a totally new God, utterly new, absolutely new. This will be the God one comes to know, not the God one believes in. This will be an alive God that throbs in your heart, that breathes, that flowers in the trees, that sings songs in the birds. This will be the God of the mountains and the rivers and the stars. This will be the God of life. This will not be a God who exists somewhere in heaven, no, this will be the God who exists herenow – in me, in you, in everybody. This is the God that is equivalent, synonymous with existence.
But this God can come only through knowing, not through knowledge. Knowledge has been destroyed and that’s good. These three people – Feuerbach, Marx, and Nietzsche – have done a good job of clearing away the whole nonsense of centuries, but remember, even they were not benefited by it. Nietzsche died in a madhouse, and if you are stuck with Nietzsche you are waiting for madness and nothing else. Nietzsche did a great service, he was a martyr, but he became stuck in his own negativity. He destroyed the belief, but then he never went to explore what is there. Without belief what is there? With no belief what is there? There is something. You cannot say there is nothing. There is something: What is it? He never went into meditation. Thinking, logical thinking, can do one thing: it can destroy belief. But it cannot lead you into truth.
You can be led into truth only by the door of meditation or by the door of love – marifa or mahaba, either by knowing or by loving. Either by becoming a lover, an ashik, a bhakta, a devotee; or by becoming a yogi, dhyana, a meditator. These are the only two ways – either through intelligence or through feeling. These are the two doors to godliness.
Man has to create meaning now. The meaning is no longer given by the society, no longer by the church – is no longer given by anybody else. Martin Heidegger says, “Once one has become aware of the meaninglessness of life and existence there arises great anxiety, angst, anguish. This happens through unlocking that which subjection to conformity and conditioning of centuries had locked. Once this liberation has happened one can act – but not according to norms given by anybody or anything. One has to fall upon oneself.”
Heidegger is right. You have to fall upon yourself. Now you cannot lean on anybody. No scripture will help. The prophets are gone, the messengers are no longer there. You will have to lean upon yourself. You will have to stand on your own feet. You will have to become independent. Heidegger calls it resolve. You will have to come to a resolve, a resolution that “I am alone and no help is coming from anywhere. Now what am I going to do? And I don’t know anything. No belief exists to give me a map. No chart exists and the uncharted is all around. The whole of existence has again become a mystery.”
It is a great joy for those who have courage because now exploration is again possible.
This is what Martin Heidegger calls resolve. This is what Hindus have called sankalpa. Now you have to resolve. He calls it resolve because through it the individual becomes resolute, the individual becomes individual. No God, no conventions, no laws, no commandments, no norms, no principles – one must be oneself and one must decide where to go, what to do, and who to be. This is the meaning of the famous existentialist motto: Existence precedes essence. That is, there is no essential human nature. Man creates what he is, man projects himself.
The meaning has to be projected, the meaning has to be created. You have to sing your meaning, you have to dance your meaning, you have to paint your meaning, you have to live your meaning. Through living it will arise, through dancing it will start penetrating your being, through singing it will come to you. It is not like a rock lying there, it has to bloom in your being. It has to become an inner lotus.
Now this beautiful parable.
A man came to Bahauddin Shah and said, “First I followed this teacher and then that one. Next I studied these books, and then those. I feel that although I know nothing of you and your teachings, this experience has been slowly preparing me to learn from you.”
When you go to a man like Bahauddin you are coming close to danger, you are coming close to fire, you are coming close to death. This man must have gone to this teacher and to that. There are millions of teachers; masters are rare. You can find teachers by the dozen very easily, they are cheap. To go to a master you are taking a risk.
This man says to Bahauddin – as he must have said to other teachers – “First I followed this teacher and then that one.” People are like that. They think that this is something very glorious. People come to me and they say, “First I have been to Guru Maharaji and then I went to Muktananda and then I went to this and that. Now I have come to you.” They think that they are great pilgrims, they think they are great seekers. By enumerating all the names they feel very good. They are simply showing that they are still stupid.
A real seeker will not be bothered by teachers, will not become attached to teachers. Even if he goes to a teacher he will see through and through that this is just a teaching and he will escape as fast as possible. He will not go on bragging about it because there is nothing to brag about.
One has to find, one has to go on groping in the dark. But when you are groping for a door sometimes you fall in one corner of the room and there is a wall, and you are struck and your head hurts. And then you fall on some furniture and then this and that. And then you come to the door. When you come to the door, do you relate how many times you have stumbled before? In what corner? With what furniture? How many times your head has been hurt? You don’t. All that is meaningless. When you have found the door all those gropings and stumblings in the dark are finished. Then there is nothing to brag about.
In fact, when you say that you have been to Muktananda or Guru Maharaji or Sai Baba or this and that, you are simply saying that you don’t have eyes to see. You are simply showing your unintelligence. This has been my experience. People come and relate these things to me.
There are three kinds of people in the world. The stupid people, they are the majority; then the mediocre people, a little better; then the intelligent people.
The stupid people are in three divisions – as every kind of people are in three divisions. One: the person who functions through his mind. He does not have much, but still he functions through it – so, the stupid intellectual. Whenever somebody says, “I have been to Prabhupad,” then I know he is the stupid intellectual. The second is the man who is stupid but emotional. He functions through emotion. Then he will go to Guru Maharaji. He will become a premi, a lover. Or, the third possibility: the stupid person who has will, stubbornness, or is seeking some willpower. He will go to Satya Sai Baba – miracles. He will be interested in magic.
When you come to me and you say that you have been here and there, you are simply showing all the nonsense that you have been doing in your past.
The second kind, the mediocre minds, are also in three divisions. If the mediocre mind functions as intellect then he will go to Sri Aurobindo. Or if he functions through feeling then he will go to Muktananda. Or if he functions through will then he will follow some hatha yogi. He will find some gymnast and will start torturing his body. Or he may become a follower of a Jaina muni. He will be a kind of masochist. He will enjoy torturing himself. Through torture he will feel powerful.
And then there are the intelligent, the really intelligent people. They also have three approaches. If a person really functions through intelligence then he will go either to Krishnamurti or Ramana. Or if he is a man of feeling then he will find some master like Meher Baba. Or if he is a man of will then he will find a master like Gurdjieff.
But if you have found a master, you will not need to come to me. Once you find a master you will not go anywhere. Your journey is complete. If you have not yet found a master, only then do you go on looking. So when you say, “I have been with this and I have been with that,” it simply shows that you have not found yet.
It does not show that you have gained anything, it simply shows that you have been stumbling here and there but you have not found yet. It simply shows that something has been missing and has not been found. It is not really your autobiography because it has not even started yet.
When you find your master – finished, full stop. Then the door has arrived. You enter through it. Then you don’t go anywhere else. So if you have not found yet, then all that you think you have been to is meaningless.
This man came to Bahauddin and said: “First I followed this teacher and then that one.” What is he saying? He is saying, “I am no ordinary man, I am a great seeker.” He is introducing himself and showing his autobiography: “You should not take me for an ordinary person. I am a great seeker, a great devotee. I have been to this teacher and to that.” That’s his idea. But he does not know Bahauddin, what Bahauddin will think of it.
“Next I studied these books, and then those.” Then there are people who will enumerate what books they have been reading. Just a few days ago I received a long list from somebody in a very high post in Nepal. He sent a list of books: “I have been reading these books. What do you think?” Why should I think about what books you are reading? “And if you think that any books are missing, can you suggest…?” he asked me. I have suggested that he burn all these books. Books are not going to help. But by the way he has written the letter, he was feeling very great – as if he has been doing something great, as if he has been obliging the whole of existence by reading these three hundred books. He must have gathered much knowledge, and through knowledge, the ego.
“I feel that although I know nothing of you and your teachings, this experience has been slowly preparing me to learn from you.” Look at the foolishness of it. He says, “Although I feel that I know nothing of you and your teachings, still this experience of going to this teacher and that, and my studiousness with this book and that has been slowly preparing me to learn from you.” He does not know what Bahauddin has to teach – because a master has nothing to teach. A master destroys all teaching. A master takes away all that you have learned; a master does not give you anything more to learn. He puts you into a different kind of process – the process of unlearning. A teacher teaches. A teacher gives you so much to learn. If you want to learn, go to a teacher; if you want to unlearn, go to a master. The master takes away all that you know. He has to be very destructive because only when all that is useless is destroyed will you be able to be born anew.
The Shah answered, “Nothing you have learned in the past will help you here.”
It must have come as a shock to the great seeker. Bahauddin says, “Nothing you have learned in the past will help you here.” Nothing, unconditionally. He says, “Nothing you have learned in the past is going to help you here because here we don’t help learning. Here we help unlearning. So all that you know has to be dropped irrespective of what it is.”
All that you know… If a Hindu comes to me he has to drop his Vedas; if a Mohammedan comes to me he has to drop his Koran; if a Buddhist comes to me he has to drop his Dhammapada; if a Christian comes to me he has to drop his Bible. It is not relevant to know what he has to drop – all that he carries within him has to be dropped.
Conditioning has to be dropped. Who has done the conditioning is not the point. A mind has to come to a point where it can feel a deconditioning – a freedom that brings insight, eyes that are no longer foggy with concepts. Life is very green; theories are very gray. When your eyes are full of theories you cannot see the greenness of life. Life is new each moment, theories are always old. When your eyes are full of the old you cannot see the new. Life is very, very silent; theories are clamoring, noisy. Theories create a marketplace in your head and life is very meditative. Through theories you will not be able to contact this eternal silence.
And let me tell you – it may look paradoxical, but it is so – even if you find sound in life it is the sound of silence. It is only man who creates noise. These birds, they sing silence; these trees, they sing silence; these rivers rushing toward the ocean, they sing silence. Yes, there is sound, but the sound is born out of silence. The sound has no noise in it. It is only man who is noisy, chattering. It is man who has brought language into existence. It is man who has brought words into existence – and through words he has lost all. He has become lost in the jungle of language.
A master helps you to burn the whole jungle of language. He brings you to a nonlinguistic space.
Hence Bahauddin says:
“…Nothing you have learned in the past will help you here. If you are to stay with us, you will have to abandon all pride in the past. That is a form of self-congratulation.”
Bahauddin seems very hard. One feels he should have been a little more courteous with the poor fellow. But masters are hard; they can’t be courteous with you. They cannot follow the ordinary etiquette, they have to be rude because only through their rudeness are you shocked. And if you are not shocked you are never aware. Only through shocks do you by and by become alert.
Gurdjieff used to say that people have created shock absorbers around them. Etiquette is one of the shock absorbers. It is like a spring. You sit in a car, the car has many springs. Those springs are helpful – you bump less. The road may be rough, but you don’t feel the roughness too much. Trains have buffers, between two compartments there are buffers. If something happens those buffers absorb the shock.
Man has created many buffers, many springs, many shock absorbers. You see somebody, you meet somebody on the way, you say, “Hello! How are you? Good morning.” This is a buffer. You may not feel good. You may be feeling very bad seeing this man early in the morning, but you have to say, “Good morning,” you have to say, “Glad to see you.” This is a buffer so that you can hide the real fact. And he also says, “Very glad to see you.” Both are miserable at seeing each other. They are not seeing into each other at all, they are avoiding. They are just throwing out these words so that an ugly situation can be avoided, an uncomfortable situation can be avoided and polished.
But a master has to hit you so that you can become alert and awake. There is no other way; you have to be shocked into wakefulness. So the master never misses any opportunity. Whenever you make any opportunity possible, if he can hit, he hits. He certainly hits. He never misses any opportunity.
Now, this man must have been shocked. He was being polite, mannerly, and he had not said anything wrong to the master. He was just saying, “I have been to this master and to that and I have been reading these books.” He is simply saying, “I am worthy of your attention, please. You can accept me. I am ready. I have prepared. All my studies and preparations have led me to you.” Now, he could not have expected this. The shock has to be unexpected, remember. If you can expect it, it is meaningless. If you expect it, you are already ready to absorb it. When you cannot expect, when it comes suddenly, from a corner you would never have expected it to come, only then does it enter you – otherwise you become ready, you become defensive.
So a master cannot repeat. He cannot use the same situation again and again in the same way. With each disciple he is different because once it becomes a stereotyped thing it doesn’t create the shock, the needed shock.
“Nothing you have learned in the past will help you here. If you are to stay with us, you will have to abandon all pride in the past.” You have to abandon the past and the pride in the past. All pride comes out of the past. You are born to a very rich family, you are born to an aristocratic family, you are born to a very famous family, you are born into a very, very noble family. You have studied at Harvard or at Oxford or in Varanasi. You are a brahmin, your father was a great scholar, you have many degrees. The pride comes from the past and a disciple has to drop the past. When you drop the past the future opens its door. If you cling to the past you remain looking backward. And this is the situation – that’s why you are constantly in trouble and constantly moving into accidents. You are like a car driver who is driving ahead and looking backward. An accident is certain. If sometimes it doesn’t happen it is a miracle.
People go on looking back. The rearview mirror is always in their eyes. They see the path that they have traveled already and they don’t see the path that is ahead. And that has to be seen; if you want to avoid accidents that has to be seen. One has to be utterly free from the past, only then are the eyes open to the future. You cannot see both together, remember.
The master makes the future available, and it can be made available in only one way – the past has to be burned, totally. Sometimes when I say to my sannyasins, “Drop the past,” they say, “All? Total? Do you think all is wrong in my past?” They are saying that some good things can be saved – there may be some bad things, they can be burned. But that is not the point. You can save the good things, but again you will be looking at the past. It is not a question of good and bad, it is a question of a choice between the past and the future, remember. It is not a question of you having to choose the good and drop the bad – you have to drop it all. Only then will the eyes be turned toward the future. And the future is potential – because the future is the future.
“…you will have to abandon all pride in the past. That is a form of self-congratulation.” Bahauddin is saying that this “I have been to this teacher and to that, have been reading this book and that, have been practicing Yoga and doing Zen and have been into Subud and all that” is a kind of self-congratulation. He has hit hard.
The man exclaimed, “This is, to me, the proof that you are the great, the real and true teacher!
The man is also extraordinary. He must have been with many teachers and sometimes may have even stumbled upon some masters. He is trying to defeat Bahauddin. Look, he has a shock absorber there too. He says, “Okay, you are hitting me, but you cannot hit me. I have a defense there too.” He suddenly turns. He is defensive in a very subtle way. He says:
“This is, to me, the proof that you are the great, the real and true teacher! For none whom I had met in the past has dared to deny the value of what I had studied before!”
He is really a cunning and knowledgeable man. He would have deceived if there had not been a man of the quality of Bahauddin there. If there had been even a small iota of ego in Bahauddin, this man would have deceived, would have managed.
Now he seems to be saying something perfectly true when he says, “This is precisely the case. Now I see you are the real teacher, the real master as you have dared to say such a thing.” Otherwise teachers persuade, they are salesmen; they try. If you say something to them they always pat you. They say, “Good. What you have done is the right thing to do.” They will not hit you so hard because they are in search of disciples. They can’t miss a customer so easily. A customer has come and you are the shopkeeper – how can you hit him? You have to persuade him, you have to tolerate his nonsense, you have even to appreciate his nonsense.
If you go to a teacher, an ordinary teacher, and if you say that you have been studying this and that, he will say, “Very good. This is how it should be. You are a great soul.” If you say, “I can recite the whole of the Vedas,” he will say, “This is the right thing to do. Now you are ready. So I will not have to work much on you. You have already done half the work.” He will make you feel very good.
Remember, only somebody who is not trying to exploit you in any way can hit you. If he has some ideas of exploiting you he cannot hit you.
“This is, to me, the proof that you are the great, the real and true teacher!” Now he has praised Bahauddin like anything.
“For none whom I had met in the past has dared to deny the value of what I had studied before!”
Bahauddin said, “This feeling is in itself unworthy.”
He hits again and hits even harder.
“In accepting me so enthusiastically and without understanding, you are flattering yourself that you have perceptions which are in fact lacking in you.”
“Now don’t try to befool me,” says Bahauddin. “What do you think you are doing? Do you think you are praising me? In an indirect way you are praising yourself. You are praising yourself and saying that you are so perceptive – and you are not. You are trying to prove that you can recognize when there is a great master in front of you. How can you recognize? You are blind. All your praise of the sun is meaningless.”
Bahauddin can see that the man is blind and yet he is saying, “You are the greatest light.”
“How can you see? You are without understanding and you are praising me so enthusiastically?” It takes time to praise a master. It takes years to praise a master. Only through understanding… If you praise a master through understanding he will accept it. If you praise him only out of enthusiasm he will not accept it. Only your insight can be accepted, not your flattery – because the flatterer indirectly only flatters himself.
Bahauddin said, “This feeling is in itself unworthy. In accepting me so enthusiastically and without understanding, you are flattering yourself that you have perceptions which are in fact lacking in you.”
“You are still, in effect, saying, ‘I am of some worth because I have recognized Bahauddin as a great man.’”
This is the quality of a master, and particularly of a Sufi master. It is very difficult to befriend a Sufi master. It is very difficult to have his grace, his baraka. It is very difficult to become worthy of receiving him in your heart. But it has always been so – because if you become worthy of receiving a master, you have taken a great step toward God. You are becoming worthy of accepting God. The master has to make you utterly naked because before God you will be standing utterly naked.
The master has to be hard. It is his compassion. It is only because of his compassion that he is hard. Remember, when you can come across a master who is hard, recognize it as a fact that he has compassion for you. If he has no compassion he will be polite: Why bother?
I go on hitting on your head mercilessly for only one reason – that I would like to help you.
Just the other day I said something about theosophy and some woman has written: “Your remark was very derogatory. Theosophy has helped many people and theosophy is a great science. What about Madame Blavatsky? She says exactly the same things that you are saying.” Remember, I did not condemn theosophy, I condemned this woman. What have I to do with theosophy? Madam Blavatsky is not here. What is the point? But I am hitting all those here who think they are theosophists.
When I say something against Satya Sai Baba, I am not saying something against Satya Sai Baba. What do I have to do with Satya Sai Baba? I have no business… But I am hitting all those who think they are related to Satya Sai Baba. Remember it always. What do I have to do with Muktananda? A poor fellow. But when I say something about Muktananda, I am hitting you. This has to be remembered always, otherwise you will misunderstand me.
When Bahauddin said to this man that he would have to drop all his past, he was saying, “All those people who have come in your past were wrong.” He was not saying, “You will have to forget all your scriptures because they are wrong” – no, not at all. He was saying only one thing, a simple thing: that pride in the past is egoistic, and a man cannot grow through the ego. If you want to grow you will have to drop all pride in the past.
If you are here with me and if you want to stay here with me, meditate over this small parable. This will give you an indication of what I am doing here with you and what I am going to do again and again. In a thousand and one ways my hammer will always be destroying your skull, your head. If I really love you then I have to behead you, I have to destroy you; I have to become a crucifixion for you – because only after crucifixion is resurrection.
Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
I am not clear. Is being a Sufi a matter of will? Is it a blessing? Or is it something else?
The Sufis have a very beautiful saying. They say, “God is not found by seeking, and never found by those who don’t seek.”
First a man has to seek and then he has to surrender his seeking too – because in the seeking the seeker goes on existing. The seeker is the ego. Of course if you never start seeking, you will never find. You have to be thirsty for God. You have to start moving, groping in the dark. But don’t become addicted to your groping.
A moment comes when you start feeling that your will is not succeeding. But that moment comes only through will, effort, arduous effort. A moment comes when you start feeling that your will has failed, that you are utterly defeated. In that utter defeat is the victory. In that utter defeat you surrender. In that utter defeat you start crying. In that utter defeat you say, “Now I cannot do any more. I am finished. Whatever I could do I have done.” In that moment when you have this total failure, this feeling of utter defeat, you disappear. You are no longer there. The seeker has disappeared through seeking.
To seek God is to seek the impossible. By seeking you cannot find it. If you can find God by your seeking then God will be something that you can possess, then God will be in your fist, then God will be your property – then God will not be greater than you. That which you can seek is bound to be smaller than you, it cannot be bigger than you. The lower cannot seek the higher and the smaller cannot seek the bigger.
You cannot possess the infinite, the eternal – that is absurd. But to understand that this is absurd, one has to start seeking. You will not know it in any other way. One starts longing for God and that means that one is moving, desiring, longing, for the impossible. That’s why I call religion the passion for the impossible.
One day or other defeat is absolutely certain. In that defeat something transmutes, transforms. In that defeat the seeker disappears, the will disappears – surrender happens. You cannot surrender without that defeat. How can you surrender? Deep down you will continue thinking, “I could have succeeded.” Or you may even think that this surrender is something that you are doing – that you are the doer of the surrender too. But then it is not surrender. Surrender can happen only in utter defeat. Only utter defeat prepares you to surrender – not a single hope remains, not a single ray of light in the dark night of the soul. You have put everything at stake, now nothing is left. You are empty.
In that emptiness…surrender. That emptiness flowers into surrender. In that emptiness you are not, something new arrives. The seeker is no longer there, the will has disappeared, but the seeking is there, the longing is there – even more so, because the energy that was involved in the seeker has also become longing. Now you are simply thirsty, knowing perfectly well that you cannot do anything. That moment of utter despair brings grace – that’s what Sufis call baraka, what Hindus call prasad.
When you have fallen flat and you cannot move even a single inch on your own, when you have again become a small child and you are crying and screaming for your mother, the mother comes. But you have to become helpless again.
The question is important. You ask, “I am not clear. Is being a Sufi a matter of will?” Yes, in the beginning it is a matter of will. Each journey toward God starts in will but never ends in will. The first step has to be of will – and will takes you a long way toward your utter defeat. Half the journey is done by willpower and the other half is done in surrender. Will leads to surrender.
This will look paradoxical to you. Will flowers ultimately into surrender because it is will that makes you aware that on your own you cannot do anything. You have done it. You have seen it fail. So the first step is in will; half the journey is in will. And when will has disappeared there is blessing, prasad, baraka.
So if you ask me definitively whether it is will or surrender, I will say it is both and neither. Will and surrender are like two wings of a bird. They both help, they complement each other. Even while they are opposed to each other they complement. Their very opposition creates movement. It is just like your two legs – they are opposed to each other. Through their opposition, energy is created and you can move. Will and surrender are opposites but deep down part of one whole.
Every seeker starts in will and ends in surrender.

The second question:
Osho,
Why do great philosophers and so forth say such beautiful things and yet remain such a mess?
Philosophers are like fences – they run round a lot without getting anywhere at all. Yes, they are exactly like a fence – it goes round and round, but it never reaches anywhere. Thought is a vicious circle. One thought leads to another and so on, so forth, but you go on moving in a circle. You do a lot of running, but you never reach anywhere. Thought is inconclusive. Thought cannot give you the conclusion, it only pretends. It is a pretender. Conclusion comes through experience – that’s why scientists have moved toward the lab, experimentation, and the religious mystics have moved toward the inner lab, the experience. Religion is the science of the inner and science is the religion of the outer.
Philosophy is a mess; it is just pure speculation. One sits and thinks without experimenting, without experiencing, and only experience or experiment is conclusive. Experiment is conclusive about the objective world – that which exists opposite to you, the other; and religion is experience, experiment of the inner, of the subjective – that which you are. Both are conclusive. Philosophy is inconclusive, it is an endless game. But philosophers can say beautiful things. In fact, only they can say beautiful things. Philosophers can afford to say beautiful things, but they are only sayings. These statements may have a certain poetry, but they don’t have any reality, any truth. Yes, those statements can be beautiful, they can have a logical consistency, a logical harmony, but they don’t relate to reality at all. They are all false.
There is nothing to choose between one philosophy and another – all philosophies are false. The philosopher is one who has become stuck in the mind.
Man has three layers: first, the body; second, the mind; third, the soul. This has to be understood. The soul is a reality, so is the body a reality. The mind is nothing but a bridge between the two; in itself it has no value. A bridge has no value in itself. It has value only because it bridges the two banks. It has no intrinsic value. The banks can exist without the bridge, but the bridge cannot exist without the banks. It is just a utility, a means. The mind is where the soul and the body overlap. Where body and soul overlap, a new kind of illusory reality is created. That reality is the mind.
Science trusts in the body, religion trusts in the soul, philosophy goes on trusting in the mind; it is a mind game. And remember, when you are totally in your body, the mind disappears. Or when you are totally in the soul, the mind disappears. If you are making love and you are totally in the body, for a few moments there is no mind. You are so totally involved in the reality of the body that the mind cannot exist. Or, if you are deep in meditation, absolutely in, then the mind disappears. Reality is always a no-mind thing; whether you are in the body or in the soul doesn’t matter, reality is always a no-mind thing. The mind is maya, the mind is illusion.
You must have heard the often-repeated statement of Vedanta that the world is illusion. That is not exactly right – because by “world” you understand the world of objects. When Vedanta says the world is illusory, what it means exactly is that the mind is illusory. The mind is the world. That is where you live, your world. You don’t live in reality, in the real world, you live in thoughts, desires, fantasies, imaginations. You live in a mind world. That mind is maya; it is a magical thing. Nothing really exists – it is almost like a dream.
Every night you dream and when you are dreaming you think that the dream is real. How many times have you been deceived by the dream? When are you going to understand that the dream is not real? And every day, when you awake in the morning, you know it was not real. And again you sleep and you dream and again it becomes real. When you are asleep the dream appears to be real. The dream appears to be real in the same proportion as you are asleep. If you become a little alert then the mind is no longer real and the dream is no longer real.
When one becomes perfectly awakened, when one becomes a buddha, then the mind is no longer real. The morning has come. You have become awakened. That is the meaning of the word buddha – one who has awakened. Now the body is real, now the soul is real, but the mind has disappeared. The mind is a twilight phenomenon.
Nikolai Berdyaev says in his autobiography, “I am very afraid of the twilight time, when it is neither day nor night. It frightens me.” When I read it I was puzzled about why he should be troubled by the twilight. It is so beautiful – when the day is no more and the night has not come yet. But he is right. He does not mean only the twilight, he means all twilight phenomena.
The mind is a twilight phenomenon, neither body nor soul. A little reality has been imparted by the soul and the real reality has been imparted by the body. The mind is borrowed – something of the soul and something of the body. It is just midway; it is neither this nor that.
Philosophy lives in the mind, hence philosophy lives in illusion. Dreams can be beautiful, illusions can be tremendously sweet.
You ask me, “Why do great philosophers and so forth, say beautiful things and yet remain such a mess?” By saying beautiful things you cannot sort out the mess. It is not so easy and not so cheap. If you sort out the mess, if you want to get beyond the mess, you will have to do some real work – that’s what Gurdjieff used to call it. He used to call his system “the work.” Real work is needed. Beautiful aspirations, poetry, beautiful philosophies can console, but that is not going to help. It is as if somebody is hungry and you go on talking about delicious food; as if somebody is hungry and you give him a beautifully printed menu. As if somebody is hungry and you give him a cookbook to read.
That is exactly what philosophy is. Philosophy is a menu. It talks about food and sometimes it can start your saliva flowing. Even thinking about a lemon, juices start moving. But that is not going to satisfy. Philosophy affects people because they live in the mind.
I have heard…

A philosopher went to the bus station to catch a bus, but found he was early. He saw a little fortune-telling machine so he put a nickel in, and a little card came out that said: You are John Jones – you are sixty-five years old, you are a great philosopher, and you are on your way to Chicago on a business trip.
He said, “I don’t believe this machine. I can’t believe that this machine knows this information. There must be someone behind it.” So he put another nickel in and another card came out saying: You are still John Jones, you are still a great philosopher, you are still sixty-five years old – and you are still on your way to Chicago on a business trip.
“I just don’t believe it,” said the man again, as he put another nickel in. This time a card came out saying: You are still John Jones, you are still a great philosopher, you are still sixty-five years old, you are still on your way to Chicago – but you’ve fooled around and missed your bus.

Philosophy is a fooling around – and mind you, you will miss your bus.
Just thinking is not going to help; it is a luxury. You can rest and you can think and you can spin theories and you can make castles in Spain and you can dream beautiful dreams. These are all childish.
But if you can be logical, if you can be consistent with words, if you have a certain capacity and skill with words you can feel very satisfied. You can start feeling that you have the key, that you know.

The pet shop delivery boy was not exactly the brightest lad in the world. One day he was asked to deliver a pet rabbit to Mrs. Jones, Route 2, Box 4.
“You had better write that down in case I forget it,” said the boy.
Slipping the address into his pocket he started off on his errand. Every few minutes he glanced at the address and said, “I know where I’m going: Mrs. Jones, Route 2, Box 4.”
Everything went smoothly until he hit a crater in the road. The truck he was driving landed in a ditch and the rabbit began to run for its life across an open field.
The boy stood there laughing uproariously. When asked by a passerby what was so funny he said, “Did you see that crazy rabbit running across that field? He doesn’t know where he’s going because I’ve have the address in my pocket.”

All philosophy is like that. It is not concerned with reality. Philosophers think they know the address of God. They don’t know, all they know is rubbish. It is all their own fantasy. To know God one has to become religious.
There are only two ways to know reality: if you are interested in objective reality, become a scientist; if you are interested in subjective reality, become religious. That’s why philosophy is disappearing by and by. In the future there is a possibility that there may be no philosophy at all, or it may only be in the madhouses.
Science has taken the bigger part of it. Many questions that used to be thought philosophical are philosophical no longer. Science has taken them over, they don’t have any philosophy about them anymore. Science knows the exact answer. Philosophy can exist only in the twilight when the exact answer is not known. So the major part, the objective part, has been taken over by science. And the other part, the other half, has always been taken by the mystics – the Sufis, the Hasids, the Zen people.
Philosophy is dying. Now it has nothing to think about. The mystic knows what reality is and the scientist knows what objective reality is – what is left for the philosopher? There is nothing much left. Philosophy has no future. It had a glorious past, but it has no future. Out of philosophy, two systems have arisen that are more relevant: science and religion.
Philosophy is a primitive approach, a magical approach. When you don’t know anything, you need to think about it. That thinking gives you a kind of substitute; it feels good that at least you know something. Either science will take it away from philosophy, or religion will take it away from philosophy. Both are decisive.
The future is with science and religion, and the final future will be a new kind of approach that will be religio-scientific. The ultimate future will be where science and religion meet and disappear into a new kind of system, a new kind of synthesis. That will be the greatest day in the history of human consciousness.
Just the other night an old French poet took sannyas. I gave him the name Ananda Kavishwar. It means “great poet of bliss.” He was asking me when the revolution was coming. Of course, he is French so he thinks in terms of revolution. He is very old, must be beyond seventy, but a Frenchman is after all a Frenchman – they don’t grow old. “When is the revolution coming?”
I would like to tell him that this is the revolution – what I can call real revolution – when science and religion meet and disappear into one metaphysics, into one synthesis. That will put humanity in a totally new kind of light. That will bring a new harmony into the world.
That will help all schizophrenia to disappear – because the body and soul are two realities. I am saying two because science and religion are still separate. In fact, they are not two. The body is the visible soul and the soul is the invisible body. They are not really two – they appear to be two because in between them stands the mind. Once the mind disappears then the division disappears, then all demarcation disappears, then there is no possibility of deciding where the body ends and where the soul begins, then they melt and merge into one. That one has been called God by Sufis. The body and the soul have disappeared into each other, they don’t exist separately. It is the mind just standing in between that keeps them separate, that divides and defines them.
Once philosophy is gone, once the mind is no longer there, who is there to divide the objective from the subjective? Then the outer and the inner will be one. They are one. The outer is the inner and the inner is the outer. Division disappears, duality disappears. Philosophy is dualistic.
That ultimate system for which no name exists yet, or, if you allow me, I can use the Indian term, darshan – which may become the name for the ultimate synthesis…
Darshan is not philosophy, as it is ordinarily translated in Indian universities. Books on darshan are called Indian philosophy. It is not true. It is very, very falsifying. Philosophy means love of thinking. Sophia means knowledge, wisdom, and philo means love – love of knowledge. Darshan means not philosophy but philosia – love of seeing. Not love of thinking – love of realizing, an effort to attain a vision of the ultimate reality as it is. In that ultimate reality there are no divisions. It is one piece, it is one melody.
With that vision all schizophrenia disappears – otherwise man remains divided. When you divide the inner and the outer you divide man. When you say body-soul, you divide man. And when you divide man you create conflict, you create tension. Then there is always a war going on inside.
I would like you to learn the ways to drop this war, this constant ongoing war. The body is you and you are the body. Respect your body, love your body. Respect your soul, love your soul. And don’t create any conflict between the two. Listen silently and you will find that their voice is one. With that one voice there is peace, there is benediction.

The third question:
Osho,
Please explain the difference between following you and surrendering to you.
There is a great difference. Following me, you are still on the path of will; surrendering to me, the will has disappeared. Following me, you are important. You are: it is your decision to follow me. You can change your mind any moment you want; you can cancel your decision.
Surrendered to me, you have disappeared. Now it cannot be canceled. There is nobody to cancel it. Now there is no way to reverse it. Following, it is possible you may turn back. Surrendering, how can you turn back? It is irreversible. Following me, you are there, I am here. There is bound to be conflict.
Surrendering, you disappear. And when you disappear then you will be able to see that I have never been here. In your disappearance you will see the disappearance of the master too. A master is a master only because he has already disappeared. He does not function as an ego. So to have real contact with a master is possible only when you also stop functioning as an ego – that is the meaning of surrender. The master is without any ego. If you want to communicate with him, if you want to be in communion with him, if you want to be in deep love with him, you have to disappear. Only when you also become an emptiness will there be a meeting. When the disciple is not, suddenly all barriers disappear.
If you are, you go on defending. If you are, you go on choosing. If you are, then you will keep a certain space – protected, defended. You will keep a fence around you. You will go only so far. The moment you see that your identity is at stake, you will turn back. The moment you see that now you can be completely taken over, you will start moving away. You will go only to a certain extent, defending yourself, remaining yourself. This is not the way to be a disciple.
A follower is not a disciple. A follower is convinced through his intellect that whatever the teacher is saying seems to be logically right. It is convincing, it is intellectually satisfying. That’s what a follower is. A follower is from the head. And the disciple? A disciple is not only intellectually convinced that the master is right in what he says, the disciple is convinced that the master is right – not in what he says but in what he is. It is a heart-to-heart approach. It is a dialogue – deeper than the head; two beings communing. The disciple surrenders.
And the beauty is – it is very paradoxical – the beauty is that when you surrender to a master you become yourself for the first time, because surrendering to the outer master is really surrendering to the inner master.
Everybody is carrying godliness somewhere deep in the innermost core of his being. Godliness is present in you, but you don’t know how to approach it. You have forgotten the ways and means of coming to your own inner reality. You have locked the door and lost the key. And for centuries you have never been in. You don’t know how to turn in. You have become paralyzed. You can only see outside, hence the outer master is needed. The outer master will only help you to go to your inner master; the outer master will become the door. You will have to go via the outer master because you cannot go directly. If you can go directly there is no need for a master.
A few people – very rarely it happens – go without a master. Yes, sometimes it happens. Sometimes it happens that a person reaches directly into his being, but it is very rare. It is so exceptional that it cannot be counted, it is so exceptional that it only proves the rule. Hence no tradition: Sufi, Zen, Hasid – no tradition talks about it. They all insist that a master is needed.
Why don’t they talk about it? Don’t they know? They know. It has happened. A few times down the centuries it has happened that a man has attained his self without going via an outer master; he has reached directly to his innermost core. But why don’t they say it?
People think that Krishnamurti is talking about it for the first time; people think Krishnamurti is very original about it. That is not the case. All the masters have known about it, but they have not talked about it for a certain reason. The reason is that if it is told to you that you can go on your own, this very statement will become a barrier to your surrendering.
Only one in a million can go. What about the remainder? They will also think that they can go: “What is the need to surrender?” Their ego will exploit the idea. Their ego will say, “Then it is perfectly okay. Why should I surrender to anybody? I can go myself.” To protect these fools it has never been said before.
Krishnamurti is not saying anything new, it has always been known. It is one of the oldest, ancientmost truths that a rare person sometimes enters. But it is accidental, it cannot be made a rule. And to talk about it is dangerous because the egoist will fall upon it, will immediately jump upon it.
That’s why you will find all kinds of egoistic people around Krishnamurti. One who cannot surrender will sooner or later reach Krishnamurti. One who is not able to surrender, whose ego is really very hard, who does not want to surrender, will be very happy with Krishnamurti. Of course, that happiness is not going to change him.
Many people come to me and say, “We have been with Krishnamurti for thirty years, forty years. We have been reading and listening, and whatever he says is perfectly true. What do you say about him?”
I say, “He is saying the truth, but he is talking to fools. It is the truth, but he should not have told it to you.”
They feel very offended. “Why? If it is the truth then why should he not tell it to us? Forty years are lost and even maybe forty more lives in the future.”
“What have you attained?”
They become restless and they say, “I have not attained anything. But is it not the truth?”
It is the truth, but you are not ready for it.
A truth is truth only when you can use it. It has to be in such a way that it is helpful. Buddha has said that by “truth” only one thing is meant – that it works. If it works it is true, if it doesn’t work, what is the meaning of calling it truth? It is inhuman.
Krishnamurti’s truth has not worked. It cannot work. It can work only in a rare case. And the person with whom it can be of any use will not bother to come to Krishnamurti. Why should he bother? He can go directly. Why should he come via Krishnamurti? These people who are surrounding Krishnamurti are still in need of somebody and are still so egoistic that they cannot surrender. So this is a good support for their ego: they need not surrender and they can have a master.
But you cannot have a master without surrendering. Krishnamurti is a master without disciples. Those disciples cannot surrender. His own teaching prohibits them to surrender. He has lived a very lonely life. And sometimes he gets very angry – angry that his whole life has been a wastage.
Buddha helped thousands. Thousands became enlightened. Not only while he was alive, even when he was gone the chain continued, the silsila continued. The continuation has remained. Even now, here and there a flower blooms and bows down in deep gratitude toward Buddha – still, after two thousand five hundred years.
And Krishnamurti is a man of the same caliber and intelligence as Buddha. Nothing is lacking. There is just this idea that the disciple need not surrender. Even if it is a truth it is still dangerous. It has allowed only egoistic people to come around him; those who would like to surrender will not come to him because he won’t allow surrender. Those who don’t want to surrender and are still in search of a master – they cannot depend on themselves and they cannot surrender – these people have gathered around him.
Now they are stuck. Krishnamurti is stuck with them and they are stuck with him. Krishnamurti cannot say surrender: the day he says surrender, they will escape because they are there only because he goes on saying that there is no need to surrender to anybody. They are feeling very good, perfectly happy with this idea. Their ego need not be at stake.
But nothing is happening. I have come across many Krishnamurti people – nothing is happening. They have become very, very intellectual, very refined intellectuals. They can talk a lot. They can discuss and argue a lot, but nothing has happened. No fragrance has happened. The ego won’t allow it.
You ask me, “Please explain the difference between following you and surrendering to you.” One who is following me is not with me, remember. He is maybe using me, but he is not with me. He may be choosing a few things from me, but he remains the decisive factor. Deep inside he is still defending himself. He may find a few bits and pieces of wisdom, but they are not going to help. They will become a philosophy.
Only those who are surrendered to me are with me. And I can only be with those who are with me. If you are not with me, it is impossible for me to be with you even though I would like to be. But it is impossible. It is not possible in the nature of things. Only if you are surrendered can I be with you; only then are you available, receptive.
That’s what sannyas is all about. Drop following and move into surrender. Sannyas is surrender. The day you take sannyas, if you have really taken it from your heart, you are no more. Then you become part of me or I become part of you. Then you breathe for me or I breathe for you. Then you don’t think about yourself as a separate entity.
And the paradox is that you don’t become dependent. For the first time you become independent individuals – because the ego is not the thing that makes you independent; the ego is a prison, an ugly prison. When the ego has gone, your flame burns bright for the first time.

The fourth question:
Osho,
Why does religion create so much guilt?
Religion does not create guilt – if it creates guilt it is not religion. Yes, Mohammedanism, Christianity, Judaism, Hinduism, they create guilt. Let that be your definition of religion: if it creates guilt it is not a religion. It is something else pretending, something else garbed as religion, posing as religion – but it is not religion. Religion creates celebration, not guilt.
These are hidden things that don’t want to expose themselves. These so-called religions are more political than religious. Their whole idea, desire, ambition, is how to dominate people, how to control people. And naturally, guilt is one of the best mechanisms ever evolved to control people, to dominate people. Make them feel guilty! Once they start feeling guilty they are in your control. All dictators do that, all politicians do that.
And your priest is just a politician behind the mask. The popes, the shankaracharyas, are all politicians; they are not religious people. They have a very hidden politics on how to dominate humanity, how to control people, how to make slaves out of people. And, of course, there is no better trick than creating guilt. It is a psychological technique.
How does it function? To create guilt you first have to create an impossible ideal. You have to give an ideal that cannot be fulfilled, that is inhuman, that is not possible at all.
For example, in India they have created guilt about sex. If you have any sex desire you start feeling like a great sinner. Sex has been condemned.
Now, sex is such a natural thing – as natural as any other thing, as eating, breathing. Only one thing is different about sex: it can be transcended. But there is nothing intrinsically wrong about it. One can go beyond it. And when one goes beyond it there is great freedom, there is great joy – greater than sex can ever bring. But still sex is not sin. Sex is beautiful, healthy.
But if it is condemned then you have a great trick, a great technique in your hands. Millions of people will be then controlled because they will not be able to get beyond sex. In fact, the more they think it is a sin, the less is the possibility of going beyond it – because to go beyond one has to go through it. So it is very cunning to keep people in sexuality, and keep them feeling guilty and keep them continuously afraid that they are doing something wrong.
When a person feels that he is doing something wrong he is trembling inside. He cannot be a rebel. He cannot stand on his own, he knows he is guilty. He is not good, he is not worthy enough of anything. He cannot hope to be happy. He knows he is a sinner; hell is waiting for him. Now you can manipulate, you can do whatever you want to do with this man; he is available, he is ready to become a slave.
This is a psychological slavery. You have taken away his respect for himself, you have taken away his worth. He feels himself dirty – how can he love himself? How can he respect himself? He will be a victim of anybody who wants to control him: the parents will control him, the wife will control him, the husband will control, the children will control, the society will control. Everybody will control him because something immensely valuable has been destroyed in him – his respect for himself. He has lost that. And he will remain miserable, continuously miserable. How can you be happy if you don’t have any respect for yourself?
And such a natural thing as sex – and so difficult to get rid of it! Yes, people can transcend, but nobody can get rid of it.
Let me tell you something. Just the other day I was reading that the psychologist, Dr. Paul Cameron, reports that males spend a great deal of time thinking about sex. In a survey of four thousand people, he found that males between the ages of twelve and seventeen think about sex once every two minutes. This rate continues into young adulthood and drops to once every five minutes in middle age – that is, forty to forty-five – and finally tails off to once every ten minutes after sixty-five.
Females give thoughts to sex every two and a half minutes as teenagers – they are little more saintly, half a minute’s difference; once every three minutes in young adulthood; once every ten minutes in middle age – forty to forty-five; and once every twenty minutes after sixty-five.
And that too seems to me to be just because of conditioning – because females down the ages have been conditioned more than males against sex. They were expected to remain virgins. That too is male ego.
Why? Why should you try to find a virgin to get married to? Why? – the male ego. The male ego always wants to be there first, to be the first everywhere! Hence the woman has to remain a virgin. And boys are boys. Virginity was not expected of boys, but girls were very protected. Women have been more repressed. But out of thousands of years of repression there is only half a minute’s difference. Not much. So ladies, please, don’t feel too saintly.
But this survey is very important. It shows how natural sex is. Now, if you create guilt, if you make people feel that it is sin, you are destroying their respect for themselves. And you are making them afraid. The so-called religions make you afraid that you will suffer in hell and they also make you greedy – you will have your rewards in heaven if you follow their dictates. So greed and fear… And between the two, guilt is created.
When the father of Sirhan, the assassin of Senator Robert Kennedy, was asked why his son did it and how he could do it, the old man said, “I just don’t know. I am crushed and confused. I taught my children to fear God.”
The man said, “I taught my children to fear God so I am very confused about how he could do such an ugly, ghastly act, such a horrible thing.” But the old man does not know that fear of God is not a good thing. It is precisely because of the fear that he could do such a thing.
If you are too afraid – if you are too afraid of being yourself – then there are two possibilities: either you become a so-called false saint, you pretend to be that which you are not, or you become a criminal, you assert whatever is the case. But in both ways you become abnormal. Fear creates abnormality. Either you become a saint – the so-called saint, the mahatma, a hypocrite – or you become a criminal. It depends how you react. If you are a cowardly man you will become a mahatma and if you are a brave man you will become a criminal. But both are wrong. Neither cowardly saints and hypocrites nor brave criminals are needed.
Brave saints are needed, courageous saints are needed – that is a totally different thing. You cannot create that out of fear. And for small things man has been made so afraid.
Listen to this story:

There was a young English boy by the name of Orrie. He was from a home of very meager circumstances. On nights when they didn’t have enough food for supper they resorted to a dish known as sparrow pie. He was met at the back door by his mother one day, and she told him to go for some sparrows for sparrow pie.
The best way to hunt them was to go to a group of trees in a cemetery, late in the evening. He carefully crept up – and was ready to make a mighty sweep with a big stick, when suddenly he fell into a freshly dug grave, as yet unoccupied. He tried to get out, but it had rained and the sides were as slick as glass.
He knew his mother would send someone for him, and she did – his big brother. But just as he got near the grave another terrible thing happened – his brother also fell into the grave. It was dark and he thought he was alone so he pushed and shoved, but it had rained in his end of the grave as much as in the other end, and the harder he pushed and shoved, the further he slipped towards the bottom.
Young Orrie had enjoyed the show, but knew that all good things must come to an end, so he decided to make as much of the dramatic situation as possible. He sat up very straight in his end of the grave, gathered all his diaphragmic tones well underneath him, and with all the eerie, ghastly tones he could muster he said, “Friend, can’t you let a man rest in peace?”
There was a deadening silence in the other end of the grave, then something that resembled a rocket zoomed by young Orrie’s head, and his brother, who hadn’t been able to make six feet to the top of the grave, made twenty feet past it on his first jump.

Fear works! The priests came to know it very early on – fear works. Create fear and then you can make people do anything you want them to do. Fear creates such an intensity that one puts one’s whole life at stake.
Go to the monasteries: it is because of fear that people are in the monasteries, struggling hard with sex, with food, with sleep. It is just fear, fear of hell. Or greed – that is another aspect of the same thing. Greed and fear are two aspects of the same coin. A greedy person is an afraid person and a fearful person is a greedy person. A really courageous man has no greed and no fear. He lives his nature in a natural way.

When a prominent politician was a candidate for an important municipal office, he said to three Negroes that he would give a fat turkey to the one who would give the best reason for being a Republican.
The first one said, “I’se a Publican cause de Publican set us darkies free.”
“Very good, Peter,” said the politician. “Now, Bill, let me hear from you.”
“Well, I’se a Publican cause dey done give us de protective teriff.”
“Fine,” exclaimed the politician. “Now, Sam, what do you have to say?”
“Boss,” said Sam scratching his head and shifting from one foot to the other. “Boss, I’se a Publican cause I wants dat turkey.”

People are religious either out of fear or out of greed, they are not religious out of awareness or out of love. And all these religions that have created guilt in man have created an irreligious world.
Beware – because the same mechanism has also been put in you. Everybody carries guilt inside himself – as if you are naturally wrong; that to be natural is to be wrong. Anger is wrong, sex is wrong, joy in food is wrong, laughter is wrong. All good things seem to be wrong.
Then one goes on repressing. And however you repress, nature goes on asserting. You repress it and it asserts. When it asserts and you have to do something against your mind, then there is guilt – then you know that you have fallen again, you have committed the sin again.
Be free from guilt. If you really want to go closer to God, be free from guilt. Accept nature, welcome it. It is perfectly good.
Sex is good, sometimes anger is good. When I say sometimes, I mean whenever anger is spontaneous it is good. And if you allow anger its spontaneity, you will never accumulate anger and you will not explode out of proportion. Your system will be clean, it will be a momentary thing: something happens and you respond.
If your anger is spontaneous, relevant, responsible, true to the moment – is not a reaction but a response – it has beauty. You simply say that you are alive, nothing else.
But if you go on repressing your anger – feeling that anger is wrong; anger is wrong, don’t do it; when you are feeling angry, smile, go on smiling – you are gathering poison. After a time there comes a limit. When the poison is too much it will explode. And it will explode in a situation where you will look foolish, stupid, mad, because the situation didn’t demand it. Have you not observed it? When you really become angry out of repression you are always irrelevant, your response is not to the point. It comes from the past.
For example, for many days you have been repressing anger in the office, in the marketplace, with the friends, in the club. Then one day suddenly it breaks through on your child: you hit him hard, and you pretend that you are doing it for his own good. You know that he has just been an excuse; that the poor child is suffering from your anger absolutely unnecessarily. And the child can see that he has not done anything, at least not in the proportion that you are being hard with him. You know that in the face of the child you have projected the face of your boss, you have projected the face of your wife, you have projected so many faces, so many situations. Now the poor child is a victim.
This anger is ugly. This anger comes because you have been taught that anger is wrong, never be angry. All that is spontaneous is beautiful. And I am not saying there are not states of consciousness where anger disappears – but it disappears only by being spontaneous. Anger, greed, fear, sex, all disappear. A moment comes, slowly, slowly – when you have experienced life in its truth, in its reality, when you have lived it in all its possibilities you grow beyond it. Then those things become toys, left behind. They look childish, immature, juvenile. It is not that you condemn them and it is not that now you hope you will get to heaven – there is just nothing in them. You have not sacrificed anything, there is no sacrifice.

Mr. Khrushchev wanted to find out what people really thought of him. Naturally they would not tell him if they recognized him, so he dressed in an elaborate disguise, put on glasses and a false mustache, and flew to a small town in the Urals.
There he met a farmer and said, “Tell me, what do you think of Khrushchev?”
The farmer answered, “Sh-h-h-h…you crazy or something?”
He looked around furtively and took the premier inside his farmhouse. He closed all the windows, bolted the doors, pulled down the shades, then whispered, “I like him.”

This is the situation of man – so much fear. So much fear has been put into your system, into your blood. With your very mother’s milk it has gone into you. You have been brought up in fear.
If you really want to be with me, drop guilt. The same energy that has become a guilt complex becomes celebration once it is released. Celebration is the right attitude. Celebrate all that God has given to you. I promise you that if you can celebrate all that God has given to you, you will become worthy of more.
Sex disappears one day and you become capable of love. One day love disappears and you become capable of prayer. One day prayer disappears and you become a god yourself. But you have to start to live that which has been given to you.
I have heard…

Sister Agnes was walking through the park near the convent when she was attacked and raped several times by an assailant.
Hearing of her horrible misfortune the Mother Superior hurried to the hospital and met the doctor on duty.
“Oh, doctor! How is poor Sister Agnes?”
“She is doing fine,” said the MD. “They should be through with the plastic surgery in a few hours.”
“What!” exclaimed the Mother Superior. “Why in God’s name would she need plastic surgery?”
“We are trying to get the smile off her face.”

That’s what your so-called religions have done to people: repression, repression, repression. They have not allowed you to be yourself, to be a natural being. They have crippled you, paralyzed you. Of course, it is easy to control paralyzed people, it is easy to control crippled people, it is easy to dominate dead people.
People who enjoy their life are difficult to control. It will be difficult to send people to war if they are really living their sex life truly. It will be impossible. Why? Why should a man who is immensely satisfied go to war? Because some stupid politicians are fighting about some stupid problems – where the boundary should be of one country, a few miles here or a few miles there? Can you convince people to go and die for those stupid things? You cannot. If they are really living their life they will laugh at the whole ridiculousness of it: “Why?”
But right now it is just the opposite. People are so ready to go to war because they are dead. War gives them a feeling of life, at least some thrill. They are so bored – bored with the wife, bored with the husband, bored with the children, bored with the whole thing that is so-called life. War brings a little joy.
People feel happy when there is war. You can see a subtle joy on the face of the soldiers going to the war. You can see thrill, adventure, all around. Why? Their life is so dull that in comparison even death seems to be far better.
If people’s life is a celebration you cannot drive them to war. You cannot drive people to war for foolish reasons – ideological, religious. They will simply refuse. They will laugh at the whole nonsense of it. You cannot force people to do ugly jobs, jobs that simply destroy their souls.
But dead people can be forced anywhere. You can make a man a clerk, and for his whole life he will simply move files from here to there. His whole life he will shift files; there will be no joy in his life. But a guilty person cannot expect more. Even this is too much; it is God’s blessing that he is employed.
Dead people will go on living. A man will go on sleeping with a woman he does not love. He is so guilty that he feels it is God’s blessing that he even has a woman who is okay. A woman will go on living with a man she hates, feels repelled by. Guilty people can be forced into any hole, into any dungeon.
But when people are happy they will live their life. When they are happy they will become woodcutters, gardeners, farmers, fishermen, they will be singers, dancers, poets, painters. Or if somebody enjoys being a clerk, that is another thing. Then he chooses it. But it is his choice.
And people will not be so mad after money. Money is a substitute for love. When you don’t get love you start trying to have more money, more money. Money is a substitute for love. That’s why people who are very miserly about money are very loveless people. They cannot afford to be loving. If they are loving they cannot be miserly – these things don’t go together. A loving person is never a miser and a miser is never a loving person. He does not need love. His love is money, his God is money, he worships money. That’s enough.
Then there are power addicts who spend their whole life trying to become more and more powerful – how to reach New Delhi or Washington or Moscow. Their whole life seems to be just an effort to reach the capital. For what? Why do people enjoy power so much? Why this madness, this political madness? The reason is that they don’t have any power over themselves. They need a substitute. They can feel happy if they have power over others.
A man who has power over himself need not bother. Why should he bother to have power over others? It is enough, it is more than enough that he has power over himself.
That’s why in India we call a sannyasin “swami.” Swami means one who has power over himself. His whole search is that “I should be myself. It is enough, it is immensely satisfying that I am a master of my own self.” That’s enough. Why should you bother to be master of others?
But people are missing that basic mastery, hence they are driven into mad ways, into mad paths – politics, money, power, prestige, fame. These are all ugly things. These are neurotic things.
And religions have not only condemned your being natural, they have created a subtle mechanism for you to condemn yourself. The priest cannot follow you everywhere, the parents cannot go with you everywhere, so they have created a very subtle mechanism – almost like Delgado’s electrode – they have put a conscience in you that goes on condemning.
If the parents have said, “Don’t make love to this woman, she is not yet your wife and love is prohibited,” you may be alone with the woman, it may be a full-moon night and you may be feeling like loving and she may be feeling like loving and the parents are no longer there – they are far away, miles far away, maybe dead – but the conscience is there. Deep in your heart somebody goes on pulling on you: “Don’t do this. This is wrong.” Even if you do it you will not enjoy it because the parents will go on interfering. If you don’t do it you will be miserable, if you do it you will be miserable – either way you will be miserable.
I have heard that parents nowadays, particularly in America, are too busy even to punish their kids! Mothers are running to bingo games, fathers are running off to golf courses and bowling alleys. And mothers have their boyfriends and fathers have their girlfriends. Before they leave the house they just say, “Son, we left a strap on the bed. If you do something wrong, hit yourself six times.”
It may not actually be done like that, but that is what conscience tries to do. Hit yourself: whenever you do something that has been taught as wrong, hit yourself, punish yourself. This is the most criminal act to do to a child. To create a policeman in him against himself – that’s what conscience is.
My whole effort here is to kill your policeman. I am not saying become irresponsible and I am not saying go mad or insane, I am saying be free of the policeman. Rather than having a conscience, have consciousness – that is the true thing. Let consciousness decide, not conscience.
Conscience is borrowed, it is parental, it is suicidal, it is political. A man who has a conscience is never a free man, he is a slave. He is not inside a prison, the prison is there inside him. The jailer is sitting there just in his own heart, pulling his strings.
Drop this policeman. Say good-bye to it forever. Become more alert, become more loving, become more natural, become more ordinary, drop ideals. Don’t try to be extraordinary – that’s how you have been befooled. And don’t try to become perfect images of something that does not exist in reality.
Don’t try to become a Christ or a Buddha or a Krishna. Just try to become yourself – that’s what God wants you to be. If he had wanted Buddhas he would have created more Buddhas. He never creates again; once is enough. He has created you as a unique human being. Respect this unique human being that you are and live it authentically. Drop all guilt, fear, greed. Enjoy each moment of life as a great blessing from God, a baraka.

The last question:
Osho,
What is wrong in studying religious scriptures?
Who will be studying? You will be studying. When you read a statement of Jesus, who will interpret it to you? You will interpret it. The statement will no longer be Jesus’, it will become yours. You will have pulled it down to your level.
How can you read scriptures unless you attain that consciousness out of which the scripture has flowed? If you want to understand Krishna, his Gita, you will have to attain Krishna-consciousness. There is no other way, otherwise you will corrupt the scripture.
When I say “Please burn the scriptures,” I am not against the scriptures, I am trying to save them, otherwise you will corrupt them. If you want to understand Jesus you will have to attain christ consciousness – at least a little bit. When a little window opens in your heart that gives you a vision of the sky that was fully available to Jesus – only then. Otherwise, you will go on interpreting in your own way. That’s what is always happening. Rather than learning the word, learn the ways of being more conscious.

The young convert worked as a clerk in a store operated on strictly Christian principles.
One day an elegant lady came in to buy some tapestry. Producing a roll from the lowest shelf, he said, “This is $1.98 a yard, madam.”
“Young man, I can afford the very best and I want the very best,” the prospective customer declared.
“Well, this is $2.98 a yard,” said the clerk, producing the most expensive price range they had in fabrics.
“Young man, I don’t think you understand – I want the very best!” the customer said emphatically.
The clerk reached for another roll of $2.98 quality material. “We have this one at $9.98 a yard,” he said.
“Fine,” responded the customer, “that’s just what I want!”
The owner came into the store later and was told of the transaction. “But how can you reconcile a deal such as that with the scripture?” he asked – because the store was run strictly on Christian principles.
Scratching his head, the young man replied, “She was a stranger and I took her in.”

He is quoting a scripture!
Or this beauty…

It was somewhat disconcerting to the minister’s wife to hear him exclaim, “Oh Jesus, sweet Jesus!” every time he reached orgasm, and she finally asked him about it.
“It is perfectly proper, my dear, and in accordance with the Bible,” he answered her. “Don’t you remember where it says: Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord?”

Enough for today.

============================================================

Najrani said, “If you say that you can ‘nearly understand,’ you are talking nonsense.”
A theologian who liked this phrase asked, “Can you give us an equivalent of this in ordinary life?”
“Certainly,” said Najrani. “It is equivalent to saying that something is ‘almost a circle.’”
Man is not yet man. He can be, but he is not. The potential is there, but the potential has to be actualized, it is not yet a reality. By birth we are only born into an opportunity to grow. Birth itself is not life, and the person who thinks that by being born he has already become man is befooling himself.
That is the original sin. That is the only sin there is – to think that you are already that which you can be.
Life has to be discovered, created, realized. If you don’t realize it you remain more or less a machine. That is one of the basic principles of Sufism: that man as he exists is a machine.
The machine has deceived itself into believing that it is conscious. Consciousness is a promise, but one has to explore it. It is also a task. Consciousness is a possibility, but you can also miss it. Don’t take it for granted: it is not yet a fact. You are a seed for it, but you have to grow into it.
A seed can remain a seed and may never become a tree, may never become capable of blooming, may never be able to release its fragrance to the world, may never be able to offer itself to the divine. That possibility also exists. And remember always that many miss; only a few arrive.
This creates an anxiety – that man is a promise, that man is an adventure, that man is not yet. It creates an anxiety in the wrong kind of person, but it creates joy in the right kind of person. Whom do I call the right kind of person and whom do I call the wrong kind? The coward is the wrong kind of person. In the coward it creates anxiety. At the very idea of going on an adventure, on a pilgrimage into the unknown, the coward shrinks. He stops breathing, his heart no longer beats, he becomes stone deaf to this call, to this challenge. This challenge becomes an enemy. He becomes defensive against it.
And the courageous I call the right kind of person. To him this is not an anxiety, this is thrill, this is challenge, this is adventure. Existence has called him forth. He starts moving, he starts seeking and searching. If you seek, there is a possibility of finding; if you don’t seek, there is no possibility. If you start moving, then one day or other you will reach the ocean, as every river does. But if you have become very, very afraid of movement, of dynamism, of life, of change, then you become a small pond. By and by you die. You become more and more dirty, dull, stale, stagnant. Then your whole life is ill. Then your whole life is a pathology. And many – the majority – live in a kind of pathology.
A modern thinker, Lewis Yablonsky, has coined the right word for this pathology – he calls it robopathology. The man who suffers from it he calls a robopath. Robo means a machine, an automaton; one who lives a mechanical kind of life, a repetitive kind of life; one who has no adventure; one who simply goes on dragging himself. He fulfills the day-to-day demands, but he never fulfills the eternal demand, the eternal challenge.
He will go to the office, to the factory, he will come home, he will look after the children and the wife, and he will do a thousand and one things – and do them very efficiently but he will never be alive, you will not find aliveness in him. He will live as if he is already dead.
Robopath is a beautiful word. Sufis have always talked about this pathology – they have called it by many names. For example, they say that man is a machine. Gurdjieff introduced this Sufi idea into the Western consciousness. Sufis say that man is asleep. Sufis say that man is dead. Sufis say that man is not yet. Sufis say that man only believes that he is, but that belief is a kind of dream.
You may remember sometimes dreaming that you are awake. Yes, it happens in dreams. You can dream yourself awake, you can think you are awake – and when you dream in a dream that you are awake you feel as if you are awake. Only in the morning, when you are really awake, will you be able to compare notes. Then you will laugh at the ridiculousness of it. The dream deceived you.
Sufis say that people are not awake, they only believe they are awake. And their very belief is a hindrance to their awakening. If you already believe that you are awake, then what is the need of doing anything for it? It is pointless. If a man feels he is healthy, then what is the point of going to a physician? Then what is the point of taking any medicine or treatment? Then what is the point of having very, very painful surgery? He believes he is healthy already.
Cowards believe they are healthy because they are afraid of the medicine, of the physician, of the operation, of the surgery. They are afraid of everything. They simply exist in fear, they go on trembling deep inside. They are just protecting themselves. Their whole life is a long story of protection, defending. They don’t have time to live and they don’t have energy to grow.
This robopathology has to be understood. It is one of the fundamentals of Sufism.
A few things… “A robopath is a person whose pathology entails robotlike behavior and existence.” He is man only for the name’s sake. He could have been a computer: he may be. “A robopath is a human who functions insensitively, mechanically.” – in short, in a dead way. “A robopath is an automaton. His existensial state is not even inhuman.” He is not human certainly, he is not even inhuman – because to be inhuman first you have to be human. His existential state can only be described as the Sufis describe it – they call it ahuman. It has no human value, neither this way nor that. He is neither human nor inhuman, he is ahuman.
“These are the characteristics of this disease.” Ponder over them because they are your characteristics, everybody’s. Until you become enlightened these characteristics will follow you like a shadow. We can define enlightenment as getting out of robopathology, becoming consciousness for the first time, dropping the mechanical, no longer being identified with the mechanical, becoming a witness, awareness, awakenedness.
“The first characteristic is sleep.” You will find the robopath always asleep. He walks, but he walks in sleep. He talks, but he talks in sleep. He does many things, he has become perfectly efficient in doing the ordinary things of life. But watch yourself and watch people. They go on doing the same thing again and again. By and by there is no need to be alert about those things, you can simply do them. You need not be there.
When you first start learning to drive you have to be there for a few days. That’s why it is so troublesome to learn anything – because to learn anything you will have to come out of your sleep a little bit at least. Otherwise, how will you learn?
Robopaths are never interested in new things. Once they have learned a few things they go on moving in that vicious circle. Every morning is the same, every evening is the same. Every time they eat or they talk or they make love, it is the same. They are not needed there at all. They don’t do anything through consciousness, they go on making empty gestures. That’s why there is so much boredom in life. How can you remain thrilled by constantly repeating the old? This is the first characteristic – sleep.
“The second characteristic is dreaming” – part of sleep. A robopath continuously dreams – not only in the night, even in the day. He has daydreams, reveries. Even while he is doing something, deep inside he is dreaming. You can find that any time. Close your eyes any time and look inside and you will find a dream unfolding. It is constantly there. It is like the stars – in the day they don’t disappear, they only become invisible because the light of the sun is too bright. But the stars are there, the full sky is there as it is in the night – exactly as it is in the night. When the sun is gone you will see those stars appearing again. They have not gone anywhere, they were there just waiting for the sun to go.
In the night you start seeing dreams. Those dreams don’t disappear in the day; because you become involved in a thousand and one things in daily, routine life, they go on lurking deep in the unconscious. You can find them any moment. Close your eyes, wait a single moment, and the dream is there. Sleep is constantly there. Your eyes are full of sleep and your mind is full of dreaming.
And the third characteristic is ritualism. “A robopath remains in rituals,” he never does anything through his heart. He will say “Hello” because he has to say it or because he has always been saying it. His hello will not have any heart in it. He will kiss his wife, but it will be just repeating an empty gesture. There is no kiss in his kiss. He will embrace somebody, but only bones will touch and skin will touch; he will remain as far away as ever. He is not there. You can be certain about one thing – he is not there.
But robopaths are great ritualists. They depend on ritual. They do everything as it should be done. Ritualism is by its very nature uncreative. A ritualistic person is never spontaneous, he cannot afford to be spontaneous. If you want to be spontaneous you will have to be alert. Spontaneity needs one necessary ingredient, and that is alertness. If you are not alert you cannot be spontaneous.
And of course, how can you be creative? You are repetitive, how can you be creative? Even great creators are rarely creative. Even great painters go on repeating their own painting, and great poets go on repeating the same poem again and again.
Only very rarely does a person sometimes create something – and those moments when creativity is there are moments of spiritual joy. That’s why creativity brings so much joy. A creative person is a happy person; an uncreative person is a miserable person.
Many people come to me and they ask how to be happy, where to find happiness. They cannot find it unless they become creative. Happiness cannot happen to them, it happens only to creative souls. Create something, become more spontaneous, drop repetitions. Let every morning be a new morning and let every experience be a new experience. Don’t think that all is old. Robopaths say there is nothing new under the sun – it is all the same so why bother?
“A robopath, rather than living life, creates a ritual.” For example, if he prays he prays as a ritual. He has learned a certain prayer, he goes and repeats it – he goes to the church; he has learned a ritual. There may be a temple by the side of the church, but he will not go to the temple – and the temple may be more silent. Or there may be a mosque and the mosque may be more silent. It is Sunday, all the Christians are in the church. If you really want to pray, the church is the last place. If you want to pray you should find a temple or a mosque where there will be silence and more of God. But a Christian cannot go there. He is not interested in prayer and he is not interested in God, he is only interested in a certain kind of ritual. That makes him feel that he is a Christian.
These ritualists create great problems in the world. They go on fighting, they go on debating whose ritual is the best. All rituals are just rituals; there is no question of there being a good ritual or a bad ritual. A ritual as such is bad, ugly. Spontaneity is good, ritualism is bad.
Just the other day I was reading a story:

Sedgewick, the eldest son of a respectable Boston family, walked into his father’s study one evening and made a shocking announcement. He intended to live openly with his boyfriend on Beacon Hill.
“Damn it!” exclaimed the parent. “Our family came here with the pilgrims and we have never had a scandal such as this.”
“I can’t help it,” said Sedgewick, “I love him.”
“But for God’s sake son!” shouted his father. “He’s a Catholic!”

Now that is the real problem. That is the scandal. That’s what is heavy on the parent.
The ritualistic mind is always like that. It goes on missing the real problem. It never faces a real problem, it creates an unreal problem because it is easy to solve an unreal problem – remember it. It gives you a good feeling that you have solved it.
That’s why people love to solve puzzles, crossword puzzles, and things like that. It gives you a feeling that you are solving something. It is stupid. Nothing is solved by solving a crossword puzzle. Your life remains as unsolved and as complicated and confused as ever, but it gives you a feeling that at least you have been able to solve something. Otherwise, there is no need. Life is such a great puzzle, if you want to solve it, solve it. Why create small, tiny, petty troubles and puzzles and then solve them? They give you a good feeling. They make you avoid life itself. Life is too big and dangerous – solving a crossword puzzle has no danger in it. If you solve it, good; if you don’t solve it, nothing is wrong in it.
People go on watching other people live. They go to the movies to see other people love; they go to see a dance, other people dancing; they go to see wrestling, other people wrestling. People have become spectators. It gives them a false feeling, as if they are part of the dance or part of the love affair that is going on. And they go on just watching; spectators, dead and dull. Their life is nil. And if you look into their life you will find them repeating the same motions again and again.
I have heard…

Rabbi Greenberg died and went to heaven. He saw only three people there reading by a dim light. One of them was reading Playboy, another Gallery and the other Genesis.
Then he decided to see what hell was like. He arrived at the Devil’s domain and it turned out to be a big night club with every kind of music being played. There was an eight-piece Dixieland band, a thirty-piece swing band, and all the people were dancing.
Rabbi Greenberg went back into heaven and asked for an audience with God. “I don’t understand it, Lord,” he said. “There are only three people here in heaven and they are all reading. Down in hell everybody is dancing and having a good time. Why can’t we have that in heaven?”
The Lord said, “I cannot hire a band for just three people.”

If your so-called saints are going to heaven, heaven is going to be a really dull kind of place, avoid it. If by chance you enter it, escape from there! If your mahatmas are all going to heaven, then it is better to choose hell. There you will find people who are a little more alive – dancing, singing, living. If you want to read Playboy you can do it here; what is the point of going to heaven and reading Playboy?
But that Playboy is also significant – significant of the robopath. He is not interested in real women; real women are dangerous. He is interested in pornography. Even while making love to his woman he will be thinking of other women – actresses, Playboy playmates, unreal things, false things, plastic things. Even while making love to a real woman he avoids. People go on avoiding the real.
The pornographers and the people who are obsessed with pornography are not different from the churchgoers. It is the same thing. If a real Jesus is there you will kill him. If a dead Jesus is there you will worship him. This is pornography, spiritual pornography.
People worship the dead and avoid the alive – because with the alive you have to become alive, that is the problem. With the dead you are perfectly happy; you are also dead, there is a communion between the dead and the dead. With the alive you start feeling guilty, with the alive you start feeling you are missing, with the alive you start feeling jealous. With the alive you start feeling that now you have to do something – and you don’t want to do it. You want to somehow kill time, to pass time. People are passing time.
And people are very interested in rituals. A real prayer is going inward; a ritualistic prayer is just lip service. To face a real master is to face death and to face life – they are both together, always together. To worship a dead master – a Jesus, a Buddha – requires nothing from you. You can bow down at the feet of an image and you remain the same. Bowing down at the feet of a real master, your ego has to be put aside.
Your ego will create a thousand and one difficulties for you to bow down and surrender. That’s why people become Christians, Hindus, Mohammedans – these are all rituals.
“Robopaths live a life of formality. Even their so-called intimate and emotional behavior is ritualistic and programmed. Their activities are all prepackaged.” They never do anything on the spur of the moment. Coming home they think about what they are going to say to their wife. Going to the office they prepare what they are going to say to the boss. They are always rehearsing. It is always a rehearsal. They are always getting ready. And naturally, when you are too prepared, you miss the moment. You don’t hear what is being said, you don’t see what is present. You go on seeing things in the light of what you have prepared.
I was a teacher in a university for many years. I was surprised that students used to answer a question that had not been asked at all. Something had been asked, but they had prepared something else, they were expecting something else, and they would answer whatever they had prepared.
It was not that they were doing it knowingly, no. Because their answer was ready, they would read the question in such a way that the answer fitted with it. They would interpret the question in such a way that it fitted with the answer. They could not afford to read the question as it was – that would be dangerous, it might not fit and they knew only a certain answer for which they were ready. They would immediately start writing the answer; they would not even bother to go into the question. Just a slight change in the question and their whole answer would be wrong, but they would not see that slight change. And that’s how it goes on in your whole life.
“A robopath is very dogmatic. He is always pretending to be certain about everything.” He cannot allow doubt; doubt creates trembling. He believes, he never suspects. Because if you doubt, then you have to inquire, and who knows where your doubt will lead? That’s why you see so many believers on the earth and no religion at all. So many believers? Everybody seems to be a believer – believing in Christianity, somebody in Mohammedanism, somebody in Hinduism; everybody is a believer.
And the world is so utterly irreligious. What is the matter? With so many believers the world should be blooming in religion. But this belief is not trust, not faith; it is pure dogmatism. It is just an effort to crush the doubt, it is just an effort to repress the doubt. If you talk to a robopath you have to be very alert; you must not touch his belief otherwise he gets mad. He is not getting mad at you, he simply becomes afraid – you are taking the ground from underneath his feet. He has been believing that he knows and now you are here to disturb him. People don’t like being disturbed, it creates anxiety.
People are very fixed in their ideas. Life goes on changing, but their ideas never change. Just look… You are still carrying the ideas that were given to you in your childhood – and that life is no longer there. Life has moved, the Ganges has flowed and much water has passed, and you still go on believing in your childhood beliefs – childish, juvenile concepts. You carry them. That’s why people don’t grow.
“A robopath is always past-oriented or future-oriented.” He is never in the present. The past is good because you cannot do anything with it. The past is finished and complete. The robopath feels very at ease with the past. The past is dead, things have happened, now there is no way to change and alter them.
With the past the robopath feels in tune, with the future he can desire and hope – but with the present he is very uneasy, with the present he is very restless. The present brings problems. The past is finished, there is no problem about it – it is settled. And with the future you can hope and you can settle according to the hopes in your mind. The future will not create any trouble for you. The future will not say, “This is not possible.” You can dream about it.
But the present is the most dangerous space to be. You want one thing and life gives something else. There is always a clash. You wanted somebody to welcome you and he didn’t welcome you. If you had been hoping about the future there would have been no problem. The future cannot come and say no. The past is settled, you know it is settled. Everything has happened; it is no longer relevant. The past can be classified easily, the future can be projected easily, the only problem arises with the present.
The present does not listen to you, it has its own being; that’s why the robopath goes on avoiding the present. And the best way to avoid the present is either to remain past-oriented or to become future-oriented.
“There are two kinds of robopaths – the older type remains with the past and the newer type remains with the future”; the Catholic remains with the past and the communist remains with the future. The so-called orthodox religious people think that the golden age was in the past – somewhere far away, pre-history. And the communists and the fascists think that the future is going to bring the utopia – those golden peaks are somewhere far away. But they are not very different.
These are two aspects of the same robopathology. One thing is similar – both want to avoid the present. Nobody wants to deal with it, nobody is ready to encounter it.
Life happens only when you start encountering the present. You become aware. Your life starts being new when you respond to the present. And the response has to be completely pure of past and future.
The robopath lives out of the past, the present does not exist for him. There is nothing new. The response of the robopath is never adequate, cannot be. It is not a response to the present situation so how can it be adequate? It is always inadequate. He reacts on cue. He suffers from a cultural lag – he is never contemporary.
Remember well, if one thousand people are sitting here, don’t think they are all living in the same moment, don’t think they are contemporary. A few may be still struggling in the caves ten thousand years back – cultural lag. Or a few may be dreaming of the future. Either you lag behind or you jump ahead and both are wrong.
The only way to be authentic and alive is to be herenow. This is the only moment and this is the only space. All else is the mind. Reality is herenow.
The mind lives in the memory or in the imagination. The robopath lives in memory, lives in imagination, but never lives reality.
“The robopath is a conformist; conformity is a virtue for the robopath, the highest value.” His whole idea is how to conform with people, how to become part of the mob and the crowd. And whatever value the crowd gives, he follows it. He is a follower, he is an imitator. He never asserts his individuality, he is never a rebel. He is orthodox in his very blood. He trusts the crowd, he does not trust his consciousness – he has none. When you have consciousness you trust your consciousness, then you are not a blind follower of the crowd.
The crowd is the lowest consciousness. To follow the crowd simply means a blind man following other blind men who are far blinder than you are. An individual has some possibility of awakening, the crowd has none. Sometimes an individual has become awakened – a Buddha, a Krishna, a Christ, a Mohammed, a Mansoor – have you ever heard of a crowd becoming enlightened? It has not happened and it is not going to happen. The crowd has no soul. The crowd is absolutely dead.
Only individuals live, but the conformist puts his individuality below the crowd. The conformist has only one idea – how to convince people that he is living according to their ideas and ideals, how to have people have a good opinion of him. The good opinion of others is his whole virtue, his whole morality.
“New or different behavior is viewed by the robopath as strange and bizarre. Freaks are feared; originality is suspect. Tradition is truth. Obeying is his religion.” To be part of the crowd is his goal. He wants to be anonymous in the crowd.
He does not want the responsibility of being an individual because to have responsibility you will have to have consciousness. It is very easy to drop all responsibilities when you become part of a crowd. A Mohammedan crowd burning a temple, or a Hindu crowd killing Mohammedans, or a Catholic crowd murdering – if you become part of the crowd you don’t have any responsibility. You can always say, “I am not responsible. Hindus were going there to destroy the mosque and I followed them because I am a Hindu. But I have no individual responsibility. I did not decide to do it. It was already happening. I was just there and I became part of it.”
When so many people are burning a mosque or murdering people, you can always say, “They are doing it. Even if I am not doing it, it is going to happen – so what, I can be with them.” And you don’t feel any prick in your conscience.
Just think… Can you do the same thing individually, all alone, on your own? You will think a thousand times before you decide to do such a stupid act as burning a mosque, or killing a person. But crowds are known to do any kind of thing. It has been one of the observations down the centuries that only rarely do individuals go mad; crowds are always mad. For individuals, madness is a rare phenomenon, it is accidental. But for mobs, madness is the rule. The crimes that have been committed by the crowd are many; individuals have committed only a few crimes here and there.
Remember, a robopath lives through the crowd so that he cannot be bothered by any responsibility. He can always say “they.” He can drop his I into the “they.” He can lose himself in the crowd, become faceless, anonymous. Nobody can catch hold of him.
But you are responsible.
“The robopath lives in image involvement”: he is always concerned about how his image is, what people are thinking about him – whether they think him good, saintly, this and that. He is not really worried about transforming his life. If people believe in stupid things he will follow them. You can go and see. If people believe that fasting is good, you will find a few stupid people fasting – because only through fasting will they become saints. If people believe that killing oneself is spiritual, you will find people killing themselves.
Suicide is permitted in Jainism. If somebody wants to kill himself he is allowed to, and he becomes a great saint. Why? Because they say the world is just sin. The man who wants to get out of this world fast and soon is a great saint. Many people have committed suicide.
You can look into religious traditions and you will find a great Christian sect in Russia before the revolution. They used to cut off their genital organs – that was a religious thing. Thousands of people would do that. Women would cut off their breasts. And it was thought to be a great virtue.
There have been many sects whose members used to whip themselves; the idea was that one who whips himself every morning is a great saint. And he who was the greater was decided by how many times he whipped himself in a day. Stupid, neurotic things, but they have happened. They still go on happening.
I have heard…

A disciple died and went to purgatory. There he ran into his guru, who was accompanied by a luscious young blonde.
“I’m happy for you master,” said the new arrival. “At least you’re getting a partial reward in this place while you expiate your sins.”
“She isn’t my reward,” sighed the guru. “I’m her punishment.”

Your so-called saints can only be used for that, for a punishment. They are ugly people, destructive people, stupid people – either masochists or sadists, but pathological in every way. Their whole idea is how to have a good image in the eyes of others, that’s all. If they think that a man standing on his head is a great saint, they will stand on their head. They live through public opinion. They live through the ideal, they live for the image, they don’t have any inner direction.
“They have no interior definition of their behavior. They are decided by others. Public opinion is the ultimate deciding factor. Their behavior is thus dominated by image or status requirements set by the surrounding society.”
Watch these characteristics in you and in others. Robopaths are idealists, they are never realists. They avoid reality. They have great ideas in their minds about how man should be. They never listen to the fact of how man is; “should” is far more important for them than “is.” And “is” is real, and “should” is just imagination. They live in the “ought” and they have impossible ideals in their minds that cannot be fulfilled, that are inhuman – but they try to fulfill them. And in that very effort they start becoming more and more hard, more and more dead.
A robopath is always a perfectionist. He is never satisfied. He will always be finding fault. He will try to be as faultless as possible and he will always look at others’ faults. Now, if you want to be faultless you cannot be original. With the original comes the error. If you want to do something new, you have to accept that sometimes you may commit mistakes. If you want to be faultless, you have to have a very small routine repeated so many times that it has become absolutely rigid and you can do it perfectly.
That’s why many people live at the minimum, they cannot go to the maximum. With the minimum they can remain perfect, but the maximum is a danger – error may enter. People live a very limited kind of life. They choose a small life and life has to be multidimensional, only then is it rich.
A robopath is really poor. He may have as much wealth as one can have, but he is poor. His life is one-dimensional. He always lives to the minimum, close to the minimum. Do as few things as possible because then you remain more perfect. If you do many more things, naturally you can’t be perfect.
A real man is rich. He commits many errors – of course, he never commits the same error twice – but he always goes on new adventures, seeking and searching for the new. He is ready to go astray. The perfectionist is not ready to go astray. He cannot learn because learning creates trouble – that’s why you see that children can learn so much, grown-ups cannot. Grown-ups become perfectionists, they become robopaths. Children are still not trained for it; they are ready to learn.
And children learn fast. Psychologists have come to observe that a child learns as much in seven years as he will learn in the rest of his life. Fifty percent of his whole life is learned by the age of seven. If you are going to live for seventy years more, you will learn only fifty percent more. This seems to be a sheer wastage of life. But why is the child so ready to learn? He is ready to commit mistakes, he is not worried about his image. He can try. If he fails he is ready to fail. A person who is not ready to fail will never try.
“A robopath is necessarily anti-joy, anti-life.” Not only is he anti-joy, he is a joy-killer. If somebody else is celebrating he will look with eyes of condemnation. If somebody is singing and dancing he will look as if somebody is committing a sin, a grave sin. He cannot accept laughter; laughter looks to him like a sacrilege. He wants everybody to be serious and have long faces, he wants everybody to be miserably serious. That is his idea of a grown-up man. This is not a grown-up man; this is really a pathological state, ill.
A real man has the capacity to laugh as much as the capacity to cry. The real man has the capacity to be happy and to be miserable. His misery also has a certain life. These robopaths are miserable, but even their misery is dull and dead and mechanical. Even in their misery there is no throb.
Remember this, and avoid any ideas that make you anti-life.

Father Sullivan was terribly overworked and confided to a psychiatrist that he felt on the verge of a nervous breakdown.
“What you need,” said the doctor, “is to break completely with your everyday life. Put on a business suit and spend an evening in…well…a topless nightclub.”
That night, with some misgiving, the priest followed this advice. He sat in the darkest comer of the club until a passing waitress stopped at his table. “Why hello, Father!” she said.
“How…how did you know I was a priest?” asked the clergyman.
“Don’t you recognize me, Father?” smiled the girl. “I’m Sister Natalie. How’s our shrink?”

The same psychoanalyst has sent them both. She says, “How is our shrink?”
One of the greatest problems before therapists is how to help people to become more life-loving, life-affirmative again – because when you affirm life you are relaxed, when you start enjoying life you start becoming alive. Again your feet have a dance and again your heart has a song; again things start happening.
People come to me – these anti-life people – they say, “What kind of ashram is this? People dancing, singing, women and men holding hands – what kind of ashram is this?” I can understand their problem. They may have gone to Vinoba’s ashram or to Shivananda’s ashram. Ashrams have existed in India for centuries – life-negative ashrams where only dull and dead people gather together; old, on the verge of death, tired, bored, finished, just somehow pulling themselves along, against life, against every kind of celebration. So they have a certain idea about an ashram – that an ashram has to look serious. They have a certain idea about an ashram – that an ashram has to look like a hospital.
This is not a hospital, this is not for dull and dead people. This is not a cemetery, this is not a graveyard. This is a temple where we celebrate – and through celebration we grow tremendously. Where we celebrate the very fact that existence has given us birth, where we are grateful for these few utterly precious moments that existence has given to us, for this baraka, for this prasad. What can we do except thank existence through dance, through singing, through being more loving? Existence has showered so much love on us what can we do in return? How can we pay the debt? We can shower this love on other human beings, on trees, on birds, on animals, on the world. Whatever existence has given to us we have to give and share.
The robopath has no compassion. He is hard. He is hard on himself, he is hard on others. And sometimes, when robopathology goes to its very extreme, it is not only that he has no compassion, it is not only that he lacks compassion, he becomes acompassionate. That value simply disappears. They are neither compassionate nor not compassionate – that value simply does not exist for them. They only do their role – properly, of course. They follow orders – blindly, of course. Their great value is efficiency.
“Their enactments are generally neither against other people nor for other people in terms of a sense of personal moral values or principles. They act essentially in terms of what is the most expedient behavior to further or confirm with their expected status or image in the social system.”
That’s what the people who served Adolf Hitler said in the courts – that they were simply following orders; they were not responsible. Their only duty was to obey and they did their work as efficiently as possible. They were not concerned with what the work was.
The man who dropped the atom bomb on Hiroshima was asked the next morning by a journalist how he felt. He said, “There was nothing to feel. I dropped the bomb, I fulfilled my duty. Then I ate my dinner and I went to sleep. And I had a perfect sleep.” Now what kind of man is this? One hundred thousand people have died by his bomb, by his act – one hundred thousand people, and he could sleep the whole night perfectly well without even a nightmare disturbing him? What kind of man is he? And he could eat his dinner that night?
But try to understand. He is the perfect robopath. He says, “I did my duty” – as you do your duty. You go to the office and you do your duty. You are a clerk and you have to issue an order for somebody to be crucified, sentenced to death – you don’t feel anything. You simply type the order, you send it to the right person to sign, you come back home, you take your dinner, you love your wife, you talk to your children, you watch the TV, and you go to sleep. It is none of your concern.
The answers were the same from the German officials, who followed such orders that it seems impossible that a human mind could do that, that a human being could do that. Burning thousands of Jews… But they did it perfectly and they did it efficiently.
Just the other day I was saying in darshan…

An Indian died. He used to live in Germany. When he died he went to hell and the Devil asked him, “What hell would you like to choose? You can have either Indian or German because you were born an Indian and you lived in Germany, so this alternative is possible. You can choose either.”
The Indian was surprised. He said, “I never thought that there were different kinds of hell. But what is the difference? Are the punishments different?”
The Devil laughed. He said, “No, the punishments are exactly the same. The same fire is waiting for you, and every torture.”
Then the Indian was even more puzzled. He said, “Then what is the difference?”
And the Devil said, “Of course, there is a difference. Things are done with German efficiency in the German hell, with German accuracy, precision, perfection. And, of course, an Indian hell is an Indian hell.”
The Indian jumped. He said, “I want to go to the Indian hell – because sometimes the fire may not burn, sometimes the man who puts the fire on may not turn up.”

An Indian hell is going to be Indian so if you have any choice, choose the Indian.
The robopath has no compassion, he has no feeling, he has no heart. The robopath lives in constant hostility because he goes on repressing anger, hatred; he goes on repressing every kind of emotion. He goes on repressing all the negative kinds of emotions, then by and by a moment comes of such accumulated anger that he is simply angry – not at anyone in particular, he is just angry. He becomes antagonistic to everybody and he has no reason, just antagonism. It seeps into his blood and bones, it becomes part of his marrow.
“People unable to act out their spontaneity and creativity develop repressed venomous pockets of hostility. They become hard, thick and dense.” Never repress, otherwise you are on the way to becoming a robopath.
Robopaths are self-righteous, they always feel holier than thou. Their whole effort is how to look holier than others, how to be at the top. Their egos are very subtle. These people become saints, mahatmas, and all kinds of neuroses are born in them. These people become politicians, puritans, moralists. They are ready to throw the whole world into hell. These are the people who have invented hell.
And the last thing that a robopath is, is alienated. “The robopath is alienated from self, from other selves, and from nature. He is alienated from self in the sense that his ego is only a function of ritualistic demands. It has no intrinsic self-definition.”
He does not know who he is, he knows only what others say about him. So he is alienated from himself; he has never encountered his own self. He has never looked into his own being. He has always been looking into other people’s eyes and looking for his image, for how he looks in other people’s eyes. He has never come home. He is alienated from his self.
He is alienated from other selves because others don’t exist for him as people, others exist as things. His world is the world of “I-it,” it is not the world of “I-thou.” He never calls anybody thou, he never falls in love, he never melts his ego into somebody else’s being, he never comes close enough to overlap anybody. He remains aloof, distant. He remains higher than others.
And in small things – he will not smoke, he will not drink, he will not eat this and that – in these small things he will pose as a saint. Can you become a saint just by not smoking? So cheap? Just by not smoking? Can you become a saint just by not drinking? Can you become a saint just by becoming a vegetarian? I am not saying don’t be vegetarians and I am not saying go on smoking and drinking, what I am saying is that these things don’t make a saint. People who go on smoking and drinking and eating – anything whatever – with no compassion in their hearts, are just stupid people. Those who don’t do such stupid things are intelligent people, but not saints. To smoke, to drink may be a mistake against your body, but it is not a sin.
But those robopaths will make it a sin because this makes it very, very easy to become saints. They can always say, “I don’t smoke, I don’t drink, I don’t eat meat, I don’t do this and I don’t do that,” and immediately they are on a higher pedestal.
And naturally, when you are not in tune with yourself and with other people, how can you be in tune with nature? These robopaths have been destroying nature. They are the enemies of ecology. They go on destroying nature. They have wiped almost half of nature off the earth. They are very destructive people. They are destructive to themselves, of others, of nature – how can they know God? How can they feel God? They have not even felt a roseflower, they have not even felt the cry of the cuckoo, they have not even felt the river passing by, they have not even felt a child smiling, and they have not seen a woman’s tears. They have not even felt their own existence.
This creates alienation. “They are alienated from other people because their interaction is usually in terms of others as objects, not as human beings. They are role objects, like servants, bosses, employees, employers, doctors, patients etc.”
When a doctor comes to see a patient he is not interested in the patient as a person, just in their role as a patient. And the patient is not interested in the doctor as a person, just in his role as a doctor. The wife, the husband, the son, the father, the mother – they are all roles. People are not interested in each other’s person, in each other’s living reality. This is the robopathology that man has lived up to now, and man can go on living in it.
You can jump out of it. That jump makes you religious. That jump brings you to understanding, that jump makes you wise, that jump makes you enlightened.
Now this small story.
Najrani said, “If you say that you can ‘nearly understand,’ you are talking nonsense.”
A theologian who liked this phrase asked, “Can you give us an equivalent of this in ordinary life?”
“Certainly,” said Najrani. “It is equivalent to saying that
something is ‘almost a circle.’”
There are people who think they can understand – maybe not perfectly, but they can understand approximately. This is not possible. Understanding is not gradual, understanding is a sudden flash. Understanding is always total, it is never partial. It is not that you can have it in little chunks, in little bits and pieces. No, understanding is not cumulative.
Understanding cannot be divided into parts. When it comes, it comes as a totality. Either it is or it is not. Either you are awake or you are asleep. Either you are enlightened or you are a robopath. From robopathology to enlightenment there is a quantum leap, a jump.
But the robopath believes that although he may not be as enlightened as Buddha, he is also a little bit enlightened. That belief helps him to go on sleeping. Yes, he may not be such a great meditator, but he is doing a little bit of meditation. He may not have known God, but he has had a few glimpses.
This is not possible. Najrani’s statement is of tremendous importance: “If you say that you can ‘nearly understand,’ you are talking nonsense.” There is no way to have a “nearly understanding” state of mind. Nobody can know truth approximately. An approximate truth is still a lie. It is as if you are heating water – at ninety degrees it is still water, at ninety-five degrees it is still water, at ninety-nine degrees it is still water. You cannot say that it is less water now. It is still the same water – heated, but the same water. Then at a hundred degrees, suddenly there is a jump. The water evaporates. It is a quantum leap, discontinuous.
It is not that at first the water becomes a little bit of vapor and then a little bit more and then a little bit more, no. At one point it is still water, coming closer and closer to a hundred degrees. At ninety-nine point nine it is still water, and then in a split second it is no longer water, it has become vapor. In fact, to say in a split second is not right – it happens in no time. That moment is almost timeless. When I say timeless, I mean it exactly. No time passes, it is sudden. That is the meaning of a quantum leap.
Either you understand or you don’t. So be clear about it. Understanding is indivisible, it is not possible to divide it; you cannot have little or more of it. Preparation for it is gradual, but the happening is a sudden happening, like lightning. One moment all was dark, another moment all is light – like that. Understanding has no continuity with understanding, it is discontinuous.
That’s why I say to you that by accumulating knowledge you will not become wise. Knowledge can be accumulated; you can be less of a knower or more of a knower. You can go on accumulating knowledge; you can become more and more of a knower. But wisdom is noncumulative. It is radical. It is a revolution. It is an explosion from the known into the unknown, from the visible into the invisible, from the material into the spiritual, from the temporary into the nontemporal, from time into eternity, from robopathology into enlightenment. It is a hundred-and-eighty-degree turn without taking any time – because time brings degrees, gradualness.
The moment of enlightenment is a timeless moment – we should not even call it a moment because it is not. But we have to because of linguistic limitations.
Knowledge is one thing, understanding is totally another. Understanding is as free of knowledge as ignorance is – it is more like ignorance than knowledge. It is as empty as ignorance. But in ignorance there is a hankering for knowledge; in enlightenment there is no hankering anymore – that is the only difference. The ignorant person will become knowledgeable sooner or later because there is a hankering. He wants to have knowledge. He suffers because of his ignorance. He feels hurt that he does not know. He wants to know.
The man of enlightenment has come to know that there is no way to know, that the mystery is absolute, that the desire to know is meaningless. Nothing can be known. Not a thing is ever known. In that moment he becomes innocent. Ignorance is no longer there because ignorance can only be there if you hanker for knowledge. Only the desire for knowledge creates the idea of ignorance. When the desire for knowledge has disappeared, ignorance has disappeared too – one is absolutely empty of both ignorance and knowledge. One is in utter silence, awe. All has stopped, all has disappeared, and for the first time there is consciousness, total consciousness.
That total consciousness is what Najrani means by understanding. That’s why he says you cannot have approximate understanding.
“A theologian who liked this phrase asked…” Theologians are people who are always hankering for more knowledge. He said: “Can you give us an equivalent of this in ordinary life?” “Certainly,” said Najrani. “It is equivalent to saying that something is ‘almost a circle.’”
A circle is either a circle or is not a circle. You cannot have a half-circle. A half-circle is not a circle at all. It is only an arc, it is only a curve; it is not circle. A circle is a circle only when it is complete. The very idea of a circle has completion intrinsic to it. Only a complete circle is a circle and only absolute understanding is understanding.
That’s why there is no way to compare Buddha, Mohammed, Mansoor, Christ, Lao Tzu, Zarathustra – there is no way. You cannot compare; they are all circles and all are complete. You cannot say that Buddha is more of a circle than Zarathustra, or Zarathustra is more of a circle than Lao Tzu. You cannot use the words more and less as far as enlightenment is concerned. Enlightenment is never more or less.
People come to me sometimes and they ask who is more enlightened, Buddha or Mahavira? They are asking an absolutely stupid question. Nobody is more enlightened. One is enlightened when more and less have disappeared. One is enlightened when all comparisons have disappeared. One is enlightened when one has disappeared.
How can two absences be more or less? When I am not in the room and when you are not in the room, can my absence be more than your absence? When I am not in the room, the room is as empty as when you are not in the room. It can’t be that when I am not in the room it is more empty, and when you are not in the room it is less empty. Absences cannot be more or less.
Egos can be more or less; egolessness cannot be more or less. Remember this, it is a tremendously important statement.
Understanding is a lightning flash. You can prepare for it, but while you are preparing you remain ignorant. You go on remaining ignorant to the very last moment. And then suddenly all has disappeared. And it happens without any process, without any time passing by. It is utterly timeless.
So the last thing… Remember, there have been two schools all over the world: one school teaches gradual growth, another school teaches sudden enlightenment. And both are right because those who teach gradual growth are talking only about the preparation – heating the water; and those who are talking about sudden enlightenment are talking about the last thing when the water has come to a hundred degrees.
Both are right, and there is no conflict and there is no need to create any conflict. They are absolutely right, and both are right and both are right together. One’s emphasis is on the preparation – it is true because what is the point of talking about sudden enlightenment if you are not prepared? If you are cold, below zero degrees, what is the point of talking about evaporation?
First get heated, become at least warm, start moving toward the hundred-degree point. Those who talk about gradual growth simply mean that the preparation will have to be gradual.
Those who talk about sudden enlightenment are talking about the ultimate thing. They say, “Why talk about the gradual growth? That’s okay. That is accepted, taken for granted. The real thing to talk about is the ultimate – when it happens, it happens in a total way. It simply wipes you out completely. You disappear, and then there is understanding.”
Najrani said this to the theologian because theologians are the people who belong to the world of knowledge, who always think of accumulation, of having more knowledge, of having more virtue, of having more this and that – their minds are always greedy. They think in terms of degrees. The mind functions in terms of degrees, and understanding is a state of no-mind.
I talked to you about robopathology for a long time for a certain reason – because that is where you are. And unless you get out of your robopathology you will never know that benediction called understanding, enlightenment, nirvana.
Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
Why do you give sannyas to babies and children?
Sannyas can be only given to babies and children. The very idea of being an adult is a barrier. The adult mind is an adulterated mind; it is already corrupt.
The physical age is irrelevant. Somebody may be seventy years old and yet a baby, and somebody may be young and may not be innocent.
To receive sannyas needs a very, very innocent mind – one that knows nothing. Then the contact is immediate and the contact is from being to being, from heart to heart. Otherwise the contact remains from mind to mind – and from mind to mind there is no contact really, it is a deception. It only appears as if there is a contact. There is a constant conflict between two minds.
Listen to this small story:

One evening, Katz, a black cat who lived at Master Soen-sa’s ashram, died. The seven-year-old daughter of one of Soen-sa’s disciples was very troubled by the death. After the burial and chanting to Amida Buddha, she went to Soen-sa for an interview.
Soen-sa said, “Do you have any questions?”
She said, “Yes. What happened to Katzie? Where did he go?”
Soen-sa said, “Where do you come from?”
“From my mother’s belly.”
“Where does your mother come from?”
She was silent.
Soen-sa said, “Everything in the world comes from the same one thing. It is like in a cookie factory. Many different kinds of cookies are made: lions, tigers, elephants, houses, people. They all have different shapes and different names, but they are all made from the same dough and they all taste the same. So all the different things that you see – a cat, a person, a tree, the sun, this floor – all these things are really the same.”
“What are they?”
“People give them many different names. When you are thinking, all things have different names and different shapes. But when you are not thinking, all things are the same. There are no words for them. People make the words. A cat doesn’t say, ‘"I am a cat.’" People say, ‘This is a cat.’ The sun doesn’t say, ‘My name is sun.’ People say, ‘This is the sun.’ So when someone asks you, ‘What is this?’ how should you answer?”
“I shouldn’t use words.”
Soen-sa said, “Very good! You shouldn’t use words. So if someone asks you, ‘What is Buddha?’ what would be a good answer?”
She was silent.
Soen-sa said, “Now you ask me.”
“What is Buddha?”
Soen-sa hit the floor.
She laughed.
Soen-sa said, “Now I ask you, ‘What is Buddha?’”
She hit the floor.
“What is God?”
She hit the floor.
“What is your mother?”
She hit the floor.
“What are you?”
She hit the floor.
“Very good! This is what all things in the world are made of. You and Buddha and God and your mother and the whole world are the same.”
She smiled.
Soen-sa said, “Do you have any more questions?”
“You still haven’t told me where Katz went.”
Soen-sa leaned over, looked into her eyes and said, “You already understand.”
She said, “Oh!” and hit the floor very hard. Then she laughed.
Soen-sa said, “Very, very good! That is how you should answer any question. That is the truth.”
She bowed and left. As she was opening the door, she turned to Soen-sa and said, “Master, but I’m not going to answer that way when I’m in school. I’m going to give regular answers!”
Soen-sa laughed.

This is a deeper communion than can be possible between two minds.
The child understands in a very different way. First, the child has no knowledge. When there is no knowledge, when you know that you don’t know, there is opening. When you know that you know, you are closed.
When a child asks a question it is really out of his ignorance; when a grown-up asks a question it is out of his knowledge. The question may be formulated in the same way, but the quality of the question is utterly different. When a child asks, there is purity. He does not know, that’s why he is asking. When a grown-up asks, he knows, he already knows. The question is out of his knowledge.
When the question is out of knowledge it is impossible to answer it. When you already think you know, you are in conflict with anything that is going to be said to you. You have something at stake – your knowledge, your past, your belief, your doctrine, your church.
A child has none of these hindrances. That’s why Jesus says, “Unless you are like a child you will not enter the Kingdom of God.”
So don’t be worried about why I give children sannyas – rather be worried about yourself. If you are not a child, even if I give you sannyas you will not receive it.
I go on giving sannyas to every kind of person. To say no is not my way. I hope even against hope. Even when I see somebody who is just like a rock – when I see him closed completely with no way to enter him – then too I never say no. Who knows, maybe tomorrow he will relax. Maybe just this gesture of his, that he wants to take sannyas, will begin a new chapter in his life. Who knows? Things change, people change. Those who are very, very soft become hard; those who are hard become soft. Life is a constant flux. Maybe in the past things have happened in such a way that the person has become rocklike. The future may be different, may have a different story to tell.
Just looking at the past – because a man is just his past. To deny him sannyas because of this past is to deny him a new future, is to deny him any possibility to change. Who am I to deny? So to whoever comes, even a rocklike person, I say yes.
To the lowest the highest remains possible. There is no way to go so far away from God that you cannot turn. The farthest point in existence from God is still in God; we cannot go out of him.
When a child comes, I accept the child.
I understand why you have asked. You have asked because I say that children should not be conditioned. But sannyas is not a conditioning, it is just the opposite. If I don’t give the child sannyas he is going to become a Christian or a Hindu or a Mohammedan; he is going to become somebody who will be far worse. By giving him sannyas I allow him entry into a new kind of commune, a new kind of religiousness – which is not religion but just religiousness.
I am welcoming him to a new kind of family where we are not going to impose any dogma, we are only going to give him a kind of milieu. This is totally different. To give a dogma gives conditions; to give a milieu is not a conditioning, to give a milieu is just to share.
If I have attained something I can do two things. Either I can start conditioning you so you also attain the same thing – but through conditioning nothing is ever attained; or I can start helping to create a milieu, just a climate, where if you want to open you can open.
It is just like in the morning as the sun arrives on the horizon. It does not go to each flower, it does not knock at each bird’s nest, it does not order, “Now start singing – the morning has come. Now start opening – the morning has come. Now be awake!” It says nothing. The sun simply stands there. It creates a climate. That warmth, that life-giving warmth, spreads all over the earth. In that warmth trees start opening their eyes, birds start singing again, flowers open their petals.
Nothing is being said, nothing is being conditioned – it is just the presence. When I am giving sannyas to you, child or not, what is going to happen in it? It is just that I am allowing you to be in my presence. I am simply allowing you to become friends with me. This is just a friendship in which something is possible if you are ready to move.
And a child is more ready to move, a child is more inquiring, a child still has wondering eyes, a child is still clean. Nothing is written on his slate yet. Sannyas is not a kind of imprisonment, it is just an attitude of coming out of all prisons. So why should the children not be allowed to become sannyasins?
I have no creed, no dogma, no catechism. I am simply a presence. In this presence you can share something, you can partake of me. Everybody is welcome – a child of three months and an old man of ninety years. Everybody is welcome. Whoever wants to go on the journey of the unknown is welcome.
And all that we teach here – if you can call it teaching – is love and meditation. Both are deconditioning, both are dehypnotizing. We don’t teach a philosophy about love, we simply create the milieu where love can grow. And we don’t give a ritualistic, formalistic form of meditation – just the quality of meditativeness. Once you start drinking a little of meditativeness, a little of love, you start growing wings.
Sannyas is not the end of the journey, it is just the beginning. It is the first step. When you become a Christian it is the end, when you become a Hindu it is the end, when you become a Mohammedan it is the end. Then you can relax. Then you need not worry. When you become a Christian it is Christ’s duty and responsibility to save you. Now he will do everything; now you can continue in your own way, you can go on doing your things – you have left the burden on Jesus, he will carry your cross. Nobody can carry your cross, no, not even Jesus. Nobody can save you. How can anybody save you? The moment you start thinking that somebody else is going to save you, you are going to become a slave. The very idea that somebody else is going to save you creates slavery.
I am not a savior. I don’t deal in that kind of nonsense. I am not going to save you. You can save yourself. I will make available all that is in me, you can choose anything you like and love. And there is no enforced effort here to bring you all into the same mold. You can grow the way it happens to you. My trust is in the individual, I don’t trust the crowd. The crowd is by its very nature ugly. My sannyasins are connected with me individually. My sannyasins are not in fact connected to any organization.
If you see any kind of organization, it is just like the post office or the railway management. It is not a church, it is just to make me available to you more easily, more comfortably – otherwise I would be crowded and it would not be possible to work at all. The organization is there, just like the postal department. It is needed. But it is not an institution. Its function is there, its utility is there, but it is not a church. My sannyasins don’t belong to any organization, they belong to me. And each sannyasin belongs directly to me, it is not via the organization. The organization is there only to facilitate things. It is not a party, a sect, a church; it is nothing of the kind.
And to each individual my answer is always different, hence you will find so many contradictions. I don’t have anything fixed. Whenever I face an individual I reflect him. I see into him. I don’t have anything in my mind to enforce. I see into him; I respond to him.
When a child comes I respond in his way; when an old man comes I respond in his way. And each individual is so unique, so utterly unique, that you cannot give the same answer to everybody.

The second question:
Osho,
Can a disciple transcend form and be in tune with the essence of the creator?
Why this hankering to transcend form? Form is also of the creator, form is also God. In the form he also exists. Nothing is wrong with the form.
The problem arises only when you start thinking that the form is all. There is no need to transcend the form, there is only a need to understand it. The form is perfectly beautiful, the body is perfectly beautiful – but don’t think that the body is all. There is something more, something more that is not visible to the eyes, something deep. It has to be there.
The body is the surface, the soul is its depth. These are not two things. God and the world are not two things: the world is the surface and God is the world’s depth. And the depth cannot exist without the surface, remember, neither can the surface exist without the depth. They are together, they are absolutely together. They are one. It is only in language that the division arises; reality remains indivisible.
So first, don’t hanker for transcendence. There is no need – only understanding is necessary. Or, if you love the word transcendence, then you can remember: understanding is transcendence. But transcendence is not of the form, transcendence is of both the surface and the depth – because the moment you see it is all one then you cannot define it as the surface and you cannot define it as the depth. Then all definitions are meaningless. Then you are facing the indefinable. You have transcended duality. But it comes through understanding.
The very idea of transcendence can create problems. You can start repressing, you can start condemning – that’s how condemnation entered human consciousness. And it has been the greatest calamity that man has ever suffered.
I have heard…

A guy went to his dentist. The dentist wanted to give him Novocain.
But he said, “No, I want to transcend dental medication.”

He must be a transcendental meditation freak. He says, “I want to transcend dental medication.” Why? Why this constant effort to go somewhere else, to be somewhere else, to be someone else? Why can’t you relax into reality as it is? There is nowhere to go, nothing to transcend, and nothing to transcend to. God is herenow.
Just understand. Just open your eyes and see. See without any ideas. If you have this idea of transcending something, you are always looking with prejudiced eyes. You know that this is the form and you have to transcend the form. How can you love the form? This is the body and you have to love only the soul! And this is the world and you can love only God!
You will be getting into unnecessary anxiety, and the anxiety that you will create is such that you will never be able to solve it – because the form is always there with the formless. The form is of the formless – let me be contradictory, or paradoxical, but it is so. The form is of the formless and the body is of the bodiless and matter is nothing but non-matter in a condensed form; it is the manifestation, matter is the manifestation of the nonmaterial. The word is nothing but the manifestation of silence.
Rather than trying to transcend, start thinking of relaxing into that which is. You will reach into the formless sooner – and without any effort on your own. Just relax and be drowned by the form, and when you are drowned by the form you start entering the formless. If you can love a woman or a man, your friend, your wife, your child, your father, your mother, if you can love anybody soon you will see that the form is not there alone. The formless has started coming through the form.
When you touch the hand of somebody you love it is not only a touch of the skin, something is touched that is beyond the skin, behind the skin. Some pulse, some vibe, simply jumps from one hand to another; something of the spiritual. Look into the eyes of somebody that you love and you are not only looking into the eyes – something deeper opens, something abysmal opens. By and by the body starts disappearing. You are getting into the spiritual. But the body is the door.
It is exactly like a temple. You enter a temple… What do you mean by the word temple? The door, the walls – do you mean that? Of course, the door and the walls are not the temple, the temple is the emptiness inside. That’s where you go. But those doors and those walls protect that emptiness, that shrine. If those walls and the doors disappear, there will be no shrine. Those walls are not against that emptiness; those walls support that emptiness, those walls protect that emptiness. So what is the temple? The walls, the doors, or the emptiness? No, you cannot divide that way, both are the temple. The wall and the doors are the outer form, and the emptiness, the innermost emptiness is the soul.
Exactly so is the case with man, with a flower, with a tree. God is there in every form and God is formless. Because God is formless, the idea of how to transcend form arises. But the only way to transcend it is to descend into it. The only way to transcend it is to go into it so totally, so lovingly, that there is no condemnation.
Don’t even call it the surface, because even our words have become contaminated. The moment you say that this is just the surface you have already condemned it – it is as if there is something wrong with the surface.
You go for a walk on the beach, you see millions of waves in the ocean – on the surface. Yes, this is the surface, but can you take the surface away from the ocean? And can you enter the ocean without entering the surface? The depth and the surface are two polarities of one energy. And the ocean will not be much of an ocean if you take the surface away, nothing will be left. You will go on taking the surface away, away, away, and nothing will be left because whenever something is there, it will become the surface.
To see this nonduality is to see. Then one becomes alert, aware, for the first time.

The third question:
Osho,
I want to be creative. What should I do?
Become a child again and you will be creative. All children are creative. Creativity needs freedom – freedom from the mind, freedom from knowledge, freedom from prejudices.
A creative person is one who can try the new. A creative person is not a robopath; robopaths are never creative, they are repetitive. So become a child again.
And you will be surprised that all children are creative; all children, wherever they are born, are creative. But we don’t allow their creativity, we crush and kill their creativity, we jump upon them. We start teaching them the right way to do things.
Remember, a creative person always goes on trying the wrong ways. If you always follow the right way to do something you will never be creative because the right way means the way discovered by others. And the right way means that of course you will be able to make something, you will become a producer, a manufacturer, you will be a technician, but you will not be a creator.
What is the difference between a producer and a creator? A producer knows the right way of doing a thing, the most economical way of doing a thing; with the least effort he can create more results. He is a producer. A creator fools around. He does not know what the right way is to do something, so he goes on seeking and searching again and again in different directions. Many times he moves in a wrong direction, but wherever he moves he learns. He becomes more and more rich. He does something that nobody has ever done before. If he had followed the right way to do things he would not have been able to do it.
Listen to this small story:

A Sunday school teacher asked her students to draw a picture of the Holy Family.
After the pictures were brought to her, she saw that some of the youngsters had drawn the conventional pictures – the Holy Family in the manger, the Holy Family riding on the mule, and the like.
But she called up one little boy to ask him to explain his drawing, that showed an airplane with four heads sticking out of the plane windows.
She said, “I can understand why you drew three of the heads to show Joseph, Mary, and Jesus. But who’s the fourth head?”
“Oh,” answered the boy, “that’s Pontius the pilot!”

Now this is beautiful. This is what creativity is. He has discovered something.
But only children can do that. You will be afraid to do it, you will look foolish. A creator has to be able to look foolish. A creator has to risk his so-called respectability. That’s why you always see that poets, painters, dancers, musicians, are not very respectable people. And when they become respectable, when a Nobel Prize is given to them, they are no longer creative. From that moment creativity disappears.
What happens? Have you ever seen a Nobel Prize winner writing another thing that is of any value? Have you ever seen any respectable person doing something creative? He becomes afraid. If he does something wrong, or if something goes wrong, what will happen to his prestige? He cannot afford that. So when an artist becomes respectable he becomes dead.
Creators are only those who are ready to put their prestige, their pride, their respectability again and again at stake, and can go into something that nobody thinks is worth going into. Creators are always thought to be mad people. The world recognizes them, but very late. It goes on thinking that something is wrong. Creators are eccentric people.
And remember again, each child is born with all the capacities to become a creator. Without any exception, all children try to be creators but we don’t allow them. Immediately we start teaching them the right way to do a thing – and once they have learned the right way to do a thing they become robopaths. Then they go on doing the right thing again and again and again, and the more they do it, the more efficient they become. And the more efficient they become, the more respected they are.
Somewhere between the age of seven and fourteen a great change happens in a child. Psychologists have been searching into the phenomenon: Why does it happen and what happens?
You have two minds, two hemispheres. The left hemisphere of the mind is uncreative. It is technically very capable, but as far as creativity is concerned it is absolutely impotent. It can only do a thing once it has learned it, and it can do it very efficiently, perfectly; it is mechanical. This left hemisphere is the hemisphere of reasoning, logic, mathematics. It is the hemisphere of calculation, cleverness, of discipline, order.
The right hemisphere is just the opposite of it. It is the hemisphere of chaos, not of order; it is the hemisphere of poetry, not of prose; it is the hemisphere of love, not of logic. It has a great feeling for beauty, it has a great insight into originality – but it is not efficient, it cannot be efficient. The creator cannot be efficient, he has to go on experimenting.
The creator cannot settle anywhere. The creator is a vagabond, he carries his tent on his shoulders. Yes, he can stay for an overnight stay, but by the morning he is gone again – that’s why I call him a vagabond. He is never a householder. He cannot settle; settling means death to him. He is always ready to take a risk. Risk is his love affair.
But this is the right hemisphere. The right hemisphere is functioning when the child is born; the left hemisphere is not functioning. Then we start teaching the child – unknowingly, unscientifically. Down the ages we have learned the trick of how to shift the energy from the right hemisphere to the left hemisphere; how to put a stop to the right hemisphere and how to start the left hemisphere. That’s what our whole schooling is. From kindergarten to university that’s what our whole training and so-called education is. It is an effort to destroy the right hemisphere and to help the left hemisphere. Somewhere between the ages of seven and fourteen we succeed and the child is killed, the child is destroyed.
Then the child is no longer wild – he becomes a citizen. Then he learns the ways of discipline, language, logic, prose. He starts competing in school, becomes an egoist; starts learning all the neurotic things that are prevalent in the society, becomes more interested in power, money; starts thinking how to become more educated so he can become more powerful, how to have more money, how to have a big house, and all that. He shifts.
Then the right hemisphere functions less and less – or functions only when you are dreaming, fast asleep. Or sometimes when you have taken a drug.
The great appeal of drugs in the West is only because the West has succeeded in completely destroying the right hemisphere through compulsory education. The West has become too educated – that means it has gone to the very excess, to one side. It has become extreme. Now there seems to be no possibility. Unless you introduce some ways that can help the right hemisphere to be revived again in the universities and colleges and the schools, drugs are not going to go. There is no possibility of prohibiting drugs by law alone. There is no way to enforce it unless the inner balance is put right again.
The appeal of the drug is that it immediately shifts gear – from the left hemisphere your energy moves to the right hemisphere. That’s all the drug can do. Alcohol has been doing it for centuries, but now far better drugs are available – LSD, marijuana, psilocybin, and even better drugs will be available in the future.
The criminal is not the drug-taker, the criminal is the politician and the educationalist. It is they who are guilty. They have forced the human mind into one extreme – into such an extreme that now there is a need to revolt. And the need is so great! Poetry has completely disappeared from people’s life, beauty has disappeared, love has disappeared; money, power, prestige, have become the only gods.
How can humanity go on living without love and without poetry and without joy and without celebration? Not for long.
The new generation all over the world is doing a great service by showing the stupidity of your so-called education. It is not a coincidence that drug-takers almost always become dropouts. They disappear from the universities, colleges. It is not a coincidence – this is part of the same revolt.
And once a man has learned the joys of drugs it becomes very difficult for him to drop them. Drugs can be dropped only if better ways can be found that can release your poetry. Meditation is a better way – less destructive, less harmful than any kind of chemical. In fact, it is not harmful at all, it is beneficial. Meditation does the same thing: it shifts your mind from the left hemisphere to the right hemisphere. It releases your inner capacity of creativity.
The world can avoid a great calamity that is going to be there through drugs by only one thing – that is meditation. There is no other way. If meditation becomes more and more prevalent and enters peoples’ lives more and more, drugs will disappear. And education must start to be not so absolutely against the right hemisphere and its functioning.
If the children are taught that their minds are both left and right hemispheres, and if they are taught how to use both, and if they are taught when to use which… There are situations where only the left brain is needed, when you need to calculate – in the marketplace, in the everyday business of life, and there are times when you need the right hemisphere.
And remember always, the right hemisphere is the end and the left hemisphere is the means. The left hemisphere has to serve the right hemisphere. The right hemisphere is the master – you earn money only because you want to enjoy and celebrate your life. You want a certain bank balance only so you can love. You work only so you can play – play remains the goal. You work only so you can relax. Relaxation remains the goal, work is not the goal.
The work ethic is a hangover from the past. It has to be dropped. And the educational world has to go through a real revolution. People should not be forced, children should not be forced into repetitive patterns.
What is your education? Have you ever looked into it? Have you ever pondered over it? It is simply a training in memory. You don’t become intelligent through it, you become more and more unintelligent. You become stupid. Each child enters the school very intelligent, but it is very rare that a person comes out of university and is still intelligent – it is very rare. The university almost always succeeds. Yes, you come with degrees, but you have purchased those degrees at a great cost: you have lost your intelligence, you have lost your joy, you have lost life – because you have lost the functioning of the right side hemisphere.
And what have you learned? – information. Your mind is full of memories. You can repeat, you can reproduce – that’s what your examinations are. The person is thought to be very intelligent if he can vomit all that has been thrown into him. First he has to be forced to swallow, go on swallowing, and then in the examination papers, vomit. If you can vomit efficiently you are intelligent. If you can vomit exactly that which has been given to you, you are intelligent.
Now remember, this is something to be understood: you can vomit the same thing only if you have not digested it. If you have digested it you cannot vomit the same thing, something else may come. Blood may come, but not the same Vrindavan canteen bread. That will not come. It has disappeared. So you simply have to keep it down there in your stomach without digesting it. Then you are thought to be very, very intelligent. The most stupid are thought to be the most intelligent. It is a very sorry thing, a sorry state of things.
The intelligent may not fit. Do you know Albert Einstein could not pass his matriculation examination? Such a creative intelligence – it was difficult for him to behave in the stupid way that everybody else was behaving in.
All your so-called gold medalists in the schools, colleges, universities, disappear. They never prove to be of any use. Their glory ends with their gold medals. Then they are never found anywhere. Life owes nothing to them.
What happens to these people? You have destroyed them. They have purchased the certificates and they have lost everything. Now they will be carrying their certificates and degrees.
This kind of education has to be totally transformed. More joy has to be brought to the schoolroom, more chaos has to be brought to the university – more dance, more song, more poetry, more creativity, more intelligence. Such dependence on memory has to be dropped.
People should be watched and people should be helped to be more intelligent. When a person responds in a new way he should be valued. There should be no right answer. There is none. There is only a stupid answer and an intelligent answer. The very categorization of right and wrong is wrong; there is no right answer and there is no wrong answer. Either the answer is stupid, repetitive, or the answer is creative, responsive, intelligent. Even if the repetitive answer seems to be right it should not be valued much because it is repetitive. And even though the intelligent answer may not be perfectly right, may not fit with the old ideas, it has to be praised because it is new. It shows intelligence.
You ask me, “I want to be creative. What should I do?” Undo all that the society has done to you; undo all that your parents and your teachers have done to you; undo all that the policeman and the politician and the priest have done to you – and you will again become creative, you will again have that thrill that you had in the very beginning. It is still waiting there, repressed. It can uncoil.
And when that creative energy uncoils in you, you are religious. To me a religious person is one who is a creative person. Everybody is born creative, but very few people remain creative.
It is for you to come out of the trap – you can. Of course you will need great courage because when you start undoing what the society has done to you, you will lose respect. You will not be thought to be respectable. You will start becoming bizarre; you will look bizarre to people. You will look like a freak. People will think, “Something has gone wrong with the poor man.” This is the greatest courage – to go into a life where people start thinking you are bizarre.
There will be difficulties. You can ask Indivar. He has come from Australia. He was a renowned psychoanalyst there for twenty years and now he is in such difficulty. His wife thinks that he has gone mad; his children have become suspicious that “Dad has gone mad”; his colleagues are no longer in sympathy – there is no question of respect, even sympathy is missing. The bosses where he works in the clinic are ready to throw him out at any moment. And for the first time he is happy and for the first time he is doing something that he enjoys – and for the first time something from the right hemisphere is released in him.
Just the other night he was there, and when I touched his head I could feel the shift. It is no longer the left hemisphere, it is the right hemisphere where more energy is moving. His poetry is coming back. He is becoming a child again.
But naturally you have to risk. If you want to be creative you will have to risk everything. But it is worth it. A little creativity is more worthwhile than this whole world and its kingdom. The joy that comes by creating something new, whatever it is – a small song, a small painting, anything… When you create something new you participate with the creator because existence is the creator. When you create, you are in tune with existence. When you create, really existence creates through you – that’s why great joy arises. When you repeat, you repeat alone. Existence is not there. You are a desert, you are a machine. When you create, existence simply enters your heart. You become a hollow bamboo and it starts playing on you and you become a flute. Great song is possible.
Everybody is carrying that song, and unless that song is sung you will never feel fulfilled.
My sannyas is nothing but an initiation into creativity, initiation into danger, initiation into a new kind of life that has not been taught to you – in fact, against everything that has been taught to you.
My whole struggle is against this so-called neurotic society. I would like you to become uneducated again.

The fourth question:
Osho,
Why is it so difficult to find oneself?
Because you have been turned outward. Your eyes have become paralyzed. They can only see the without. You cannot turn back; your neck is no longer flexible. You cannot go into your being; all that you know takes you outside.
You are very, very efficient in thinking – thinking takes you outside. To go in, to know oneself, non-thinking is needed. Now that seems impossible. The whole of life’s training in thinking has become such a fixed structure inside you that even when you don’t need to think, you go on thinking. You would like to sit silently, but the mind goes on chattering. You have practiced that chattering too long, it has gone into your blood. That’s why it looks difficult; otherwise it is the easiest thing in the world. It has to be the easiest because you are closer to yourself than anything else. If you want to know somebody else it is a long journey. If you want to know God one never knows where he is hiding and where to find him and what his address is.
But if you want to know yourself there should be no problem at all. You are yourself. If you cannot know even this – where you already are, where you exist – then what else can you do and what else can you know? Self-knowledge should be the easiest thing.
But it has become difficult because you have been trained to focus your eyes on the outside.
I have heard…

Sherlock Holmes arrived in heaven. The angels turned out en masse to meet him. The Lord himself descended from his throne to bid him welcome.
“Holmes,” he said, “we have a little mystery up here that you may be able to help us solve. Adam and Eve seem to have disappeared. Nobody has been able to locate them for eons. If you could possibly uncover them for us…”
Holmes darted to the fringe of the assemblage and hauled two frightened and surprised angels before the Lord. “Here they are,” he said.
Adam and Eve admitted their identities. “We became tired of being stared at and asked for autographs by every damn new angel who came up here,” they explained. “We assumed aliases and these simple disguises, and got away with them for centuries until this smarty-pants ferreted us out.”
“How did you do it?” marveled the Lord.
“Elementary, my dear lord,” said Holmes. “They were the only two who had no navels.”

Yes, to know oneself is elementary. It is not difficult – it can’t be difficult. You just have to unlearn the ways. You need not learn anything to know who you are, you only have to unlearn a few things.
First, you have to unlearn being concerned with things; second, you have to unlearn being concerned with thoughts; and the third thing happens on its own accord – witnessing.
Let me tell you in this way… These are the three things in your life. On the outermost fringe are things, the world; what Zen people call “The world of ten thousand things.” On the outermost fringe – the periphery, the circumference – are things, millions of things. Then between the center and the circumference there are thoughts, desires, dreams, memories, imaginations – the mind. If the world is called “The world of ten thousand things,” the mind should be called “The world of ten million thoughts.”
And the key is, one: first start watching things. Sitting silently, look at a tree; just be watchful, don’t think about it. Don’t say, “What kind of tree is this?” Don’t say whether it is beautiful or ugly. Don’t say, “It is green or dry.” Don’t make any thoughts ripple about it, just go on looking at the tree – that’s what meditators have been doing down the centuries. They would choose one thing – maybe the small flame of a lamp – and they would sit silently looking at it. What were they doing? The flame has nothing to do with meditation, it is just a device. They were trying one thing: to go on looking at the flame and to come to a point where no thought arises about the flame. The flame is there, you are here, and no thought arises.
You can do it anywhere, watching anything. Just remember one thing: when the thought comes, put it aside, shove it aside. Again go on looking at the thing. In the beginning it will be difficult but, after a period, intervals start happening. There will come moments when you will be looking at the tree and there will be no thought – and you will find great joy arising out of that simple experience. Nothing has happened – just thoughts are not there and the tree is there and you are there and between the two there is space. The space is not cluttered with thoughts. Suddenly there is great joy for no visible reason, for no reason at all. You have learned the first secret.
Then this has to be used in a subtler way. Things are gross, that’s why I say start with a thing. You can sit in your room, you can go on looking at a photograph – the only thing to remember is not to think about it. Just look without thinking. Slowly, slowly it happens. Look at the table without thinking and by and by the table is there, you are there, and there is no thought between you two. And suddenly – joy.
Joy is a function of thoughtlessness. Joy is already there; it is repressed behind so many thoughts. When thoughts are not there it starts surfacing.
Start with the gross. Then, when you have become attuned and you have started to feel moments when thoughts disappear and only things are there, start doing the second thing. Now close your eyes and look at any thought that comes by – without thinking about the thought. Some face arises on the screen of your mind, or a cloud moves, or anything. Just look at it without thinking.
This will be a little harder than the first because things are more gross, thoughts are very subtle. But if the first has happened, the second will happen – only time will be needed. Go on looking at the thought. After a while… It depends on you – it can happen within weeks, it can happen within months, it can take years. It depends on you how intently, how wholeheartedly you are doing it. Then one day, suddenly, the thought is not there. You are alone.
With the thing, thoughts disappeared: you were there and the thing was there; subjective and objective were both there, duality was there. When the thought disappears, you are simply left alone, only subjectivity is left alone. And great joy will arise – a thousandfold greater than the first joy that happened when the tree was there and the thought had disappeared. A thousandfold. It will be so immense that you will be flooded with joy.
This is the second step. When this has started happening, then do the third thing – watch the watcher. Now there is no object. Things have been dropped, thoughts have been dropped, now you are alone. Now simply be watchful of this watcher, be a witness to this witnessing. In the beginning it will be difficult again because we know only how to watch things. Even a thought is at least something to watch. Now there is nothing, it is absolute emptiness. Only the watcher is left alone. You have to turn upon yourself.
This is what Jesus means when he says conversion – turning upon oneself. This is what Mahavira means when he says pratikraman – turning upon oneself. This is what Patanjali means by pratyahara – turning upon oneself. And this is what Sufis mean when they use the word shahadah – witnessing the witness. This is the secret-most key. Just go on being there alone. Rest in this aloneness, and a moment comes when this happens. It is bound to happen. If the first two things have happened, the third is bound to happen – you need not worry about it.
When this happens, then for the first time you know what joy is. All those joys that you had known before – the joy that happened when the tree was there and the thought had disappeared; and the joy that happened when the thoughts disappeared and you were left alone… Yes, the second joy was a thousandfold greater than the first, but now something happens that is not only quantitatively different but qualitatively different. Now for the first time you know what Hindus call ananda – the real joy. All joys known before are now simply pale, simply don’t mean anything anymore. Those joys were something that were happening to you, now this joy is utterly different. This is you yourself; this is swabhav, this is your innermost nature.
It is not something happening to you, so it cannot be taken away. It is you in your authentic being, it is your very being. Now it cannot be taken away. Now there is no way to lose it. You have come home.
So you have to unlearn things, thoughts. First watch the gross, then watch the subtle, and then watch the beyond that is beyond the gross and the subtle.

The fifth question:
Osho,
Do you find your jokes funny or are you catering to our sense of humor?
P.S. We love them!
To me the whole of life is a joke and I find everything funny. It is all so ridiculous.
But remember, I am not catering for your sense of humor. I never cater for you in any way. If I tell a joke it is simply a trick because it is only during the moment when you open your mouth that I can help you swallow something. It is just a device. Your mouth is open and you are unaware. I can throw in something! It really goes in. Your mind is no longer functioning, your thoughts are no longer there.
When you laugh, the mind disappears. In laughter, the mind cannot exist – for a moment there is a gap, and I seek that gap. That gap is of tremendous importance because only through that gap can I make contact with you.

The last question:
Osho,
I want to surrender and yet…
This is how the human mind functions. It is always contradictory. It wants one thing and at the same time it is afraid. The mind can never be total. The mind’s existence is in division.
So if you are waiting to surrender only when your mind totally says yes, then it is not going to happen. At the most you can hope for only one thing: if the major part of your mind is saying go ahead, then go ahead; listen to the major and don’t be bothered by the minor. Sometimes just the contrary happens – people go on being bothered by the minor part of their mind.
One day somebody was saying to me, “I am ninety percent ready to take sannyas. Ninety percent!”
I said, “Man, this is a miracle! Ninety percent? Don’t wait a single moment because who knows? Just take sannyas!”
He said, “But what am I to do about that ten percent of the mind? It goes on saying no, so I will have to wait.”
But that man is not aware that even to decide to wait is a choice. To take sannyas is a choice; not to take it is also a choice. You cannot choose not to choose – that freedom is not given. You cannot choose not to choose. You are choosing every moment. You have to remain a chooser.
Man is not free not to choose, remember. But you can create an illusion… That man is thinking that he is not choosing yet because ten percent of the mind is saying no. But he is choosing in favor of the ten percent – he is not taking sannyas. He is going against the ninety percent for the ten percent. This is stupid. At least be a little democratic.
Don’t wait for totality. The mind is never total. When there is totality, the mind disappears. In fact, you are trying to surrender so you can be total. Now if you demand totality as a requirement to surrender, then you are just being absolutely absurd.

I have heard about an old church. The church was very ancient and the building was falling. A small wind would come and the building would start shaking. People stopped coming to it, they were afraid.
Then the committee, the board of directors, met. Even they didn’t meet inside the church. It was dangerous to go in so they met outside. And they decided that now something had to be done: “People have stopped coming, even the priest won’t go in. And it can fall any moment; it is a miracle that it has not fallen up to now. What should we do?”
But the orthodox mind… The old people were there who said, “This is an ancient church and we cannot demolish it.” And there were other new people who said, “We have to demolish it otherwise it will kill somebody one day. We have to make a new church.” And there was great conflict. What to do?
Then they decided on a compromise. They passed a resolution: “First, we decide that the new church has to be built. Second, we decide that the old church has to be demolished. Third, we decide that the new church should be made exactly like the old, on exactly the same spot, and all the material from the old church should be used in the new church. Nothing new will be used so it remains ancient. And fourth, till the new is ready, we will go on using the old.”

Now, how is it going to happen? Compromises don’t help.
If you want to surrender, just watch inside yourself. If the major part of your mind is ready, then take the jump.

A Russian commissar was so discouraged with life in Moscow that he decided to commit suicide. One evening, he walked out into the country with a loaf of bread tucked under his arm. When he came to a train junction, he lay down on the railroad tracks. A peasant passing by was amazed by the strange sight.
“What are you doing,” he asked, “lying on these tracks?”
Said the commissar, “I’m going to commit suicide.”
“What do you need the bread for?” asked the peasant.
The commissar answered, “In this country, by the time the train gets here a man could starve to death.”

But this is how the mind functions. You are ready to commit suicide!

I used to live in a house next to a professor. We were colleagues in the same university. I was very new, and the first night I became a little worried because the professor and his wife started fighting. The fight continued and I could hear everything that was going on. As I had not even been introduced to them it would have been an interference, trespassing, to go to their house in the middle of the night, so I had to wait and see what was happening.
Finally, the professor threatened that he would go and commit suicide. Then I became a little worried. I came out. The professor had left and the wife was standing there closing the door. I said to the woman, “What is the matter? Can I be of any help?”
She said, “Don’t be worried. This must be the hundredth time. He will take a good walk and come back. He never commits suicide. And he threatens every time.”
And within just five or seven minutes he was back. I asked him, “So soon? Have you committed suicide?”
He said, “The railroad is so far away and it is raining, can’t you see? And I don’t have an umbrella.”

The mind is like that. It goes on thinking in contradictions.

The young man poured out his heart’s devotion on paper, as he wrote to the girl of his dreams:
“Darling, I would climb the highest mountain, swim the widest stream, cross the burning desert, die at the stake for you.
P.S. I will see you on Saturday – if it doesn’t rain.”

Now drop that “yet.” If you really want to surrender, surrender. If you feel the “yet” is stronger, then forget about it. Then this is not the right moment for you.
The mind continues to be contradictory because that is its trick to survive, and that is its way to keep you always discontented. You want to do something – one part of your mind says, “Do”, another part says, “Don’t do.” If you do it, the part that was not in favor will go on condemning it and will go on saying, “It was worthless and I was telling you so from the very beginning” – and you will become frustrated. If you don’t do it, the part that wanted to do it will go on chattering to you, “Do it. You are missing something great. Why don’t you do it?” Either way, you remain frustrated.
And the mind is always happy if you go on only thinking. Do anything, and the mind becomes afraid – because when you do something you are committed, you get involved. The mind wants utter freedom to dream, desire, long for. Have you watched this phenomenon in you? If not, then watch it. Whenever you are thinking of doing something there are a thousand and one alternatives. The mind has great freedom.
For example, if you want to purchase a car you can go to a showroom. You have many alternatives; many kinds of cars are available. You can purchase this or that car, or you can dream about them all, but you can only purchase one. The moment you purchase it, the fact that out of a hundred cars you have missed ninety-nine is going to make you miserable. Now your mind has only one car and it will start finding all kinds of faults with it. And the remaining parts of the mind that wanted to have other cars will start telling you, “I was saying so from the very beginning.”
So a man remains continuously frustrated. Whatever you do brings frustration because doing always closes your freedom; it becomes a commitment. Without doing anything you are free to choose because you choose only in the mind. You can change and alter and do this and that: this morning you are going to purchase this, by the evening another thing – and you can go on playing. That’s why thinkers are not known to do many things. They don’t do at all. They only think.
Without doing anything you cannot attain. You will have to do something. You will have to have the courage to commit, to get involved somewhere, otherwise you can sit and go on thinking and dreaming. That is all futile, meaningless – a sheer wastage of energy.
So either decide to do it or decide not to do it, but don’t hang in between. Be decisive. Decisiveness is always good. It creates integration, it brings integration. It makes you more crystallized.
Enough for today.

============================================================

Hassan came upon Rabiya one day when she was sitting amongst a number of contemplators, and said, “I have the capacity of walking on water. Come, let us both go onto that water yonder, and sitting upon it, carry out a spiritual discussion.”
Rabiya said, “If you wish to separate yourself from this august company, why do you not come with me so that we may fly into the air and sit there talking?”
Hassan said, “I cannot do that, for the power which you mention is not one which I possess.”
Rabiya said, “Your power of remaining still in the water is one which is possessed by fish. My capacity of flying in the air can be done by a fly. These abilities are no part of real truth – they may become the foundation of self-esteem and competitiveness, not spirituality.”
The games of the ego are very subtle, and if one is trying to drop the ego they become more and more subtle. If one has really decided to drop it anyhow, the ultimate strategy that the ego can use to protect itself is to become egoless: is to pretend humility, humbleness; is to show, “Now there is no need to fight with me, I am not at all.”
The ego is one of the most fundamental problems that man has to face. The ways of the ego have to be understood rightly, otherwise you will never be able to get rid of it. And until you get rid of the ego there is no possibility of meeting the divine. It is the ego that functions as a barrier between you and reality.
The ego functions as a barrier because it is one of the most unreal things possible. The ego is a fiction, it is not a fact. It is maintained by conditioning, by hypnosis; it is maintained by a thousand and one props. It is a fiction because existence is one – it can have only one center, it cannot have millions of centers.
What is the ego? The ego is the idea that “I am the center of the universe.” That is what the ego is – reduced to the basic – the idea that “I am the center of the universe.” “I” cannot be the center of the universe, but everybody has the idea that “I am the center of the universe.”
And the second part of the ego is that it is separative, it is a fiction that separates you from the totality. It gives you the idea that you are independent, that you are an island – and you are not. Existence is a vast infinite continent, there are no islands. You are not separate and you are not independent.
Remember, when I say you are not independent, I don’t mean that you are dependent – because the very idea of dependence will again presuppose the ego. There is nobody to be independent and there is nobody to be dependent. We live in interdependence, in mutual existence, in mutuality. We are parts of each other, members of one another. The trees are penetrating you and the rocks are penetrating you and the rivers are penetrating you – and you are penetrating the rivers and the trees and the rocks. The furthest star is connected with you. And when you blink your eyes you change the quality of the total existence. All is infinitely interconnected, interwoven. Nobody is separate.
So nobody can be independent and nobody can be dependent. Independence and dependence are both aspects of the same coin called ego. A real person is neither. A real person simply does not exist as a person, he has no boundaries. He exists as God, not as a person.
Just the other day somebody asked a question: “What does bhagwan mean?” It means this experience of interdependence. It means this experience of infinite mutuality. It means this oneness with the whole. It means, “I am no longer separate.” And if I am no longer separate, I am not – because I can be only when I am separate. There is no way to be without being separate.
Hence on one hand the ego creates separation, on the other hand it creates anxiety, fear – fear of death. The fear of death comes out of the ego, otherwise there is no death, there has never been death. Death exists not. If I am one with the whole, then how can death exist? The whole has never died, the whole has always been there, and the whole is going to remain there always.
The ocean never dies. Only ripples and waves come and go. Once the wave thinks, “I am separate from the ocean,” then it will have great anxiety. Then death is coming – sooner or later. It is on the way; it is coming. And the fear, and the anxiety… But if the wave knows, “I am not separate, how can I die? To die you have to be separate. If I am one with the ocean, whether I am like a wave or not like a wave does not matter. That which exists in me is the ocean. It has been there before me, it will be there after I am gone. In fact, I never came and I never went, it was just a manifestation of the universe” – then death disappears and birth disappears. Otherwise the ego creates the fear that “I am going to die” and there is a constant trembling in the heart.
You can never be at ease with the ego. Your anguish is your ego and nothing else. Bhagwan does not mean the English word God – which has become very dirty with wrong associations – bhagwan means the experience of oneness, the experience that “there is no wall between me and the whole,” that “I don’t have a boundary,” that “I am not and the whole is.” If you feel a boundary you are limited, small. Then your limitation gives pain, hurts – so limited, so small. Then you want to become big.
Just see the mechanism of the ego. First the ego makes you feel small; it creates a sort of inferiority: “I am so tiny against such a big world, I have to be big – big in money, big in power. I have to be the president or the prime minister or the richest man of the world, or I have to become Alexander the Great, or something.” Because the ego makes you feel limited and nobody likes limitation. Then the desire to become bigger arises. And you go on becoming bigger, but the bigger you become the more egoistic you become – because you carry the ego.
See the absurdity of it. The bigger you become, the more egoistic you become – you start thinking, “Now I am somebody.” And the more egoistic you become, the smaller you feel. It looks paradoxical: the bigger you become, the smaller you feel. And again and again the desire arises to become big. With the ego, nobody can become big. It is impossible.
Only by dropping the ego does one suddenly become big – not big, one really becomes infinite because then you don’t have any boundaries. Then if there are any boundaries to existence those are your boundaries – and there are none. Existence is unbounded. It has no possibility of ending anywhere, neither in time nor in space. In both dimensions it is infinite, it is infinitely infinite.
But don’t start dropping the ego. You cannot drop it because it is a fiction, not a fact. If you start dropping it you will create another fiction – that “I have become egoless.” If you start dropping it, if you start becoming humble, if you practice humility, you will become egoistic again in a new way. You will start thinking, “I am the most humble man in the world, the humblest.”

Three monks were talking. One was a Trappist monk. He said, “Nobody can compete with us as far as asceticism is concerned.” Trappist monks are really very ascetic; the most neurotic of all the kinds of Christian monks.
The second was a Catholic monk. He said, “That’s right. But nobody can compete with us as far as knowledge of the scripture is concerned.”
And they both looked at the third, a Baptist monk. They wanted him to declare what goods he had. The monk said, “We are nobodies as far as asceticism goes, we are nobodies as far as knowledge goes, but as far as humbleness is concerned, we are the top.”

Humbleness and, “We are the top!”
This is how the human ego functions. You cannot drop it because it is not. How can you drop it? You can drop something if it is. You cannot fight with it, how can you fight with something that is not? You cannot kill it, how can you kill it when it is not?
Then what can one do? One can only understand. One can look into the mechanism of it – how this whole fiction functions. Once you have looked into the fiction through and through, from one corner to another, from A to Z, it is not that you drop the ego – in that very insight the ego disappears. In fact, to say that it disappears is not right, it was never there. You come to realize that you were believing in a nonentity. It was not there from the very beginning.
It is just as if you stay in a room and somebody has told you that there is a ghost in the room. Now you cannot sleep. It is not that the ghost is there, it is the idea that there is a ghost and if you fall asleep there may be some danger – the ghost may jump upon you, may sit upon you, may drink your blood or something. Ghosts are unreliable people. One never knows what the ghost will do. You cannot sleep, you cannot afford to sleep.
And the more sleepless and tired you become, the more and more you will believe in the ghost because the weaker you become, the stronger the ghost becomes. In the middle of the night, when the whole world has fallen asleep and everything is silent, you will become more afraid – now you are absolutely alone. Everybody has fallen asleep. Even the traffic has stopped. Now there is nobody. If the ghost comes you are left alone. Even if you scream now nobody is going to hear. Now you will be more troubled. And a small rat passing by, or just a bird fluttering outside in a tree, or a dry leaf moving on the road in the wind – that is enough! You can lose all your consciousness.
There was nothing from the very beginning. You created the whole thing. You had an idea and the idea became a reality. Now, you cannot fight with this ghost, you only have to see whether the ghost is or is not. You only have to understand. You have to see the mechanism of how the idea of the ghost is manipulating you. It is just an idea – and your idea.
The case with the ego is exactly the same. The ego is a ghost. It is unreal, it is utterly unreal. But it has been deeply rooted in you for certain reasons. First, the society needs it. Without creating a kind of ego in you, you will be dangerous. Through the ego you can be manipulated. Just think: if you don’t have any ego nobody can frighten you – impossible – because you don’t have any death. Only you with your ego can be frightened through death.
That is the reason why Jesus was not frightened, why Mansoor was not frightened. Many Sufis have been killed. When Mansoor was being crucified, one hundred thousand people had gathered to see. Somebody asked – because he was laughing, laughing like crazy – somebody asked, “Mansoor, have you really gone mad? You are being crucified, why are you laughing? This is death. Are you alert of the fact?”
Mansoor said, “That’s why I am laughing. They are killing somebody who is not. That is the whole ridiculousness of it, that’s why I am laughing!”
It is as if somebody is killing a wave. Maybe the wave disappears, but how can you kill a wave? It will be there in the ocean, it will still be there, it will be absolutely as it was before. Only the form is not there, but form does not matter. Mansoor says, “They are trying to kill somebody who is not there in the first place, that’s why I am laughing.”
Many Sufis have been killed and they accepted death with such joy. From where do that joy and that courage come?
It is not the courage of a soldier. No, not at all. It is the courage of a man who has come to realize that there is no ego, that “I am not, so how can you kill me?” The courage of the soldier is different from the courage of a saint. The courage of the soldier is a well-maintained courage; deep down he is afraid, deep down he is trembling like a small child. But he has been trained for years to be brave. In the army he has been trained to be brave – bravery is a trained attitude. It is his habit to be brave. But deep down is the suspicion, deep down is the fear. Even the greatest soldiers feel fear. It is natural.
The difference between a brave soldier and a cowardly soldier is not one of fear; the difference is only that the brave soldier goes to the war, to the front, into death, into fire, in spite of the fear. The coward cannot go, he escapes. But the fear is there in both. The brave man just has an idea of bravery; he has been conditioned. His ego has been strengthened in such a way that he has to remain brave. It is against his ego to escape; it is against his ego to run away – that’s all. Otherwise, he is shaking like a leaf in a strong wind, trembling.
The courage of a saint is totally different. It has nothing to do with the courage of a soldier. He knows he is not, so how can you kill him? He knows there is no death because there has never been any birth. He has dropped the fallacy of birth, so the fallacy of death disappears. He has dropped the fallacy of the ego, so all other fallacies disappear. All other fallacies hang around the basic fallacy of the ego.
And how does one drop it? – just by seeing into the ways of it, how it comes. You pull it out from one side, you push it out from one door and it comes in from another door, from the back door, in a subtler form so you cannot recognize it.
The society needs the ego, otherwise people will be uncontrollable. The state needs it, otherwise people will be so rebellious, people will be so authentically themselves, that it will be next to impossible to create slavery, to create robopathology, to create these automatons you see walking on the roads, working in the offices, factories, this and that. Exploitation will be impossible without the ego. The society needs it.
It is a political stratagem and it is utilitarian too. You have to refer to yourself in some way. It will be confusing if you start using your name to refer to yourself.

Swami Ramateerth, a Hindu mystic, used to do that. He never used to use the word I, he would use Ram – that was his name. If he was feeling hungry, he would say, “Ram is very hungry.”
But it creates trouble. Then they would start saying, “Who is Ram? Who is he talking about?”
He was in New York and some people insulted him. He must have looked a little bizarre in orange clothes in New York – this happened sixty or seventy years ago, when the orange people were not known at all. He was the first sannyasin to reach America. People laughed at him, ridiculed him. He laughed, came back home.
The host asked, “What is the matter. Why are you laughing so much? What has happened?”
He said, “Ram was insulted and people were ridiculing Ram and Ram enjoyed it.”
“Ram?” the host asked. “What do you mean by Ram? Isn’t this your name?”
He laughed again. He said, “I don’t have any name. I can’t have any name. I don’t even use ‘I.’ I use ‘Ram,’ the third person. I am as far away from Ram as you are. I am as much a witness of Ram as you are.”

But this will create many problems. It will not be feasible if everybody starts using his name instead of I; it will create confusion. The I is significant, linguistically utilitarian. Nothing is wrong in using it. I will not tell you to stop using it – just know perfectly well that it is just a word, utilitarian, but it has no reality behind it.
In fact, if I had met Swami Ram I would have told him, “You are giving too much importance to the word I in avoiding it. You are making it too significant. It is not. There is no need to be so afraid of it. One just has to see the point, one just has to look into it and see that it is only a word, a label – perfectly useful, but with no reality behind it, with no substance behind it. Why do you go on avoiding it? The very fact of avoiding it so much seems to mean that you are still afraid, a little bit afraid that if you use the word I, maybe the ego will come back. So you are putting the ego away just by not using the I? That won’t help. It can come in the third person, Ram, too. It is so subtle.”
First the society needs to create an ego in you because then it can manipulate you, manage you, very easily. How does it happen? Once the ego is created, it becomes possible to manipulate the child. Then you can tell him that he has to come first in the class. If he has no ego, you cannot create ambition in him. He will laugh at the whole idea. “Why first? Why me first, why not others? What is wrong if somebody else comes first?”
Small children don’t see the point because they still don’t have a crystallized idea of the ego. A small child can come from the school and happily declare to the house, “I have failed again.” He has not yet been poisoned. But sooner or later… How long can he survive without being poisoned? The whole system of education is a subtle trick to create the ego, hence so much competition, ambition – be the first, come at the top of the list, become a gold medalist.
And that goes on and on. It doesn’t end with school, it goes on. Even old people are hankering for rewards, awards, Nobel Prizes, and things like that. They are still childish.
Once the idea has entered your bloodstream that “I am,” then everything is possible. You can be made afraid that if you don’t do this you will lose, if you do this you will profit. If you do this you will succeed, if you do this you will fail. With the idea of the ego, fear of punishment and greed for profit become possible. The whole of society exists in greed and fear.
Once a child has learned the ways of greed, then for his whole life he will be rushing after money or power or prestige. He will be losing his whole life in something absolutely nonessential. Money is not important, remember, money is important because you have the idea of the ego.
Many people drop money, they renounce money. In India it happens that people renounce their money and they think they have renounced something really essential. It is nothing – because money is secondary. One never loves money for money’s sake, one loves money for the ego’s sake. You have one million dollars, your ego feels puffed up. You can renounce one million dollars and you can go to the Himalayas and you can still feel puffed up with the idea, “I have renounced a million dollars. Many people have a million dollars, but how many renounce it?” Now you are getting still higher. The very idea that very few people can renounce such a lot of money with such ease will make your ego a little bigger. So those who renounce have very subtle egos.
If you are a president of a country and you renounce it and you say, “Now I am going to become a sannyasin and I will go to the Himalayas and meditate,” sitting there in a Himalayan cave you will still enjoy the idea that nobody has ever done that before. You renounced being president of a country – you are the greatest monk in the world. The ego has come, following you like a shadow. It will be there in your Himalayan cave too. You cannot escape from it so easily.
It is a subtle phenomenon. It needs much awareness to drop it. Just by running away you cannot drop it. How can you run away from yourself? And this mechanism is inside you, it is not outside. If it were outside, you could drop it, but it is inside you, it has become part of you. It is your very style. You have lived with it for so long that you don’t know how to live without it. So whatever way you choose to live, the ego will remain there hiding behind it.
The society needs it, the state needs it, the parents need it, the leaders, the politicians need it, the priest needs it – everybody needs the ego. Only you don’t need it. Only you become miserable because of it. Only because of it do you miss the Kingdom of God.
So you have to be very, very alert because the whole of society and the state and everybody is conspiring. They want you to have an ego.
You have to decide whether you want to go into this trip or you don’t want to go into this trip. You have to see what you have gained up to now by going into this trip. What is your gain? What joy has arrived? What bliss has happened?
You can change. You can become an otherworldly person – who is not really so otherworldly. You can say, “In this world there is nothing, this world is all nonsense. Death comes and everything is taken away. I will seek some eternal power.” But it is still power. “This world’s money is not very significant. I will seek some other kind of treasure that is eternal, that will remain with me.” Then again you become an egoist with new names – spiritual power, miraculous power.
There are three ways that the so-called spiritual man can fall into the same trap again. Either he becomes very knowledgeable – then he has the ego: “I know, and I know much more than anybody else.” Or he can become an ascetic. He can torture himself, he can be masochistic with himself. He can fast, he can start committing a slow suicide and he can tell the world, “I am the greatest mahatma. Look, I have renounced all, even my body.”
Or the third way is that he can start using psychic energy as power. He can become a miracle-monger. There are great energies in the psyche. They can all unfold. And when you start moving into deep meditation they start unfolding. The real spiritual man will not use them at all because he knows that it will be a trap that will bring you back into the mire of the world. A real spiritual man never uses any power. If miracles sometimes happen around a real religious man they happen on their own. He is not the doer.

A man came to Jesus, touched his garments, and was healed. He wanted to thank Jesus. He was thankful, he had been ill for years and the doctors had said that there was no remedy for him – and now he was in perfect health. He could not believe his own eyes.
He fell at the feet of Jesus to thank him and Jesus said, “Man, you need not thank me at all. Thank God. In fact, thank yourself – it is your own faith that has healed you. I have nothing to do with it.”

This is the quality of the real spiritual man – if something happens he is not the doer. Yes, miracles happen, but they are not done. And when a person starts doing them – like Satya Sai Baba and other people – when a person starts doing them he is no longer spiritual, not at all. He has fallen to the status of a magician. Now there is nothing of spirituality left. Just as people want to show their money, he wants to show his psychic powers. But the showman is there – so he is as much a part of show business as anybody else.
Miracles happen around a spiritual man, real miracles. These are not real miracles – that you can produce ash or you can produce a Swiss-made watch – these are not miracles, these are simple tricks. Around a really spiritual person real miracles happen. People transform, people change, people start attaining new spaces of being. People start moving into new dimensions of joy and life and eternity. People start being more loving and more compassionate. People start blooming. Fragrance arises. People start dancing; their hearts for the first time pulsate with celebration. These are real miracles. People start feeling that God is, people start trusting that God is. People start becoming aware of who they are. People start losing their sleepiness. Their eyes start opening. People become whole, no longer fragmentary, integrated. These are real miracles. These happen.
But they are not done; nobody is doing them. If somebody is there to do them, the ego still exists. And with the ego, the world; with the ego, all the darkness.
So you have to be alert. Nobody will be in favor of you dropping your ego. Your wife will not be in favor, your husband will not be in favor, your children will not be in favor – because once the husband drops the ego he has no ambition, so the wife will not feel good. The wife wants you to go on and on earning money, purchasing bigger and bigger houses, having more diamonds, more gold, more money in the bank, bigger insurance policies, and all that.
If you lose the ego your ambition disappears. Then you are no longer concerned with ambition, then you are no longer driving yourself mad. Of course you will be healthy, but who bothers about a healthy husband? You will not have ulcers, that’s right, but wives are not interested in whether you have ulcers or not. They are interested in having a bigger house, two houses – one in the country, one in the city. They are more interested in you having a yacht, they are more interested in you having power and prestige and pull. If you have ulcers, that is your business.
You will not have ulcers once the ego disappears. The ulcers will disappear. Ulcers are the footprints of ambition. You may not have cancer anymore, the cancer may not be possible at all because cancer is chronic anxiety. When anxiety becomes too much for the body to tolerate, the body starts moving toward death. The body starts creating situations where it can die easily. Cancer is an effort to die – things have become unbearable, now there is no point in living. You want to die. Cancer simply shows your will to death. You may not be courageous enough to recognize it, but your unconscious is helping you to die easily – that’s why there is no cure for cancer. The man has really lost his joy of life. He has lost his joy of life in futile things.
But wives are interested in having bigger houses, their own airplane – you can have cancer, that is okay, that you can afford. Children are also interested. They will drive the father mad.
And the husband is also interested that his wife should be beautiful – not that he loves his wife, she is a showpiece, he takes her around. He can brag around that he has the most beautiful wife in the world. He does not care for her a bit. He may not have seen her face for many years. While making love to her he may be thinking of other women or he may be lost in a thousand and one thoughts. He wants the woman to remain young, he wants the woman to remain beautiful, he wants the woman to remain attractive so he can take her around society. She is something that helps his ego.
The ego feels very hurt when you start moving with an ugly woman, naturally. “So this is what you have?” There is no other interest; not at all in the person of the woman, only in the personality – and that too for worldly ends.
This is how things are. So if you start dropping your ego nobody is going to support you, nobody at all. Everybody will be against it because everybody’s interest is that you remain egoistic. Even people who teach you to be egoless – if you really drop the ego they will not feel very good, because then who are they going to teach to be egoless? Even the priest who goes on teaching you to be egoless will be disturbed if you really become egoless. He will not like the idea at all.

I have heard about a dog who was a kind of preacher. He used to preach to other dogs of the town that God has made the dog in his own image. “Look,” he used to say, “even the word dog is just made of the same letters as God. Just see – it is God in reverse. Just a question of changing the direction and the dog can become God.”
It appealed to other dogs. Only one thing was difficult: he was very against barking. The priests are always against something that is impossible to stop. Now, it is impossible for dogs to stop barking; that would be too much against their dog nature. They enjoy barking, that is their joy, that is their poetry, their dance, their celebration. When they feel happy, what else can they do? They bark. When it is the night of the full moon, they bark. The full-moon night is a great celebration for dogs. They go almost mad. It is so beautiful – what else can they do?
He was against barking. The priests are very, very cunning in finding things that you cannot drop. They have found sex – you cannot drop it. They are against it. They have found taste – you cannot drop it. They are against it. They have found all those things that are difficult for you to drop. They are against them. You are not going to drop them and they will go on preaching to you, “Drop them!”
He preached day and night. Wherever he found a dog barking he would immediately go and start preaching. The dogs were tired of it although they knew that he was right – it is useless to bark. They also knew it, there was no need to convince them. And he was very logical.
But one day they decided, “Our leader has grown so old and we have never given him any joy; at least for one night we should not bark.” It was the great leader’s birthday so they thought, “This will be a good present. Let him be happy at least once. Tonight we are not going to bark at all.” They decided.
It was a full-moon night and it was very difficult. It was almost impossible. They were just lying down in dark holes, holding themselves somehow – in yoga postures. Repressing, repressing – and the more they were repressing, the more the bark came to their throats.
The leader went around and he looked, and not a single dog was barking. He became puzzled. What has happened? It was going to be a surprise gift, so nobody had told him. What has happened? Have dogs really changed? Then he became worried, “Then what will I do? If they have really stopped then my whole business has gone. Then what am I going to do?” He went around. He trusted dogs’ natures; they would bark. He knew them very well. His whole life he had been teaching and nobody had stopped barking. Sometimes he would find a few disciples who would stop for one or two days and then they would escape. They would say, “This is too much. We don’t want to go to God. Please let us remain dogs.”
But what has happened? A miracle? He went around and around and he saw that dogs were not even visible and nobody was barking, and he could not teach. It was getting late, it was the middle of the night, and for the first time he himself felt a great urge to bark. In fact, it had not been felt before because he had to talk so much – morning, evening, night – that there was no energy left to bark. For the first time he had not found a single disciple to teach.
The energy accumulated and a great urge to bark arose. He was surprised because he had not barked for many years. He had almost forgotten how to bark. A great thrill came to him. He said, “There are no dogs here, why should I not try? What is wrong in it?” And all those kinds of thoughts that come to everybody: “Once it is okay. It can’t be such a sin. Not all dogs are going to hell.” He knew that it was natural, but he had lived such an unnatural life, the life of a priest.
So he went into a dark corner in a street and started barking. The moment he started barking, suddenly there was a great explosion all over the town. All the dogs started barking. Everybody was boiling within. When they saw that one had broken the vow, they thought that it was somebody from amongst themselves – they could not think that the priest would do this, that was impossible. They had known him for years. Somebody had broken the vow so there was no need to repress anymore. The whole town exploded into barking. It had never been like that!
Then out came the leader and started teaching them again that this was not good: “It is only because of barking that we are not kings of the world, otherwise we would be the kings of the world. Just this one thing is destroying our potential.”

The priests who go on telling you to drop your egos won’t be very happy if you drop them because the moment you drop your egos, you will be beyond the control of the priest.
So you will have to move into this direction alone, all alone. Nobody will be helping you and everybody will be against you. But unless you understand that the ego is your hell, you cannot be blissful.
Now this beautiful story:
Hassan came upon Rabiya one day when she was sitting amongst a number of contemplators, and said…
Rabiya al-Adabiya is one of the rarest women in the whole of human history. There are only a few names that can be compared to Rabiya, but still she remains rare, even amongst these few names – Meera, Theresa, Laila. These are the few names. But Rabiya still remains rare. She is a Kohinoor, the most precious woman ever born. Her insight is immense.
Hassan is also a famous mystic, but at a very much lower stage. And there are many stories about Hassan and Rabiya.

One day Rabiya is sitting inside her hut. It is early morning, and Hassan comes to see her. The sun is rising and the birds are singing and the trees are dancing. It is a really beautiful morning.
And from the outside he calls her forth, “Rabiya, what are you doing inside? Come out! God has given birth to such a beautiful morning. What are you doing inside?”
And Rabiya laughs and she says, “Hassan, outside is only God’s creation, inside is God himself. Why don’t you come in? Yes, the morning is beautiful, but it is nothing compared with the creator who creates all the mornings. Yes, those birds are singing beautifully, but they are nothing compared with the song of God. That happens only when you are in. Why don’t you come in? Are you not yet finished with the outer, with the without, with the outside? When will you be able to come in?”

Such stories, small, but of tremendous significance…

One evening people saw her searching for something on the street in front of her hut. They gathered together – the poor old woman was searching for something. They asked, “What is the matter? What are you searching for?”
She said, “I have lost my needle.” So they also started helping.
Then somebody asked, “Rabiya, the street is big and night is just descending and soon there will be no light and a needle is such a small thing – unless you tell us exactly where it has fallen it will be difficult to find.”
Rabiya said, “Don’t ask that. Don’t bring that question up at all. If you want to help me, help, otherwise don’t help, but don’t bring up that question.”
They all stopped – all those who were searching – and they asked, “What is the matter? Why can’t we ask this? If you don’t say where it has fallen, how can we be of any help to you?”
She said, “The needle has fallen inside my house.”
They said, “Then have you gone mad? If the needle has fallen inside the house, why are you searching here?”
She said, “Because the light is here. Inside the house there is no light.”
Somebody said, “Even if the light is here, how can we find the needle if it has not been lost here? The right way would be to bring light inside the house so you can find the needle.”
And Rabiya laughed, “You are such clever people about small things. When are you going to use your intelligence for your inner life? I have seen you all searching outside and I know perfectly well, I know from my own experience, that what you are searching for is lost within. The bliss that you are searching for, you have lost within.
“And you are searching outside. Your logic is that because your eyes can see easily outside, and your hands can grope easily outside – because the light is outside – that’s why you are searching outside.
“If you are really intelligent,” Rabiya said, “then use your intelligence. Why are you searching for bliss in the outside world? Have you lost it there?”
They stood dumbfounded and Rabiya disappeared into her house.

So many stories like that – of immense insight.
This story is also beautiful. Hassan came upon Rabiya one day when she was sitting amongst a number of contemplators… Contemplation in Sufism is zikr; it means people sitting in deep remembrance of God – not repeating any name, not saying anything verbally, not even using a mantra, just sitting silently, absorbing. And when you are around a mystic saint like Rabiya, what else can you do? The fountain is flowing, you can drink as much as you want. They must have been drinking the energy that Rabiya was, they must have been drinking the light, they must have been drinking the silence, the presence. That’s what contemplation is in Sufism.
The English word does not connote the right meaning. Contemplation in English means thinking, contemplating. In Sufism it does not mean thinking at all. Those people were not sitting there thinking about something. They were not thinking at all, they were simply being there – which in India we call satsang, just being in the presence of the master. One is not doing anything in particular, one is just in the presence – open, ready to receive, with no idea of what is going to happen, with no expectation either, just open. If something comes from the master, one is ready to receive it.
The baraka, the grace, is always flowing from the master. If you are ready you will receive it. If you are open you will be filled by it. If you are closed you will miss it. The master’s very existence is baraka, grace. Vibrations are constantly spreading around his being. And it is not only that you have to be in the physical presence of the master. If you love, then you can be on another planet and it will not make any difference. You can drink from your master’s fountain wherever you are.
This is the fountain Jesus talks about.

One day Jesus comes upon a well. He is tired. And he asks a woman who is drawing water from the well, “I am thirsty, give me some water to drink.”
The woman looks at him and she says, “But I come from a very low strata of the society and I think people like you don’t even like to touch us. And my pots and my hands have already touched the water.”
Jesus laughs and he says, “Don’t be worried. Give me your water. If you give me your water I will also give you some water. I will give you some water – water of such quality that your thirst will be quenched forever.”
The woman looked at Jesus. This statement was so sudden, she was taken aback. The statement was so sudden, so absurd, that it must have broken her sleep a little. And when a Jesus, a man like Jesus, asks a woman at the well to give him a little water, it is not really that he asks for some water for himself – he simply wants to make a contact with this woman.
In fact, a man like Jesus needs nothing from you. Even if sometimes he asks for something from you it is just in order to give to you, it is just in order to give you something, something immensely valuable.
And the woman understood it. She bowed down and touched the feet of Jesus and she ran into the town and she called to everybody in the town, “Come, I have been drawing water from the well for my whole life and I have come across a man who has quenched my thirst forever. Just looking into his eyes it has happened. Come and see this man!”
The woman became an apostle, she became a messenger. The very presence of Jesus, just a look into his eyes, transformed the quality of the woman. She became awakened.

In Zen this kind of awakening is called satori.
When Rabiya is sitting with a few meditators… It would be better to call them meditators rather than contemplators. Even the word meditation is not very good because again, in English that means thinking – to meditate upon. In English you don’t have a term to translate dhyana into because nothing like that has existed in the West – only thinking, concentration, meditation, contemplation, nothing like dhyana. Dhyana means a state of no mind; dhyana means sitting silently doing nothing; dhyana means a gap, a thoughtless gap, an interval where no thought is moving. When thoughts are not moving, the master can move in you. When thoughts have stopped, for even a single moment, suddenly the energy of the master rushes toward you. That is called baraka.
Hassan came upon Rabiya one day when she was sitting amongst a number of contemplators, and said, “I have the capacity of walking on water. Come, let us both go onto that water yonder, and sitting upon it, carry out a spiritual discussion.”
Now, this is absolutely stupid of Hassan. But he was a man like Satya Sai Baba. He was more interested in power trips. He must have learned how to walk on water, now he wanted to show it to Rabiya. He wanted to have some certificate from Rabiya. He wanted Rabiya to recognize that he had become a great mystic or something. He had not seen the people who were sitting there, he had not seen what they were doing there. He was more interested in showing some power that he had attained.
When powers start happening in your spiritual growth, the greatest courage is needed not to show them.

It is said of a disciple of Zen master Rinzai that a disciple of another religious master was talking to him. And the other master’s disciple said, “Our master is a man of miracles. He can do anything he wants. I have seen him doing many miracles, I have witnessed them myself. What is the great thing about your master? What miracles can he do?”
And the disciple of Rinzai said, “The greatest miracle that my master can do is not to do miracles.”

Meditate on it. “The greatest miracle my master can do is not to do miracles.” When miraculous powers start happening, only the weaklings will do them. The stronger one will not do them because he knows that now this is another trap. Again the world is trying to pull him back.
This is the last trap. If you can avoid psychic energies, silently witnessing, if you can pass them by without being entangled by them, without being imprisoned by them, only then do you arrive home. It is a great ensnarement.
Hassan must have stumbled upon this, now he wants to show… Naturally he must have come to Rabiya, the greatest mystic of those days.
“I have the capacity of walking on water. Come, let us both go onto that water yonder…” And he may be thinking deep inside that maybe even Rabiya does not have this power.
“…and sitting upon it, carry out a spiritual discussion.” Now, there is no possibility of any spiritual discussion ever. Spirituality knows nothing of discussion. Spirituality knows of dialogue, but it knows nothing of discussion. Spirituality knows no argument. Sufism has no argument in it. It has knowledge, but it has no argument in it. A master can share what he knows, but there is no discussion in it.
While I was traveling in India for many years it used to happen almost every day. People, knowledgeable people, would come – pundits, scholars, learned men – and they would say, “We want to discuss something with you.”
And my response was always, “If you know, you tell me, share with me. I will be happy and glad to receive it. If you don’t know, then I know something, I can share it with you. Then receive it. If we both know then there is no need to talk at all. If we both don’t know, what is the point of talking? Discussion is meaningless. These are the only possibilities: either we both don’t know, then we can go on arguing and argument will not bring any conclusion. That’s how man has argued down the ages – great argumentation, to no end. Or we both know, then there is no point in saying anything.”
Kabir and Farid, two mystics, met and sat silently for forty-eight hours. Not a single word was uttered. There was no need. Both looked into each other’s eyes and found the same reality. Not a single word. Yes, that will happen. If Jesus comes to meet Buddha, that will happen. If Zarathustra comes to see Lao Tzu, that will happen. What is there to say? You know, the other knows, there is no way to talk, there is nothing to talk about.
The third possibility is that one knows and one does not know, then whoever knows… That has been my approach. I used to say to those people, “If you know, just tell me. I will receive it. If you don’t know, then don’t be foolish and argue. I am ready to share whatever I know, then you receive it. But I don’t see that there is any point in discussion.”
This Hassan must be an egoistic fellow. First he wants to show the miraculous power he has attained, next he wants to discuss. Truth is. You cannot argue about it. Either you know or you don’t know. There is no other way. These are the only two simple alternatives – either you know or you don’t know. If you know, you know; if you don’t know, you don’t know.
Rabiya said, “If you wish to separate yourself from this august company, why do you not come with me so that we may fly into the air and sit there talking?”
She must have seen the foolishness of this man. She must have seen the ego functioning in this man. Now he had stumbled upon a toy. It always happens – when you stumble upon a toy you think you have come upon truth.
It happened in Ramakrishna’s time…

Ramakrishna had a disciple, Vivekananda, who felt great power the first time he had a satori. And in the ashram of Ramakrishna there was a very simple innocent man whose name was Kalu. He was so innocent and so simple, so childlike, that Vivekananda always used to tease him. Vivekananda was an intellectual type, argumentative. And this Kalu was a simple villager.
And Kalu used to worship: his room was a temple and in his room there were almost hundreds of gods – in India you can purchase as many gods as you want. Any stone can become a god; just put red color on it and it becomes a god. So he had almost three hundred gods in his small room. There was not even any space left for him to sleep. And he had to worship these three hundred gods every day; it used to take six to eight hours. By the evening he was finished with the worshipping, then he would take his food.
Vivekananda was always saying, “This is stupid, this is foolish. Throw all these gods into the Ganges. Be finished. This is nonsense. The god is within.”
But Kalu was such a simple man that he said, “I love those stones. They are beautiful. Don’t you see this stone? See how beautiful it is. And I have found it by the Ganges; the Ganges has given it to me. Now how can I throw it back into the Ganges? No, I cannot do that.”
The day Vivekananda attained his first satori, he was sitting in another room just close by Kalu’s room. With the first power rush the idea came into his mind that Kalu must still be worshipping. It was afternoon, but he must be worshipping. So just to have fun he thought of an idea, he projected an idea into Kalu’s mind from his room: “Kalu, now take all your gods and throw them into the Ganges.” He felt that the power was there. He could project the thought and it would be received.
Ramakrishna was sitting outside. He saw this whole game – what Vivekananda had done. He must have seen the thought being projected. But he waited. Then Kalu came out with a big bundle; he was carrying all the gods in one big bag. Ramakrishna stopped him and he said, “Wait, where are you going?”
Kalu said, “An idea came into my mind that this is foolish. I am going to throw all these gods away. I am finished with them.”
Ramakrishna said, “Wait. Call Vivekananda.” Vivekananda was called and Ramakrishna shouted very angrily and said, “Is this the way to use power?” And he told Kalu, “Go back to your room, put your gods back in their places. This is not your idea, it is Vivekananda’s.”
Then Kalu said, “I felt as if somebody was hitting me, like a stone, as if it had come from the outside. But I am a poor simple man, I didn’t know what was happening. And the idea took such possession of me and I was trembling with fear – what am I doing? But I was almost possessed.”
Ramakrishna was so angry with Vivekananda that he said, “Now I will keep your key. You will only receive this key just before you are dying, just three days before. You will never have any more satoris again.”
And this is how it happened. Vivekananda didn’t have another satori again. He cried and wept for years but he didn’t have another satori, he could not have. He tried hard. And then Ramakrishna died. When Ramakrishna was dying Vivekananda was crying and saying to him, “Give my key back.”
Ramakrishna said, “You will get it just three days before you die – because you seem to be dangerous. Such power cannot be used in such a way. You are not pure enough yet. Wait. Go on crying and you go on meditating.”
And exactly three days before Vivekananda died he had another satori. But then he knew his death had come, only three days were left.

This Hassan thinks he has attained a great power. Rabiya is joking. Rabiya says:
“If you wish to separate yourself from this august company, why do you not come with me so that we may fly into the air and sit there talking?”
Hassan said, “I cannot do that, for the power which you mention is not one which I possess.”
Remember, you can possess power, but you cannot possess God, so power can never be spiritual. With God you have to be possessed by him, you cannot possess him. If you possess something then the ego will be there. Who is this one who claims that “I possess”? “I possess money, I possess a political post, or I possess spiritual power” – but the I continues to possess. The I is possessiveness. Through possessiveness the ego exists. That’s why the ego goes on possessing. It wants to possess as much as possible. It wants to possess all. It is never satisfied. Whatever you possess, the moment you possess, it becomes meaningless. Your hankering for more – it is always for more. You can possess the whole world and still you will be hankering for more.
It is said that an astrologer once saw Alexander’s hand and by seeing his hand he said, “One thing, sir, I have to tell you. You will be victorious and you will become the emperor of the whole world, but remember, there is only one world to win.”
And it is said that Alexander became very sad with the idea that there is only one world to win. Then what will he do? What will happen to that “more,” that mind that continuously hankers? He has not yet been victorious; there is just an idea that one day he will be victorious and he will be the emperor of the whole world. The astrologer said, “But then you will be in difficulty because there is only one world, sir, so what will you do then? Where will you project your ‘more’? Where will you put your hope? How will you desire? Without desire you will be stuck.”
This is how it goes on. You can possess and then there is the “more.”
Immediately Rabiya made him aware that he did not possess the power to fly in the air. He immediately felt inferior. Now that bragging was no longer there. Suddenly he was back on the earth. He said: “I cannot do that, for the power which you mention is not one which I possess.” He had become poor again. Rabiya punctured his balloon just by creating “more” in it. The same was done by the astrologer. He must have been a very, very wise man. He punctured Alexander – there was no other world.
It is said that in the great Emperor Akbar’s time there was a great wise man, Beebal. One day the great emperor came into his court, drew a line on the wall, and said to his courtiers, “You have to do something. Find a way to make this line that I have drawn on the wall smaller – but you are not allowed to touch it. It has to be made smaller without touching it.”
It looked impossible. How to make it small if you can’t touch it? You could make it small by touching, by reducing it. And then came Beebal and he drew another line just below it, a bigger line, without touching the first line, and it became small – comparatively, relatively.
What is small? Nothing is small in itself and nothing is big in itself. It is all comparative.
Rabiya drew a bigger line. She said, “If you really want to do it then we should go into the air.” She drew a big line. Hassan must have felt very poor. In that moment the ego could not brag. He felt hurt. He said, “That power I don’t possess.”
Rabiya said, “Your power of remaining still in the water is one which is possessed by fish.”
It is nothing very valuable – otherwise all the fish would be spiritual saints.
“My capacity of flying in the air can be done by a fly.”
So that too is not much, otherwise all the stupid flies would be great buddhas.
“These abilities are no part of real truth – they may become the foundation of self-esteem and competitiveness, not spirituality.”
This is a great lesson to be remembered. If anything of competition enters your mind, you are falling away from godliness because with competition, ego is created. Competitiveness is nothing but an effort to create the ego.
Yes, you can have great self-esteem, but the greater your self-esteem is, the farther away you are from the universal self. The greater you think you are, the farther astray you have gone. And remember, I am not saying that you should start saying, “I am very small, I am just the dust underneath your feet.” No, I am not saying that – because again that is a claim.
A real spiritual man has no idea of whether he is big or small, he has no idea at all.
When the Emperor Wu asked Bodhidharma, “Who are you?” Bodhidharma said, “I don’t know.” This is a spiritual answer. “I don’t know.” Great silence. Indefinable silence. Utter silence. “I don’t know.”
The man of spirituality does not know who he is. There is no way to define. In fact, he is no more. He has become part of the whole, he has disappeared into this great orchestra. He is a simple note in this great rich orchestra. He is just a small color in this colorful existence. He is no longer separate. He is not and he possesses nothing – neither power of this world nor power of the other world. He possesses nothing. He is possessed by God.
That’s why Sufism insists on surrender. Surrender and be possessed by God. Don’t try to possess God, don’t try to grab God. Many start with the idea that they have to possess God. Many seekers move with this tremendous ego: that they have to search, their ego is at stake. But they will never find. You can find God only when you have disappeared. When the seeker is no more, suddenly only God is left. And then you start laughing because God has always been there. Just because you were so much of a seeker, you were so full of yourself, you could not see him. He has always been there. He is the reality. You cannot possess him. You cannot have God in your fist. If you have a fist you will go on missing him. You can have him only with open hands. He is there when your heart is like an open hand and not like a fist. Then you have him. Only then he is.
This is a great lesson to be remembered. You have to understand the ways of the ego. This Hassan has fallen into a subtle trap of the ego again. He has left the world, now he possesses spiritual power. Now he can walk on the water.

Once a man came to Ramakrishna. He was a great yogi. And he declared the same thing to Ramakrishna. He said, “Can you walk on the water? I can.”
And Ramakrishna laughed and he said, “What is the point of it? How much effort and how much energy and how much time did you have to waste to learn this?”
He said, “Eighteen years.”
Ramakrishna said, “This is foolish. Just by giving two paise to the boatman he takes me to the other side. Just a thing worth two paise – eighteen years? Are you stupid or something?”

This has always been the approach of a real spiritual person like Rabiya or Ramakrishna. What is the point? Even if you can walk on the water, what is the point in it? How is it relevant with your life problems? How is it going to help you? How is it going to make you happier? Just by walking on the water, will you become happy? So why are you not happy while you are walking on the earth? Just by flying in the air, will you become happy? So who is preventing you? Why can’t you become happy right now?
This is not the spiritual approach, this is the egoistic approach. Beware of the ego because the ego is the only wall between you and God.
Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
Surely meditation is for mystics. Why do you propose it for ordinary people and their children?
First, I have never come across an ordinary person; they do not exist. They are only created by egoistic people. The egoist has to create the ordinary – that is the only way the ego can exist, persist. Not a single human being is ordinary because each human being is so unique. Each human being is created by existence – how can he be ordinary? Existence never creates the ordinary. All its creation is rare. Each individual is so unique that he is never repeated. You never were before, you will never be again. You cannot find anybody who is just like you.
Forget about human beings. Not even animals, not even trees, not even pebbles on a seashore, not even two pebbles, are alike. Wherever you find the signature of existence, it is always the original, never the ordinary.
Existence is not a manufacturer, it is a creator. It does not manufacture people like cars on an assembly line. You can have many Ford cars exactly alike – that’s the difference between a machine and a man. A machine can be duplicated, a man cannot be duplicated, and the moment you start duplicating, imitating, you become more like a machine – then you are no longer respectful toward your humanity. That’s how robopathology is created.
You ask me, “Surely meditation is for mystics.” It is for mystics, surely, but everybody is a born mystic – because everybody carries a great mystery within him which has to be realized, everybody carries a great potentiality which has to be actualized. Everybody is born with a future. Everybody has hope. What do you mean by a mystic? A mystic is one who is trying to realize the mystery of life, who is moving into the unknown, who is going into the uncharted, whose life is a life of adventure, exploration.
But every child starts that way – with awe, with wonder, with great inquiry in his heart. Every child is a mystic. Somewhere on the way of your so-called growing you lose contact with your inner possibility of being a mystic and you become a businessman, or you become a clerk, or you become a collector, or you become a minister. You become something else. And you start thinking that you are this. And when you believe it, it is so.
My effort here is to destroy your wrong notions about yourself and to liberate your mysticism. Meditation is a way of liberating your mysticism and it is for everybody – without any exception. It knows no exception.
“Surely meditation is for mystics. Why do you propose it for ordinary people and their children?” There is no one ordinary, and children are the most capable. They are natural mystics. And before they are destroyed by the society, before they are destroyed by other robots, by other corrupted people, it is better to help them to know something of meditation.
Meditation is not conditioning because meditation is not indoctrination. Meditation is not giving them any creed. If you teach a child to become Christian you have to give him a doctrine, you have to force him to believe things which naturally look absurd. You have to tell the child that Jesus was born of a virgin mother – that becomes a fundamental. Now you are destroying the natural intelligence of the child. If he does not believe you, you are angry, and of course you are powerful and you can punish the child. You can torture the child in many ways. If he believes you, it goes against his intrinsic intelligence. It looks like nonsense to him, but he has to compromise with you. And once he has compromised he starts losing his intelligence, he becomes stupid.
If you teach a child to be a Mohammedan, then again you will have to teach him a thousand and one absurdities. And so is the case with Hinduism and with all kinds of creeds, dogmas.
If you teach a child meditation you are not indoctrinating him. You don’t say he has to believe anything, you simply invite him to an experiment in no-thought. No-thought is not a doctrine, it is an experience. And children are very, very capable because they are very close to the source. They have just come from God! They still remember something of that mystery. They have just come from the other world, they have not yet forgotten it completely. Sooner or later they will forget, but still the fragrance is around them. That’s why all children look so beautiful, so graceful. Have you ever seen an ugly child?
Then what happens to all these beautiful children? Where do they disappear to? Later in life it is very rare to find beautiful people. Then what happens to all the beautiful children? Why do they turn into ugly people? What accident, what calamity happens on the way?
They start losing their grace the day they start losing their intelligence. They start losing their natural rhythm, their natural elegance, and they start learning plastic behavior. They no longer laugh spontaneously, they no longer cry spontaneously, they no longer dance spontaneously. You have forced them into a cage, a straitjacket. You have imprisoned them.
The chains are very subtle, they are not visible. The chains are of thought – Christian, Hindu, Mohammedan. You have chained the child and he cannot see the chains, so he will not be able to see how he is chained. And he will suffer his whole life. It is such an imprisonment. It is not like throwing a man into jail; it is creating a jail around a man, so wherever he goes the jail continues around him. He can go to the Himalayas and sit in a cave and he will remain a Hindu, he will remain a Christian, and he will still have thoughts.
Meditation is a way to go within yourselves to that depth where thoughts don’t exist, so it is not indoctrination. It is not teaching you anything in fact, it is just making you alert to your inner capacity to be without thought, to be without mind. And the best time is when the child is still uncorrupted.

The second question:
Osho,
Is there anybody in the world who is perfect?
Perfection, the idea of perfection, is an ugly idea. A perfectionist is a neurotic. Perfectionism is a psychological disease.
So the first thing to be remembered is that I am not for any kind of perfection. I want you to be whole, but not perfect; I want you to be total, but not perfect. Avoid perfection because perfection means death; perfection means that now there is no more growth. Perfection means an existential cul-de-sac – you have come to the very end of your tether. Now there is nowhere to go, you are stuck and stuck forever: you are perfect.
Just think of the horrible situation – that you are stuck, nowhere to go, nothing to do, no possibility to grow, no direction to flow. You are just there like a rock.
Life is a flow. Imperfection is beautiful. Be total, and never strive for perfection. What is the difference? When I say, “Be total,” I mean that whatever you do, do it totally, not perfectly – these are two different dimensions. You have been taught to be perfect.
For example, if you are angry the perfectionist will say, “This is not right. Drop anger.” Anger cannot be allowed in a perfect human being; a perfect human being cannot be angry. That’s why in India the so-called religious people cannot respect Jesus very much because there are moments when he became angry. He became angry in the temple. He turned over the boards of the money-changers, all alone he threw them all out of the temple. He was really angry. Now, Hindus will say, “This is not perfection. Jesus getting angry? This simply means he is an imperfect human being.”
Perfectionism will say “No anger.” In fact, the perfectionist’s idea is no love either – because if you are loving that too shows some need. So Jainas don’t say that Mahavira was loving, they simply say he was nonviolent. Now this is a very ugly way to describe such a loving man – to describe him through a negative, just to say that he was nonviolent, that he would not hurt anybody. That’s all. But he would not love. How could he love? He was perfect. He had no need for any human relationship, all his needs had disappeared.
Love is a need. You want to love and you want to be loved. This is how imperfection goes. Mahavira is perfect, he cannot love. So Jainas depict him as being almost cold. That coldness is the coldness of death.
Perfectionism goes on denying all that is human. Perfectionism is a kind of inhuman ideal. You cannot think of Buddha crying, you cannot visualize tears coming to Buddha’s eyes.

It happened that a great Zen master died, and his disciple – the chief disciple – started crying. Thousands of people had gathered. They had all believed that this disciple had attained enlightenment and now he was crying. So a few of them told him, “This doesn’t look good. It goes against your prestige. People think that you have become enlightened and you are crying! What will they think about you?”
The disciple said, “I can drop being enlightened, but I cannot be untrue.”
They said, “But you have been telling us that the soul never dies. So if your master is still there, why are you crying?”
The disciple said, “I am not crying for the soul – the soul is eternal – but I am crying for his body. His body was so beautiful, and it will never be again. Can’t I even cry for it? I will never see my master’s body again!”

Now, the traditional Buddhist will not accept this – that an enlightened person can cry. These are the perfectionist ideals; you have to take away all that is human, then what is left behind is just a marble statue.
I teach totality. If you are crying, then be total in it, then let your whole heart cry. Then don’t be so-so, don’t be lukewarm, just go into it. In that moment let crying be your total being. Let tears come from every pore of your being. If you are angry, then be totally angry – as Jesus was angry in the temple. Whatever happens, be total in it!
And now I would like to say something very paradoxical: if you can be totally in anger, anger by and by disappears. If you can be totally in anything, there comes a great transformation; the whole energy changes because you start understanding what anger is. It is not that you drop it by conscious effort, deliberately, but simply because of understanding it is no longer relevant. Or, if sometimes it is needed there is no hindrance either; you can be angry. I love Jesus because he could be angry. He was so human. Buddha looks inhuman – at least the way he is depicted is inhuman. Mahavira is utterly inhuman – at least the way he is described in the Jaina scriptures. He looks as if he has no heart.
But that is the goal of the perfectionist. Jesus is more human. Many times Jesus says in the Bible “I am the son of man.” Sometimes he says “I am the son of God” and sometimes “I am the son of man.” He says both things. He is saying, “I am both – as perfect as God and as imperfect as man. As high as God and as low as man. I am a bridge between these two.”
I teach you totality. Be total whatever you are doing. If you love, love totally. If you are angry, then be totally in anger. Cold anger is a sin! Hot anger is perfectly human. Cold anger has to be avoided. But that’s what happens when you have the ideal, the perfect ideal of not being angry – that’s what happens. Anger is there because you have never been able to understand it. How can you understand it if you have never been totally angry?
Only in a total flame of anger does one understand, does one encounter it. So you go on repressing. On the surface you keep a mask that you are not angry, deep inside you go on boiling, ready to explode like a volcano. So what will you do? You will have to learn how to remain cold on the surface, ice-cold. And if you are ice-cold on the surface, you will go on doing things which are angry – only you will not show your anger. And in a hot anger there is something beautiful: it is a man in his energy, in his radiance. In a cold anger there is only death. If somebody gets angry and hits you, you can forgive him; but if somebody remains perfectly cold and hits you, you will be never able to forgive him.
That’s why a distinction is made even in the courts. If a man became too angry, enraged, and murdered somebody, his crime is not that big. But if a man remained cold, calculating, arranged everything perfectly and did the whole thing in a mathematical way, planned it in detail beforehand, then he is the most dangerous man. It was not on the spur of the moment, it was a planned thing. For months he calculated when to commit the murder, how to commit the murder, how to commit it perfectly so he would not be caught. All over the world courts differentiate – this man is really dangerous, this man is really a criminal.
Sometimes you do something in the spur of the moment. You were not really trying to kill the other; it may have happened just accidentally – yes, you became angry. Remember, I am not teaching anger, I am simply teaching totality. Through totality anger disappears, but you never become perfect, you always remain growing. Remain growing.
You ask me, “Is there anybody in the world who is perfect?” I am reminded of this small story.

At a revival meeting the evangelist exclaimed, “Who is the most perfect man? Is there such a being? If anybody has ever seen the perfect man, let him stand now.”
A small nervous man rose in the rear of the hall. The evangelist gazed at him in astonishment. “Do you mean to say, sir, that you know who the perfect man is?”
“I certainly do!”
“Who may he be?”
“My wife’s first husband!”

That is the only way to find a perfect man – your wife’s first husband.
The perfect man is brought in only to condemn somebody – hence your wife’s first husband. She wants to condemn you, so she creates an image of her first husband as the perfect man. Then in comparison she can condemn you.
The priests have imagined Jesus, Buddha, Mahavira, as perfect men – to condemn ordinary humanity, to condemn natural human beings, to condemn you. Buddha was growing to the very last moment of his life; on the very verge of death he was growing. Growth is life, aliveness. But the Buddha imagined by the Buddhist is not the real Buddha, it is an image painted perfect in order to condemn you. You can only be condemned if there is an image to be compared with, otherwise how can you be condemned? Once the perfect man is painted then you are in trouble. You will start feeling guilty. How am I to become a Buddha? When? And you can never become a “Buddha,” because even Buddha was not like that! Nobody has ever been like that. That is just in the scriptures. It is a strategy of the priests.
That’s why when a buddha is alive you are not so interested in him. The priest is not interested at all. People are not so interested when a buddha is alive because he is alive with all his imperfections. Life needs imperfections. He is fallible! And you will go and you will have old ideas that Krishna was perfect and Rama was perfect and Moses was perfect, and you will compare this buddha with them – and he is still alive so he is still imperfect. And those comparisons will tell you, “No, he may be a good man, but he has not yet arrived.”
Once he is gone then the painters are at work, then the dreamers and the poets gather together, and the scholars, and they create a perfect buddha. Unreal – so unreal that it sometimes becomes ridiculous. Even the size: they cannot depict a buddha as six feet tall. How can a buddha be six feet tall? – he has to be bigger than all human beings.
In Sri Lanka there is a temple in Kandy where a tooth of Buddha is worshipped. It is preserved. And it is not the tooth of Buddha, it is not even the tooth of a human being. It must belong to some ape – it is so big! If Buddha had that kind of tooth he would have been a very ugly man. But it is worshipped, and you cannot point out to them what a ridiculous thing they are doing. This is not a human tooth. Now scientists have been working on it and they have proved that this is not human – but who listens? They say Buddha was so big – the size!
If you go into Jaina scriptures you will be surprised. Their ancient masters, old ancient tirthankaras, are depicted as a thousand feet, two thousand feet, three thousand feet high. And they lived for thousands of years! Just false ideas. But why have these false ideas been created? To condemn you. The priest needs some way to make you feel guilty.
Mahavira does not perspire. He stands naked in the hot north Indian sun and he does not perspire. How can Mahavira perspire? No perspiration ever comes. He never has to relieve himself, he does not defecate or urinate – everything simply disappears inside him. This seems to be the most chronic case of constipation. He never goes! How can the priest afford, how can the priest allow Mahavira to do such ordinary things like sitting on a toilet? It will look so absurd. Just imagine…Mahavira sitting on a toilet? It doesn’t look good, it doesn’t look good at all. He looks perfectly good in a yoga posture sitting under a tree. Foolish ideas. And this is how all thinking has continued down the centuries.
Remember, life is growth. Growth is possible only when you are imperfect. There is nothing wrong in being imperfect. There is no need to try to become perfect. If you try to become perfect you will create anguish for yourself, anxiety; you will create great tension for yourself; you will start living in hell.
The very idea of perfection brings the future into the mind. You cannot be perfect right now. You can be total right now, but you cannot be perfect right now. For perfection you will have to work hard – many, many lives; one life will not be enough. Then after thousands of lives you may be perfect. So perfection is in the future, and you can only go on postponing. Today you have to live like an imperfect human being and tomorrow you can hope that you will become a perfect being. You remain the same. Your idea of perfection simply makes you guilty, it does not transform you.
The idea of totality transforms you immediately because it can be done right now. If you are listening to me, listen totally. If you don’t want to listen to me, don’t come at all. Nobody is forcing you to come – then be somewhere else. Sit in a movie house or in a hotel, but be total there. Sitting in a movie house, don’t think about me; sitting here, don’t think about the movie house. Wherever you are, be totally in tune there, and then you start growing fast and your life starts becoming richer. Each moment of totality brings new treasures.
But I will tell you one thing again: you will never become perfect, you will always remain open to more growth. That is the meaning when we say that God is eternal. Let me say it to you – even God is not perfect. A perfect God is a dead God. God is also growing. God is exploding every moment into new creativity, new songs, new joy. God is evolving.
Because of the Christian concept of perfection, there was great conflict between the idea of evolution and the Christian Church. Christians thought that when God created the world, a perfect God was bound to create a perfect world, so how could there be evolution? That was the basic problem between the church and the Darwinians: “How can God create an imperfect world, and then it starts evolving? No. God has created it perfect. It is the same world, now there is no need to grow, it cannot grow. How can it be better? It is the most perfect world as it is.”
Darwin brought in this concept of evolution. Christians were very angry with him; he was destroying the very roots of their perfect God and the perfect world. But by and by they had to accept defeat because the idea of evolution is a true idea.
Darwin never dared to say that God is also evolving, but I would like to say to you that it is not only that the world is evolving, even God is evolving. It is not only that the creation is evolving, the creator is also evolving. In fact, everything goes on evolving and there is no end to it. The journey is eternal. There will never come a moment when things will stop and somebody will declare, “Now everything has become perfect.” And it is good that perfection is not possible. Feel blessed that perfection is not possible.

The third question:
Osho,
I can't find the synthesis between surrendering and taking responsibility for oneself or growing mature and independent.
First, you are not, not yet, so you cannot take any responsibility for yourself. First you have to be, to take responsibility for yourself. You are carrying only a false idea of the ego; that ego is not you. And the true you has nothing to do with the ego.
The idea of surrendering creates a problem in the mind only because you can’t make a distinction between the real self and the unreal self. When you surrender, you surrender only the unreal; the real cannot be surrendered. You surrender only the ego, you don’t surrender the self. And by surrendering the ego you become yourself for the first time. It is not paradoxical, it is not contradictory, because you never were the ego. That was just an illusion in the mind.
Who are you? Do you know exactly who you are? If you try to ponder over it you will find that you don’t know, and all that you know means nothing – that you belong to a certain family, that this is your name, that this is your caste, that this is your religion. That makes no sense at all. It does not say anything about you. You can change your church, and one day you can come across some papers that prove that your father was not your father, that somebody else was your father – but still you will remain you. One day you can come to know that the woman who was pretending to be your mother was not your real mother, you were adopted by her when you were a child. But that will not make any change in you; you remain the same. So who are you? Your name can be changed very easily and you will not change.
So there is something inside you that you are not yet aware of. By surrendering, you surrender only this so-called ego, this false idea of oneself. And when you surrender it, the possibility to be your real self opens. So there is no contradiction really, it is only apparent.
You ask, “I can’t find the synthesis between surrendering and taking responsibility for oneself…” There is no need for any synthesis because there is no contradiction. They are not opposite, they are one phenomenon. You surrender the false and you become the real. By surrendering the false you become the real. And only then can you take responsibility for yourself, only then can you grow mature.
But one thing: you ask, “I can’t find the synthesis between surrendering and taking responsibility for oneself or growing mature and independent.” Maturity knows nothing of independence. Immaturity knows two things: dependence and independence. Both are immature states of mind. Maturity knows interdependence. In maturity you disappear so utterly that you become part of the whole. A mature person is neither dependent nor independent. A mature person has no claim to any separation from existence, he is one with existence.
Please don’t try to create any synthesis. Just look into the fact that you are not yet.

A man came to Gurdjieff and said, “I would like to serve humanity.”
Gurdjieff looked at him and laughed. He said, “But where are you? I don’t see you anywhere. I am sorry to say it to you, but you don’t exist! Who is going to serve humanity?”

A similar case is reported in Buddhist scriptures.

A man came to Buddha and said, “I have so much money. I have so much power.” He was one of the richest men of those days. He said, “Just tell me how to serve people, how to serve humanity.”
And it is said Buddha became very silent. He closed his eyes. The man was disturbed, confused. He became restless. He asked, “Why have you closed your eyes, and why do you look so sad?”
Buddha opened his eyes and he said, “I feel great compassion for you. You want to serve humanity, and you are not. First be!”

That is a basic requirement: First be! By surrendering, for the first time you attain that being-hood. You surrender all that you are not, you surrender only the false, you surrender only the persona, you surrender only the mask, you surrender that which you think you have but you don’t have. And by surrendering that which you think you have and you don’t have, you attain that which you already have and you have always had. The false has to disappear for the real to be revealed. This is growth.
But growth never makes you independent. The very idea of independence is still a hangover from those days of dependence. You are still thinking in terms of dependence or independence. A mature person is not separate, he is not an island. He has merged with this infinite continent of existence.

The fourth question:
Osho,
Where can one always find happiness?
See the dictionary under the letter H – only there will you always find happiness. In life things are very mixed up. Day and night are together, so are happiness and unhappiness. Life and death are together, so is everything. Life is rich because of polar opposites. The very idea that one would like to be happy forever is stupid. The very idea will only create unhappiness and nothing else. You will become more and more miserable because more and more you will be missing your so-called eternal happiness. Your greed is too much.
Then who is the happy person? The happy person is not one who is always happy. The happy person is one who is happy even when there is unhappiness. Try to understand it. The happy person is one who understands life and accepts its polarities. He knows success is possible only because failure is also possible. So when failure comes he accepts it.

I remember an incident of my childhood. A great wrestler had come to my town. My town was very interested in wrestling, so the whole town had gathered. I have seen many people and many wrestlers in my life, but he was really rare. He had something of Zen in him.
For ten days the wrestling continued, and every day he defeated a famous wrestler. Finally he was declared to be the winner. The day he was declared to be the winner he went around and touched the feet of all the ten people whom he had defeated.
Everybody was puzzled about why he did it. I was a small child, I went to him and I asked him, “Why did you do that? This is strange.”
He said, “It is only because of them that I am victorious. It is only because of them. If they had not been defeated, if they had not allowed themselves to be defeated, I would not be victorious. So I owe it to them. Without them, how could I be victorious? My victory depends on their defeat, my victory is not independent of them. So really I feel greatly thankful to them. There was only one possibility: either I was to be defeated or they were to be defeated. And they are good people, they accepted defeat.”

This is a very Sufi or Zen idea. Things are interdependent: failure–success, happiness–unhappiness, summer–winter, youth–old age, beauty–ugliness: all are interdependent, they exist together. And the man who starts seeking one pole against the other pole is getting into unnecessary trouble. It is not possible. He is desiring the impossible and he will get very frustrated.
Then what should the attitude be? When happiness comes, enjoy happiness; when unhappiness comes, enjoy unhappiness. When there is happiness, dance with it; when there is unhappiness, cry with it. That’s what I mean when I say enjoy. Unhappiness is a must. If you can accept unhappiness as smoothly as you welcome happiness, you will transcend both. In that very acceptance is transcendence. Then unhappiness and happiness will not make much difference to you, you will remain the same. When there is sadness you will have a taste of it; and when there is joy you will have a taste of it. And sometimes bitter things also taste beautiful.
Sadness also has something of depth in it which happiness can never have. Happiness has something shallow. Laughter always looks shallow, tears always look deep. If you want to be always happy, you will become a shallow person, a superficial person. Sometimes it is good to fall into the dark dismal depths of sadness. Both are good. And one should be total in both.
Whatever happens, go totally into it. When crying, become the crying, and when dancing, become the dance. Then the ultimate happens to you. By and by you forget the distinction between what happiness is and what unhappiness is. You enjoy both! So by and by the distinction disappears. And when the distinction has disappeared, then arises something which is eternally there, which remains always there. That is witnessing, that is sakshin. And Sufis say that if you can become a witness of all that happens to you, you have arrived home.

The fifth question:
Osho,
Why are there so many religions in the world?
Because there are so many types of people, because there are so many different kinds of people.
Religion is one, but the languages of religion are different. The Jew understands one language, the Christian understands another language. The difference is of language. The Hindu speaks still another language – but all differences are linguistic. Just as English can be translated into French and French can be translated into Italian and there is no conflict, so Christianity can be translated into Hinduism, Hinduism can be translated into Judaism – there is no problem. One just needs clarity to see.
A religious person will see that there is only one religion in the world, although the manifestations are many. And there is nothing wrong; it is good. If these religions don’t fight with each other and don’t nag each other, it is perfectly good, it is enriching. It makes the world more livable, more lovable. Just think of a town where there are only temples and no mosque and no church and no synagogue. The town is a little less rich. When there are all kinds of temples and all kinds of shrines and all kinds of prayers going on, it is beautiful. God can be worshipped in many ways. And you have to choose your way.
The problem is not why there are so many religions; the problem is their conflict, their constant antagonism to each other, their constant enmity. That is the problem. If this enmity disappears, I don’t see any problem. In fact, in a better world there will be even more religions than there are now, because basically each person is so individual and so unique that he will have his own religion, he will have his own version.
In fact, that’s how the reality is: two Christians are not alike. Even while praying in the same church and reading the same Bible, two Christians are not alike. Their approaches will remain a little different. Their approaches will keep something of their individuality, something of their color. Something of each person’s nuance will be there.
Conflict should disappear; there should arise a friendship. They are all working for God, why should they be in conflict? The conflict comes because of the politics in it. The Christian priest wants the whole world to be Christian. In just the same way, the communist wants the whole world to be communist. Why bother about the whole world? If there are a few beautiful Christians, that is more than enough. They should be Christians, that is the thing. They should live in Christ, that is the thing. Now that you have a big crowd behind you, what does that crowd matter, how does it matter? But the crowd creates power in the world of politics.
If you have many Catholics, Catholicism is more powerful. Then the Vatican pope becomes more powerful. If you have more Hindus, then the Shankaracharya of Puri becomes more powerful. It is really power politics.
People are different and they all need different approaches toward God. One should remember only one thing: that one is moving toward God. How he is moving, in what garb, with what language he prays, is irrelevant. But the conflict is there, the politics is there, and the politics is a shadow of egos.
So many religions are not the problem, many egos are the problem.
I have heard…

A Baptist, a Presbyterian, a Methodist, and a Roman Catholic met by agreement to dine on fish. As soon as grace was said, the Catholic rose, armed with knife and fork, and taking about one-third of the fish, including the head, moved it to his plate saying, “The pope is the head of the church.”
Immediately the Methodist minister stood up and helped himself to about one-third, including the tail, saying, “The end crowns the work.”
The Presbyterian, taking the remainder of the fish to his plate, exclaimed, “Truth lies between the two extremes.”
The Baptist had nothing before him but an empty plate and the prospect of a slim dinner. So seizing a bowl of melted butter, he dashed it over them exclaiming, “I baptize you all!”

This is what goes on. These are egos in conflict – not religions. How can religions be in conflict? These are egos, subtle egos. Beware of these egos; these egos are working in you too.
If you are a lover of truth, then all manifestations of truth will be welcome to you. You would not like to convert a Hindu to Christianity or a Christian to Hinduism. Your whole prayer will be that the Christian should really become a Christian and the Hindu should become a real Hindu. And a real Hindu and a real Christian are exactly the same thing, precisely the same thing.
Remember, if the world becomes almost of one religion there will be such monotony, it will be so boring. It will not be good. Just think, if the whole world were to become of one religion, were to come under one church and one fold, it would be sheer boredom, intolerable. There is so much joy because of the variety. Variety is good in everything. There are so many trees. Just think – one kind of tree all over the earth. Who would look at those trees? Even if it is rosebushes all over the earth – who would look at the rosebushes? The variety is a kind of celebration. Thousands of colors and thousands of kinds of animals and trees and birds; everything is rich with difference, with distinction.
And this should be the case in every dimension of life.

Rabbi Hirsch was sitting in the confessional box with Father Dolan to learn the principles of the Catholic religion. Two women confessed to having made love with their boyfriends, and when questioned further, admitted that it was not once but three times. As penance they were told to say three prayers and put ten dollars in the poor box.
Just then the phone rang, and Father Dolan was called away to give the last sacraments to a dying man. “Stay here and confess the rest of these people,” said the priest to the rabbi. “It is Saturday night, and they won’t otherwise be able to take communion tomorrow. After all, it is all one God, just be sure to get the ten dollars.”
He left and Rabbi Hirsch sat nervously in the box. The first girl to enter confessed to having relations with her lover. “Three times?” asked the rabbi.
“Just once, Father.”
“You are sure it was not three times?”
“No, Father, just once.”
“I will tell you what. Go back and do it twice more. We have a special this week. Three for ten dollars.”

But this variety is good! Or listen to this…

A priest and rabbi happened to find themselves sharing a first-class carriage on a long rail journey. They argued without rancor about the truths of religion until the priest, feeling he was getting the worst of it, said rather sharply, “Look here, Rabbi, on your oath as a man of religion, can you swear you never enjoyed the taste of pork?”
The rabbi colored up, wrestled with his conscience a moment, and said, “Very well, Father, I will admit it. I have eaten pork.”
“And it was very nice, wasn’t it?” exclaimed the triumphant man of Rome.
The rabbi retired behind his Jewish Times in a long and thoughtful silence. Suddenly, re-emerging he said, “I say, Father…”
“Yes, brother, what is it?”
“Can you swear as a Christian priest that you have never enjoyed sex with a girl out of the flock?”
The priest tried to beg off, but the rabbi insisted. “The truth, come on, the truth!”
“Well, Rabbi, I confess it, I have.”
“Nicer than pork, isn’t it?”

It is good – different kinds of people, different varieties of religion, different standpoints, different approaches. All is good. Just there should be no conflict. There need not be. Egos should disappear, not religions. If egos disappear, then there can be as many religions as you like and it will be very fulfilling because everybody can find his own way, choose his own way.
My own idea about religion is that nobody should be given a religion by birth. Birth should not be involved in it. A child should be given a chance to see all kinds of religions possible. He should be allowed to go to the synagogue, to the church, to the temple, to the gurdwara. He should be helped in every way; he should be introduced to all kinds of religious varieties going around so he can choose on his own. The parents should help him to become alert about all the varieties of religion – they should not try to impose any religion on him. Then if he finds that he would like to become a Sikh, perfectly good. With all blessings he should become a Sikh; he should start going to the gurdwara. If he thinks he would like to become a Buddhist, that’s perfectly good.
In a better world with more understanding, there will be many religions in every family – the father is a Buddhist, the mother is a Christian, the son is a Hindu, the daughter has become a Mohammedan, and so on, so forth. Each family should have all kinds of varieties, and it will be a richer life. And the family will have more understanding, more religiousness, because all the people searching in different ways will bring new understandings and pour them into the pool of the family. There is no need to create politics; there is no need to be so afraid of each other. One should be more available.
And if you are not feeling good being a Hindu, if you don’t feel that it fits with you, it is perfectly right to become a Christian or to become a Mohammedan. Or if you are not feeling good being a Mohammedan, it is perfectly good, you can choose. It is not a betrayal! In fact, if you don’t like being a Mohammedan and you remain a Mohammedan, you are betraying God because your search will be betrayed. If you hate the whole idea of Mohammedanism and you remain a Mohammedan because you have been brought up as a Mohammedan, because accidentally you were born in a Mohammedan family, then you will be a religion-less person. Your Mohammedanism will not make you joyous and you cannot change your Mohammedanism. And maybe the Hindu temple was the right place for you – where you could have danced, where you could have come closer to God.
Religion should be by choice, not by birth, and there should be as many religions as there are types of people.

The sixth question:
Osho,
You are quoted as being here to proclaim a new tradition, not to perpetuate the old. Why is this, and how do you see the future?
First: the creation of a new tradition is the only way to perpetuate the old, the only way. The old has to become new again and again. Only then can it be perpetuated. It is like Buddha attaining enlightenment sitting under a bodhi tree near Bodhgaya. That tree has existed, not exactly the same tree, but again and again branches of the tree were planted – three times it has happened. The old tree died and when the tree was dying a branch was planted. Then that tree also died, but before it died another branch was planted. It comes in the same continuum. It is not the same tree in a sense, just as your son is not you in a sense, but it is the same tree in another sense – just as your son is another you in a sense, your continuity.
Each time the world consciousness takes a new turn, a new religion has to be born – and this new religion will in a sense be absolutely new, and in a sense absolutely old. It will contain all that is true in all the old traditions, but it will be a new birth, a new body. The wine will be old, but the bottle will be new.
Truth cannot be new or old, it is the same truth always. It has no difference in time. The truth that Buddha attained is the truth that I have attained. The truth I have attained is the truth you will attain. It is not that truths are many – truth is one. But Buddha’s language is no longer relevant; my language is relevant. Buddha was talking two thousand five hundred years ago to a different kind of people, to a different kind of society, to a different kind of mind. Naturally, he had to speak a language that those people were able to understand. I speak to a different kind of world, to a different kind of time, to a different kind of mind. I have to speak a different language. Truth is the same, the wine is the same, just the bottle is different.
You ask me, “Osho, you are quoted as being here to proclaim a new tradition, not to perpetuate the old.” To proclaim a new tradition is the only way to perpetuate the old. If you go on insisting on the old, the old dies. If you cling to the old, you cling to a corpse. If you cling to the old, you cling to death, you cling to the past.
Each time, each age, has to discover truth on its own, has to find its own way of expressing it, its own way of dancing it, its own way of singing it, its own gospel, its own scripture, its own master. Each age has to find truth again and again. It is the same truth, but it has to be found again and again.
It is not like science. In science you discover one thing and it is discovered forever. Then there is no need to rediscover it. Religious truth is utterly different; it has to be rediscovered again and again, only then does it remain alive.
I am proclaiming a new religion. But how can religion be new? It is the ancientmost truth. But this is the only way to give it a new body and new clothes and a new language and new concepts, and a new stir and a new thrill – to make it alive for you. I am bringing the same religion for you that was brought by others for others. It is new in a sense; it is the ancientmost in another sense.
So those who understand me, they will find… If they have loved Jesus, they will find Jesus in me; if they have loved Buddha, they will find Buddha in me; if they have loved Mohammed, they will find Mohammed in me. That’s why so many people have gathered around me. It is a rare phenomenon. Hindus are here, Jainas are here, Buddhists are here, Muslims are here, Christians are here, Jews are here. You can find varieties of all kinds of people around here. It is rare; it has never happened this way before.
It could not happen this way before because it is only in this twentieth century that the consciousness has become so alert about stupid things. It has become so alert about superstitions that it is ready to drop them. If I had spoken the language that I speak in a Mohammedan country one thousand years ago, I would have been killed the first day, the very first day. It was not possible, but now it is possible. You can ask Krishna Mohammed, you can ask Radha Mohammed… I have Mohammedan sannyasins here. This is a rare phenomenon. They love me; they don’t find any conflict between me and Mohammed. In fact, they find Mohammed in me. Through me they become better Mohammedans.
Jews are here, a great number of Jews are here. Jews are ordinarily very orthodox people. They have persisted in their own idea that they are the chosen people of God, that the real religion belongs to them, that God has spoken only to them. Jews could not accept their own son, Jesus, but fifty percent of you here are Jews. You will be surprised – fifty percent! And it is not an exaggeration, it may be more. This is rare. You could not accept Jesus, your own son, but you can accept me. What has happened?
This twentieth century brings a new consciousness into the world, it is a quantum leap. Now you can see, now you are no longer bothered by language and words. You can look deep into my eyes and you can see the same truth as is revealed in Moses or as is revealed in Baal Shem.
I am proclaiming a new religion – the essential religion. In Islam it is known as Sufism, in Buddhism it is known as Zen, in Judaism it is known as Hasidism – the essential core. But I speak your language; I speak the way you understand, the way you can understand. I speak a very religion-less language. I speak as if I am not religious at all. That’s what is needed in this world. This twentieth century needs a religion completely free from all kinds of superstitions, utterly nude, naked.
This century is trained in the ways of science, is trained very logically. Never before was any other human society so logically trained. I am talking about something that is basically illogical, but I have to talk in a logical way. If you go to a Sufi, he talks about the illogical in an illogical way. I talk about the illogical in a logical way. If you go to a Zen master, he simply talks in an illogical way. You will not be able to make a bridge between you and him. With me, the bridge is very easy. I go with you to take you with me further.
First, I go with you; I make you perfectly happy that I am coming with you. Sooner or later you forget when things change and you start coming with me. I am ready to come into your valley – the darkest valley, wherever you are – I am ready to come into your unconscious cave, and in the way you want. I am ready to come there. Once I have entered there I can bring you out. That is the only meaning when I say, “I proclaim a new religion.”
And you ask me, “…how do you see the future?” The future is great because the present is great. I don’t think about the future, the present is more than enough. But if the present is so beautiful, then the future is going to be great – it will be born out of this present. That future will contain this present.
We need not worry about the future, we need not be prophetic about the future, we need not say a single thing about the future. We should be joyous and happy in this moment, and the next moment will be coming out of this moment. It will be suffused with the celebration of this moment, and naturally it will lead you into a higher celebration. The future is going to come out of this present.
There are two kinds of people: one who goes on thinking about the future, not bothering about the present at all. That future is not going to come, that future is just a fool’s imagination. I don’t think about the future. I am a totally different kind of person. I don’t think about the future at all, it is irrelevant. My whole effort is how to beautify this present moment, how to make people more celebrating, how to make people more joyous, how to give them a little glimpse of blissfulness, how to bring laughter to their life. Then the future takes care of itself. You need not think of the morrow, it comes. It comes out of this moment. Let this moment be of great celebration.

The last question:
Osho,
When two women or two men are making love to each other does it do any harm to their energies?
Love is always preferable to lovelessness – that is the first thing to be remembered. Love in any kind and any form is more preferable than lovelessness. That is a basic assumption with me. But there are three planes of love. They have to be understood. The first is auto, the second is homo, the third is hetero.
One can be very narcissistic; narcissism is masturbatory. It has many dimensions to it. That is the first kind of love, the most primitive. Every child passes through that stage of being narcissistic – he loves only himself, he is his own world. It is good as far as it goes. One has to love oneself; that should be the foundation. If you don’t love yourself you cannot love anybody else. If you can’t even love yourself, how can you love anybody else?
So the foundation is autoerotic. Each child has to love himself, and parents down the centuries have been preventing it. That’s wrong. Children should be allowed to have fun; nothing is wrong in it. In fact, they are learning the first basic lesson of love – and they can love only themselves. Their consciousness is not so developed that they can bridge with anybody else. They have a small circle of energy; it moves within themselves.
So the first is auto; that is natural. It has been disturbed, it has been disturbed so much that the disturbance persists for the whole of life. Then other kinds and other planes of love are never as perfect as they could have been. It is only in this century that psychological investigations have proved that autoerotic love is perfectly natural, normal, and each normal child will be interested in it and he should not be prevented. Each child has to play with his body so that he starts loving his body, so that he becomes sensuous about his body, so that he becomes more and more sensitive about his body, so that he has sheer joy in being in the body. That joy is missing.
If you have never loved your own body, then when somebody else loves your body you will shrink because you don’t know how to open. And if you have never loved your body and you have been taught to hate it, despise it, condemn it, when somebody else starts loving your body you will feel, “How foolish. How is it possible? How can anybody love my body?” And you will not be able to love somebody else’s body either because bodies are bodies – yours or others, does not make any difference. Body is body.
First the body has to be loved, in deep reverence. In a more enlightened age, children will be taught how to love their body with respect, reverence, because the body is the temple of God. And from there their love will start flowering and will take a right direction.
The second kind of love is homo. That too is normal, natural. First the child loves himself and then, naturally, he loves somebody who is like himself – that is a natural growth. A boy cannot suddenly love a girl, that is going too far. The girl is so different, another kind of animal. The girl cannot love the boy immediately, a bridge is needed. To move from oneself to the opposite polarity, one has to go through somebody like oneself. So from the masturbatory stage, love moves to the homosexual stage. The boy will love a boy, the girl will love a girl. This is perfectly natural; there is nothing of pathology in it.
Pathology comes in only when somebody is stuck. If somebody is stuck at the first stage and is not able to love anybody, then there is some pathology. Then somebody can be stuck at the second stage – the second stage is better than the first, but lower than the third. One should take the jump and the man should be able to love the woman, and the woman should be able to love the man. That is the hetero stage – the polar opposite. This is the natural course.
Then there is the fourth kind – the transcendence. When you have passed all these three stages naturally, totally, a moment comes when you transcend sexuality. You are no longer interested in sex – sex as such – your body, somebody else’s body. Men’s or women’s bodies don’t interest you. Not that you have any condemnation about the body; in fact, bodies disappear – there are only souls. The body is just the outermost core of it. It is a great shift in your consciousness. That is the fourth stage, the stage of the siddha. In India we have called the fourth stage brahmacharya – the state of being divine.
But that comes not by denying the third, not by denying the second, not by denying the first. It comes only if you go on fulfilling each plane in its own right.
Now, there are a few things to be understood. The hetero relationship is the most difficult relationship, the most inconvenient and conflicting, because two opposite polarities are there – man and woman. They exist differently; they are attracted to each other because they are so different, so mysterious to each other. Man has never been able to understand how the mind of the woman functions, and so is the case from the woman’s side too. They are such different dimensions, hence the attraction to explore each other. But the difficulty is also there. Men and women love each other and hate each other; are together and are continuously nagging, fighting, struggling. There is a constant effort to dominate the other.
So the hetero relationship is the most inconvenient, although the most fulfilling too. So there is a danger, but there is a thrill. The danger is that there will be conflict, continuous fight. But only through that fight is one fulfilled, and only through that fight does one transcend sex.
The second stage – homo – is far better as far as convenience is concerned. Two men or two women are perfectly at ease with each other. They belong to the same mind, the same quality of energy; they are similar. The homosexual relationship is less troublesome. That’s why homosexuals look gay and heterosexuals look very sad. They are happy people because they are not in a constant fight and struggle and nagging. They understand each other. Lesbians are also happier women because there is no problem, they function on the same wavelength, so things fit together, there is a rhythm, a kind of harmony. But the fulfillment is less.
Always remember: for the higher you have to pay higher. If you want deep fulfillment you have to take the trouble and you have to stake your life. It is risky.
Because of too much risk, in this century particularly, many people in the world have turned homosexual. People have become alert about heterosexual relationships being ugly. Continuous fight – who bothers? The whole life is so troubled. One wants to be happy somewhere at least. And even in love there is the same trouble and the same conflict and the same ego struggle. People are turning toward homosexuality. That is relapsing. It is not good.
The first – the auto-sexual relationship, the relationship with yourself, masturbatory sex – is the most convenient, but there is no fulfillment. With the first there is no inconvenience, but no fulfillment – at the most a sexual release. With the second there is a little trouble and a little fulfillment. With the third there is great possibility of both trouble and fulfillment. They grow in the same proportion.
And one should be alert to move from the first to the second, and from the second to the third. Only then can you move to the fourth, brahmacharya, celibacy.
Now, all over the world religious people have tried celibacy, but they have not tried it in a scientific way. Somebody simply jumps into celibacy from his childhood. Then your so-called monks remain masturbatory. It is a suspicion of the psychoanalysts – and I think they are right – that the Buddhist monks, the Catholic monks, and all kinds of monks and nuns become masturbatory. Or, the second possibility is that they will turn to homosexuality. Because monks and nuns are not allowed to mix there is every possibility that they will both turn homosexual. That’s what happens in schools, colleges, hostels and in the army. Wherever there is only one sex available, people turn to homosexuality. Army people are homosexual.
If you want to avoid homosexuality in the world, the army should not be monosexual – there should be women and men together. And the hostels should be for both together, not separate. Then homosexuality will disappear.
Homosexuality has a function to fulfill in the growing child. Somewhere from the first year to the seventh the child remains masturbatory. From the seventh year to the fourteenth the child turns homosexual. From the fourteenth onward he should, if things go naturally, in a natural way, turn heterosexual. And by the age of forty-two he will start being a celibate. And that celibacy will be a natural, spontaneous phenomenon, not a repression.
You ask, “When two women or two men are making love to each other, does it do any harm to their energies?” It does not do any harm but it does not do any benefit either. It is not harmful and it is not beneficial. Masturbation is harmful – beyond a certain stage it is harmful, it is destructive. A masturbatory person loses all contact with the world, he becomes unrelated, he becomes very egoistic because he feels he is enough for himself. There is no need to depend on anybody, not even for love. It is harmful. Homosexuality is neither harmful nor beneficial. Heterosexuality is very beneficial.
I would like to tell you one anecdote:

“There are those in this congregation,” shouted the revivalist, “who have committed the unutterable sin of he-ing and she-ing. Stand up and repent!” Three quarters of the congregation stood up.
“And those who have committed the double sin of sins: he-ing and he-ing. Stand up!” The rest of the men got up.
“And I positively know that there are those who have committed that triplest of triple sins: she-ing and she-ing!” The remaining women all rose, sobbing hysterically. No one was left sitting but one old man.
“Elder,” he muttered, “how do you stand on me-ing and me-ing?”

These are the four possibilities, in fact, three possibilities of your sexual energy. Either auto – but auto becomes closed, you become an island. Or homo – you make a bridge, but you make a bridge man with man, woman with woman. It is not much of a bridge because both are the same. Not much difference is there. Or hetero – the real polarity, and the real bridge. And only when you have bridged your sexual energies with the polarity does a new kind of integration arise in you, and that integration can become brahmacharya, can become celibacy.
Don’t think these are sins. These are natural growth points. The only thing to be remembered is: don’t get stuck anywhere. The goal is brahmacharya, one has to go beyond sex.
It is not that there is something wrong in having sex, but that which you will only have glimpses of through sex can be attained totally when you go beyond. In a sexual love moment, for a single second, time disappears, space disappears. For a single moment the ego disappears. For a single moment you are lost into the cosmic. That’s why there is so much joy, so much ecstasy. That’s what orgasm is – the individual is lost into the whole.
But this happens only for a single moment, and not even always. So sex only opens a window and closes it again. You have to go beyond sex. Going beyond sex means going beyond the house, the confinement: going under the sun, going into the open sky. Then that ecstasy is yours, and it is constantly yours. A real saint, one whom I call a saint, is continuously in orgasm – that is my definition of a saint. His ecstasy is a natural phenomenon like breathing.
You may not have ever heard a definition like that, but that’s my definition. Jesus or Buddha or Mohammed are continuously in an orgasm. They don’t need anybody, they don’t need to connect with anybody, they don’t need any kind of sexuality. Their energy is constantly orgasmic because they have disappeared into the whole. The part no longer exists, no longer claims to be the whole. The part has become the whole, the wave has become the ocean – and that is their orgasm, that is their ecstasy.
Out of this ecstasy great songs have been born: the Upanishads, the Dhammapada, Jesus’ sayings. They are nothing but ecstatic ejaculations, ecstatic expressions. They have tremendous beauty and poetry.
Remember this. These three stages are normal, there is nothing to be condemned in them. But don’t get stuck anywhere, always go beyond. You have to go beyond, you have to go beyond all kinds of sexuality. Sex is natural, beautiful, but to get stuck in it is to become dormant. Sex gives you glimpses of godliness. It makes you aware of godliness. Then one has to seek godliness in its purity.
Enough for today.