---
title: Take It Easy Vol 1 01
series: Take It Easy Vol 1 01-14
talk_number: 1
url: https://oshoworld.com/take-it-easy-vol-1-01
language: English
duration: 01:37:57
author: ZEN AND ZEN MASTERS
scraped_at: 2026-01-03T09:21:17.907129+00:00
---
A rest on the way back
From the Leaky Road
To the Never-leaking Road;
If it rains, let it rain;
If it blows, let it blow.

My self of long ago,
In nature non-existent;
Nowhere to go when dead,
Nothing at all.

When asked, he answered;
No question, no answer;
Then master Daruma
Must have had
Nothing in his mind.

Our mind –
Without end,
Without beginning,
Though it is born, though it dies –
The essence of emptiness!

All the sins committed
In the Three Worlds
Will fade and disappear
Together with myself.
Religion is irrational – by the irrational and for the irrational. Reason cannot contain it; reason is so small.
Religion is the vast sky of existence; reason is a tiny human phenomenon. Reason has to be lost, has to be dropped. Only by going beyond the mind does one start understanding what is. That’s the radical change. No philosophy can bring that radical change – only religion.
Religion is non-philosophic, anti-philosophic, and Zen is the purest form of religion. Zen is the very essence of religion; hence it is irrational, it is absurd. If you try to understand it logically you will be bewildered. It can only be understood illogically. It has to be approached in deep sympathy and love. You cannot approach Zen through empirical, scientific, objective concepts. They all have to be dropped. It is a heart phenomenon. You have to feel it rather than think it. You have to be it to know it. Being is knowing – and there is no other knowing.
That’s why religion has to choose a different kind of language. Religion has to talk in parables, in poetry, in metaphors, in myth. Those are indirect ways of hinting at the truth – only hinting at the truth, no direct pointing; just whispering, not shouting. It comes to you in a deep rapport.
These small poems of the Zen master, Ikkyu, are of immense importance. They are not great poetry, remember, because that is not the concern. The poetry has been used as a device so that your heart can be stirred. The poetry is not the goal. Ikkyu is not concerned with creating great poetry. He is not really a poet, he is a mystic, but rather than speaking prose, he speaks in poetry – for a certain reason.
The reason is poetry has an indirect way of hinting at things. Poetry is feminine; prose is masculine. Prose, the very structure of it, is logical; poetry is basically illogical. Prose has to be clear-cut; poetry has to be vague – that’s its beauty, its quality. Prose simply says what it says; poetry says many things. Prose is needed in the day-to-day world, in the marketplace. But whenever something of the heart has to be said, prose is always found inadequate, and one has to fall back to poetry.
There are two languages in language. Each language consists of two languages: one is prose, the other is poetry. Prose has become very predominant because it is utilitarian. Poetry has disappeared by and by, because it has no utility. It is needed only when you are in love. It is needed only when you are talking of love, death, prayerfulness, truth, godliness. These are not commodities; they are not sold in the marketplace, they are not purchased either.
Our world, slowly, slowly, has become linear. The other language, the deeper language, has lost its meaning for us, and because of the disappearance of the second language, the language of poetry, man has become very poor, because all richness is of the heart. Mind is very poor, mind is a beggar, mind lives through trivia. The heart is an opening to the profundities of life, to the depths of existence, to the mysteries of cosmos.
Remember this: there are two languages in language, two ways of speaking, two levels of linguistic usage. There is a language of clear truths, concepts and formulas: the language of pure logic, objective information, exact science. But that is not the language of the heart, and that is not the language of love, and that is not the language of religion.
Science and religion are diametrically opposite. They belong to different dimensions of existence. They don’t overlap each other’s grounds, each other’s fields. They simply never meet! They don’t crisscross. And the modern mind has been trained for science; hence religion has become almost out of date, of the past. There seems to be no future for religion.
Sigmund Freud has declared that there is no future for the illusion called religion. But if there is no future for religion, there is no future for man either. Science is going to destroy humanity – because humanity can live only through the poetic, the metaphoric. Life gathers significance only through the heart. Man cannot live by mind alone; man cannot live by calculation, mathematics alone. Mathematics can serve, but cannot be the master. The head can only be the servant. As a servant it is very useful, but when it pretends to become the master it is dangerous, it is fatal.
The language of objective science lives in the world of facts. Things are as they are: you say what you mean, as precisely as you can, and as unequivocally. Speaking, then, is deciphering a puzzle, defining, prescribing limits: this is this, not that. It is water, not steam and not ice. Here is here, not there. One is one, two equals two, dead is dead. This is the world of facts – dull and dead, stale and stagnant.
It is impossible to live just in the world of facts, because then you will never be able to relax. In fact, it is meaningless to live in the world of facts – from where will you get meaning, from where will you get value? Then a rose has no beauty; it is only a botanical fact. Then love has no splendor; it is only a biological fact.
How can one live in facts? Living in facts, life starts becoming meaningless. It is not an accident that modern philosophical minds are talking continuously about meaninglessness. We have created it by deciding to live only in one language: the prose language.
It is a good thing that we have this language, the language of facts, the language of prose. Our world cannot do without it, true. It is needed, but it cannot be the goal of life; it can only serve. But we never use it when we want to pour out our hearts and say what is really in us, hidden and almost impossible to name.
A man is certainly poor if he has not felt the inadequacy of ordinary language. If there is somebody so unfortunate that he has not felt the inadequacy of ordinary language it simply shows he has never felt love, he has never felt any meditative moment, he has not known ecstasy. His heart beats no more; he is just a corpse. He lives and yet does not live. He moves, walks, but all his gestures are empty; they contain nothing.
If a man has not felt the inadequacy of the prose language – the empirical language, the language of facts, mathematics – that simply shows that he has not experienced any mystery of life, he has really not been living. Otherwise, how can you avoid the mysteries? It simply shows that he has never seen the full moon in the night, has never seen the beauty and the splendor of human eyes, has never laughed, has never cried, does not know what tears signify. He is a robot; he is not man, he is not human; he is inhuman. He is just a machine; he works, he earns, and then he dies. He reproduces and then he dies – but in vain. He cannot say why he lived in the first place.
It is true that this kind of language is needed, it is a need, but even if all the needs are fulfilled, the ultimate need remains unfulfilled by it: the need to celebrate, the need to rejoice, the need to have a dialogue with the stars and the ocean and the sand, the need to hold hands, the need to fall in love, the need to dance and sing. Ordinary language cannot fulfill that ultimate need, and that ultimate need is what is specific to humanity. A man is man only insofar as he lives in that ultimate need.
In questions of love and death and of God and man, the first language is not only inadequate but also dangerous. If you use the first kind of language for the ultimate concerns of life, by and by your very language will destroy them. That’s how we have destroyed godliness. That’s how we have destroyed all that is beautiful and significant. Use wrong language, and sooner or later you will be trapped by that wrong language, because your mind lives through language. You know only that which comes into your language; you know only that which you can clearly think about.
If you have dropped the vague world of heart, the vague world of feelings, sensations, emotions, ecstasy, then naturally you are closed to godliness. And then if you say God is dead, it seems to be absolutely true. Not that God is dead – only you are dead to godliness. To be alive to godliness is to move into poetry. Poetry is the rainbow bridge between man and godliness, between man as mind and godliness as mystery. That is the opening, the door, the threshold.
Have you ever seen Khajuraho, Konarak, or other beautiful temples of India? In the old scriptures it is said that on each temple’s threshold there should be a statue, a sculpture of lovers. It is very strange. Those scriptures don’t specifically say why; they simply mention it for the architects, that it is a must. On each temple’s threshold, on the door, there must be at least one couple in maithun – in orgasm, in deep love, their limbs intertwined with each other, in great ecstasy.
Why on the door? Because unless you know love, you cannot know the bridge between man and existence. And the door is a symbol: the door is the threshold between the world of mind and the world of no-mind. It is love that bridges the world of mind to no-mind. It is only through love that we come to know the orgasmic mysteries of life.
It is very significant, although many temples are not built that way. People have been avoiding it; they are too moralistic and stupid. But the ancient prescription is of great significance: only love can be the threshold, because only love will make your poetry alive.
If you use only the first kind of language, you will be destroying something very delicate in you. You will become more and more accustomed to the rocks and less and less aware of the flowers.
There is a second language, deep below the first, like a much older structure wide around the first. It is the language of what cannot really be said. Yes, poetry is the language of what really cannot be said. Still it has to be said. There is an urgency to say it, and poetry is the language of that which cannot be said.
That which can be said can be said through prose. How will you say that which cannot be said if you don’t have poetry? It is the language of what cannot really be said, the language that you speak so as not to have to be completely silent, the language of emotion and ecstasy.
These small poems of Ikkyu may not be very poetic. In fact, R. H. Blyth, writing about these doka of Ikkyu, says: “Ikkyu’s little poems are not of great poetical value, yet they portray for us a man of deep sincerity, too honest perhaps to be a great lyrical poet.” The purpose is not poetry. The purpose is to convey something which cannot be conveyed through ordinary language. Poetry is being used as a vehicle, remember. Don’t think in terms of literature: think in terms of ecstasy.
And sometimes ecstasy can be expressed through small words. Just the other day I was reading William Samuel. He writes:

Pondering the enigma of communication one day out in the back-country of my hills, I witnessed the happy reunion of a father and his five-year-old son who had been lost in the woods for many hours. I knew the boy would be found – and I knew I knew – but despite the positive knowing, I was unable to allay the father’s fears or bring him to understand the truth I saw. Then, even as I wondered – even as I asked about this inability to communicate when it seemed so important to do it – I saw the little boy and the father find each other.
Oh, such a reunion! A barefoot ragamuffin came running out of the woods shouting with all his might, “Daddy! Daddy!” and I saw the father, unashamedly sobbing, sweep the child into his arms. All he could say was, “Hallelujah! Praise God!” again and again. “Hallelujah! Praise God!”

There are moments when something has to be said and nothing can be said. There are moments when tears say much more than words. There are moments when laughter says much more than words. There are moments when gestures say much more than words. There are moments when silence speaks more than words. All the laughter, all the tears, all the gestures and silences are contained in the second language, the language of poetry.
William Samuel also writes:

Once in China, I was given a simple verse to read and then to give my interpretation. I was ready to give an answer immediately but was informed that I had twenty-eight days to think about it. “Why so long?” I asked, with the usual impatience of a Westerner.
“Because nothing has been read once until it has been read twelve times,” was the answer. “Read and re-read.”
I did. Twelve times twelve to make twelve readings – and I heard a melody I could not have heard otherwise. Since then I have known why it is that certain lines in the Bible, or any other book, that have been read countless times will one day, upon just one more reading, suddenly take on a grand new significance.

That is the whole secret of mantras. A mantra is a condensed poem; it is essential poetry. Just by reading it, you can’t understand it. Not that you don’t understand intellectually – it is simple, the meaning is apparent – but the apparent meaning is not the real meaning. The apparent meaning comes from the first reading, and the hidden meaning will have to be waited for. You will have to repeat it in deep love, in great, prayerful moods, and sometime it will suddenly erupt from your own unconscious, it will be revealed to you. A melody will be heard, and that melody is the meaning – not the meaning that you had deciphered from the first reading, on the first reading. And one never knows when it will happen.
Hence, in the East, people have been reciting the Koran, the Bhagavadgita, the Dhammapada. They keep reciting; every day, morning and evening, they keep reciting. They recite as many times as possible. They don’t even keep count; what is the point of keeping count? But with each recitation, something goes deeper into you, the groove is deepened. And one day the melody is heard. When you have heard the melody, you have come to know the real mantra. You have stumbled upon the second hidden layer, the real poetry in it that cannot be understood, that can only be heard; that cannot be understood, that can only be experienced.
These small poems of Ikkyu are like mantras. Don’t try to understand them intellectually. Rather, play with them with deep love, sympathy, rapport. And, slowly, slowly, like a fragrance, like a melody, something will arise in you and you will be able to see what this man wants to convey. He wants to convey that which cannot be conveyed; he wants to say that which cannot be said. And he has been able to convey it.
This man Ikkyu was a strange master. Zen masters are strange masters. A religious person is bound to become strange, because he lives in a totally different way, he lives in a separate reality. He starts existing here as an outsider. He becomes a stranger to this ordinary world because he is here and yet not of it. He lives here, but untouched, uncontaminated, unpolluted by it. He lives here, and lives in such a way that he is untouchable. He does not escape from the world. He lives in the ordinary world in an extraordinary way.
I have heard a few stories about Ikkyu. One is this, which will give you some taste of the man. Before we enter into his poems, it is better to have some taste of the man.

One summer day while working, perhaps weeding, Ikkyu got so tired, and being hot, came up to the temple porch and aired himself in the cool breeze. He felt so fine that he went into the temple and took the buddha from the shrine, and binding him to a pole outside, said, “Now, you too, cool yourself!”

It looks absurd, binding a wooden buddha to a pole, and saying to the buddha, “Now, you too, cool yourself!” But look, something deep is there. For Ikkyu, nothing is dead anymore, not even the wooden buddha. All is alive. And he has started feeling for everything as he feels for himself. Those boundaries of “I” and “you” are no longer relevant. He has come to the one.
And now another, just the polar opposite of this story:

One night, a very cold winter night, he was staying in a temple. And then suddenly, in the middle of the night, the priest of the temple heard noise and saw light, so he came running: “What is happening?”
He saw Ikkyu sitting there; he was burning a wooden buddha. The priest was aghast. He said, “Are you mad or something? What have you done? This is sacrilege! There can be no other sin greater than this. You have burnt my buddha!”
Ikkyu took a small stick and started poking in the ashes.
The priest said, “Now what are you doing, and what are you trying to do?”
Ikkyu said, “I am trying to find the bones of the buddha.”
The priest said, “You must be absolutely mad, how can you find bones in a wooden buddha?”
And Ikkyu laughed and he said, “The night is long and very cold, and you have so many wooden buddhas. Why don’t you bring a few more and you can also warm yourself up.”

Now this man is a strange man. One time he binds the wooden buddha on a hot summer day to a pole and says, “Now, you too, cool yourself.” Another time he burns a wooden buddha because the night is too cold. And he says to the priest, “Look at me: the buddha inside is shivering.” In fact, both the stories are the same, from two different angles the same.
A man of realization, a man who has understood, makes no differences. Distinctions are lost, divisions disappear, all boundaries become meaningless. A man of realization starts living in the unbounded, in the infinite.
Now, these doka…
A rest on the way back
From the Leaky Road
To the Never-leaking Road;
If it rains, let it rain;
If it blows, let it blow.
Each word has to be penetrated with sympathy. “The Leaky Road” means this world, the world of desires. Through desires we are leaking our energy. Through desires we are wasting our being; through desires we are disappearing down the drain.
This world is the Leaky Road. Man simply wastes himself here. Nothing is gained out of it, never; in fact you come as emperors and you die as beggars. This is a Leaky Road! Each child is born as an emperor and soon the kingdom is lost, the purity, the innocence is lost. Each child is Adam in the Garden of Eden, and each child has to be expelled from the Garden.
He starts moving into the world of desires. Ten thousand desires are there. They cannot be finished, they cannot be fulfilled; they bring only frustration and more frustration. Each desire is a new trap of the frustration. You hope again and you are trapped, and each desire only brings a great frustration. But by the time it comes, you start desiring again. You move from one desire to another desire. You can go on moving for millions of lives, in fact that’s how we have been moving.
Ikkyu calls it the Leaky Road. And the Never-leaking Road is the world before we and it were born or the world when we and it are no more.
In Zen, this is one of the most fundamental meditations: to search for the face that you had before you were born, or, to search for the face that you will have when you are dead. Just to think about it brings great realizations. Just meditate upon it constantly and one starts feeling something faceless. That is your original face: facelessness. You had no face before you were born; you had no body, you had no mind, you had no name, no form – no namarupa – neither name nor form. You were, but you were not identified with anything.
To realize it again, amidst all this noise of the Leaky Road, amidst all these people who are just running after desires, chasing one desire and then another and then another; to recognize and to realize the original face when you were neither a body nor a mind, but only a pure consciousness, a witness, is the goal of all meditation. That is called the Never-leaking Road. If you can remain in that state, your life energies will not leak.
And the way back is the return to that source, to that original face. All religions are the way back. Religion means a one-hundred-and-eighty-degree turn, an about-turn, an absolute about-turn. We are rushing away from the original source, we are rushing from ourselves. We have to return; we have to come to our original source because only there is peace and contentment and bliss. Only there is fulfillment.
The source is the goal – they are never separate. Only the source can be the goal. When one has come back to one’s original source, one has achieved all that life can give, all that life is meant to give.
Life is losing the paradise; religion is regaining it. Rushing into the world of desires is Adam falling from grace; returning back is Christ. They are the same person. Adam and Christ are not two separate persons; they are the same person, only their direction has changed. Adam is on the Leaky Road, going away from the source, farther and farther away from the source. Christ is turning back, has taken the turn.
The Christian word conversion means exactly that: turning back. Conversion does not mean a Hindu becoming a Christian, or a Mohammedan becoming a Christian. Conversion means Adam becoming Christ. It has nothing to do with Christianity; it has something to do with Christhood itself. By becoming a Christian you don’t become converted, nothing changes. You were a Hindu and you were rushing into the world of desires, then you become a Christian and you go on rushing into the same world – just the label on you changes. Now you are no longer called a Hindu, you are called a Christian. Or you can be a Christian and can get converted to being a Hindu; that is not conversion either.
Conversion means a one-hundred-and-eighty-degree turn: Adam turning back, the way back.
Buddhists have an even more beautiful word for it. It is called paravritti – that exactly means about-turn and exactly a hundred and eighty degrees. Less than that won’t do. If you miss by even a single degree you will still be rushing into the world.
That is the meaning of my sannyas too: the way back.
And the rest means our short human life, so short that rain or wind, grief or passion, are of little moment or meaning.
Now listen to the doka: A rest on the way back from the Leaky Road To the Never-leaking Road; if it rains, let it rain; if it blows, let it blow.
Our human life is so momentary. There is no point in getting disturbed about it. Somebody has insulted you and you make so much fuss – and it is so momentary! It is not going to stay; all is going to be lost. Or somebody has succeeded and goes mad. Or somebody has accumulated much wealth and cannot walk on the earth, he starts flying.

In the ancient days in Rome there was a tradition, a beautiful tradition. It should be followed in every country. Whenever a Roman conqueror would come back after he had conquered new countries, had been a great soldier, and was coming home with great success and victory, the masses, the crowds, the mob, would shout in joy. He was greeted like a god. The tradition was that a servant used to walk just behind him and continuously remind him: “Don’t be deceived by the people. Don’t be deceived, sir, by the people! Don’t be deceived by the fools, otherwise you will go mad.” A servant, a slave, had to repeat it continuously just at the back of the conqueror so that he would remember; otherwise it is very easy when success comes to go mad.

This should be followed in every country. A person should follow Jimmy Carter, Morarji Desai, just reminding them: “Don’t be deceived by the success. It is momentary; it is just a bubble, a soap bubble. Don’t let it get into your head.”
Success gets into the head, and so does failure. It hurts. And all is momentary. This rest is momentary. Just think of the infinities: before your birth there was infinity – beginningless time preceded you – and after your death endless time is going to succeed you. And between these two infinities, what are you, what is your life? A soap bubble, just a moment’s dream.
Don’t allow it to affect you. If one can keep aware, and is not affected by success and failure, praise and insult, enemies and friends, then one is moving back to the original source. One becomes a witness.
A rest on the way back from the Leaky Road to the Never-leaking Road; if it rains, let it rain; if it blows, let it blow. Don’t get disturbed about it. Ponder over it, contemplate over it. It is a great secret, one of the great secrets of buddhas: just to be alert that all is trivial, momentary, a midsummer dream. It is going, it is already going, you cannot hold on to it. There is no need to cling to it; there is no need to push it. It is going of its own accord, good or bad, whatsoever it is, is going. All is going; the river is flowing. Remain undisturbed, detached, just a witness. This is meditation.
My self of long ago,
In nature non-existent;
Nowhere to go when dead,
Nothing at all.
Again, try to understand each word: My self of long ago… Before birth we were non-existent, and we will be so again after death. No self was there, and no self is going to be there after death.
Buddha insists very much on this vision of no-self, because all our desires hang around the concept of the self: “I am.” If I am, then a thousand and one desires will arise. If I am not, then how can desires arise out of nothingness?
This is one of the greatest contributions of Buddha to the world. As far as the idea of no-self is concerned, he has surpassed all other masters – Krishna and Christ and Zarathustra and Lao Tzu – he has surpassed all.
This is one of the most fundamental meditations. If it can settle in you that “I am not,” then suddenly the world disappears. To know that “I am not” is to know that there is no need to do anything, to be anything, to possess anything, to attain anything. When there is no self, ambition is irrelevant. If there is a self, then ambition is relevant.
That’s why all other religions except Buddhism have fallen in a trap. The trap is: they try not to desire the things of this world, but then they start desiring things of the other world. But it is the same – desire is the same. It does not matter what you desire. It makes no difference at all what the object of your desire is, desire is the same.
You desire money or you desire meditation: desire is the same. Only the object has changed. And the object is not the problem; the problem is the desire itself, desiring itself. Somebody desires long life here, a beautiful body here, success, name, fame; somebody else desires eternal life with God in paradise. What is the difference? The only difference seems to be this: that the first man is not as greedy as the second; the second is greedier.
That’s why your so-called spiritual people are very greedy people. It is not just an accident that India is very greedy – it is so spiritual! That spirituality creates new greed. In fact, the so-called mahatmas go on teaching people: “Don’t desire things of this world because they are momentary; desire things of the other world, because they are eternal.” And this they call renunciation? Is this renunciation? This is getting more desirous. This is asking for eternal gratification.
Worldly people are simple people; they are satisfied with momentary desires. And the otherworldly seem to be absolutely greedy: they are not satisfied with this world; they need another world where eternal pleasure exists, where beauty never fades, where life is always young, where one lives and lives and never becomes old.
This is greed; this is pure greed transplanted into another world. This is greedier than the first. Avoid this so-called spiritual materialism; it is utterly materialistic. It does not change your life; it can’t change it. It simply nourishes your old mind. It poisons you even more.
Buddha says the basic meditation is to see that “I was not and I will not be, so how can I be in the middle of two nothingnesses? If I was not before and I will not be again after death, then how can I be right now?” One cannot exist between two nothingnesses; then this too must be a nothingness – we have not seen it rightly.
My self of long ago… Before birth we were non-existent, no-self, and we shall be so after death again. Therefore we are in this condition at the present moment, without a thing in the world we can call our own, not even our own selves. This goes to the deepest core of the problem.
Don’t dispossess things. Dispossess your self, and then things are automatically dispossessed. If I am not, then how can the house belong to me? If I am not, then how can I possess a woman or a man? If I am not, then how can I possess a child? If I am not, then how is possession possible? There is nobody to possess. See the difference.
Other religions have said: “Renounce possessions!” Buddha says: “Renounce the possessor.” Certainly, it goes infinitely deeper. You can renounce the possessions, but the possessor remains, and with the possessor the blueprint to possess again – the possessor will bring his possessiveness by the back door.
You can see it happening: a man renounces his worldly life, moves to a Himalayan cave, but then he possesses that cave. And if somebody else comes and starts living in the cave, he will throw him out. He will say, “Get out! This is my cave.” And this man has renounced his house, his wife, his children. Now the same possessiveness has entered in a new form. It does not matter what you possess, but if you possess then you remain on the Leaky Road. Dispossessing things does not mean escaping from things. Things are there, they will be everywhere. In the Himalayan cave things will also be there – the mountains, the trees – and you can start possessing them. If you sit under a certain tree, you start possessing it. This is your tree; no other ascetic can come and meditate there; he has to find his own tree. Or you start possessing the temples, the mosques, the churches. Or you start possessing philosophies: Hindu, Christian, Mohammedan. Or you start possessing scriptures: the Gita, the Koran, the Bible. Or you start possessing concepts of God: “This is my concept of God. Your concept is wrong and my concept is right.”
Buddha cuts the root. He says there is nobody to possess. Just see the beauty of it and the tremendous import of it. He simply cuts the roots. He does not cut the branches and the leaves as they will sprout again because the roots remain intact. Cut the root and the whole tree dies. Don’t drop possessions; drop the possessor. And then you can live in the world and there is no problem. Just live in the world and don’t possess because there is nobody to possess.
That’s why I don’t tell my sannyasins to renounce the world. I say renounce the ego and live in the world. The world cannot do you any harm. All the harm that happens, happens through the ego. That’s what Buddha calls “self”; it is his word for ego: atta – the self.
My self of long ago, in nature non-existent… Buddha worked for six years continuously in search of the self. You have heard the famous teaching of all the ages: Know thyself. Buddha worked hard. For six years he tried from every nook and corner, from every angle, from every possible side, to penetrate into this reality of the self. But he could not find it. Know thyself, and the day you know, you will know there is no self.
That day when you know that there is no self, there is utter emptiness inside, absolute emptiness, silence undisturbed, virgin silence. You have known; there has never been anybody, it is just a dream.
In the night you dream and you think you have become an emperor. And in the morning you find yourself in the same old bed, and you are not an emperor. But the mind can imagine; the mind is a great imaginative force. The self is mind’s imagination. It does not exist in reality.
Those who have penetrated deep into their own being have come to know utter silence. Nobody has been found there. And that is the greatest realization: to find nobody there. Then all problems disappear, because the problem creator has disappeared.
My self of long ago, in nature non-existent; nowhere to go when dead, nothing at all.
Nothing means no thing at all.
There is a famous Zen anecdote…

A man came to a Zen master and asked, “Does a dog have buddha-nature?”
Now you cannot ask such a question anywhere else. If you ask a Christian, “Does a dog have christ-nature?” he will be absolutely enraged. You are insulting Christ, the only begotten son of God. This is not only profane, this is sacrilegious. But in Buddhism you can ask; there is no problem about it.
The disciple asked the master, “Has a dog the same nature as Buddha?”
And the master’s answer is very strange and very puzzling, and down the centuries people have been contemplating it; it has become a koan to meditate over.
The master said, “Mu.” Mu means nothing. Now the problem is: what does he mean by saying mu? It can also mean no; it can mean nothing, it can mean no. Is he saying that the dog has not the same nature as Buddha? That is not possible from a Zen master. Then what does he mean by mu? He does not mean no; he means nothing. He is saying: “Buddha is nothing, so is the dog.” He is saying yes by saying no.
He is saying: “Yes, the dog has the same nature as Buddha, but Buddha is nothing! So is a dog. There is no self, either in Buddha or in a dog. There is nobody there inside. Buddha is empty and so is the dog. Only the forms are different, dreams are different. The dog is dreaming it is a dog, that’s all. You are dreaming you are a man, somebody is dreaming he is a tree. But inside there is nobody, just pure silence.”
This silence is samadhi. When you start having a glimpse of this silence, your life starts changing. Then you live for the first time in a poetic way. Then death creates no fear in you. Then nothing can disturb you or distract you.
The master’s reply, mu, really means yes. But he didn’t say yes for a certain reason. The yes would have been misunderstood, the man would have thought that the dog also has the same self as the Buddha; that’s why he didn’t use the word yes. He said no. But he does not mean that the dog has not the same nature. He means both have nothingness inside. The form differs.

For a Buddhist, and particularly a Zen Buddhist, there is nothing profane and nothing sacred.
Listen to this story…

It was a solemn, dignified gathering of deeply concerned people assembled to learn the Truth. They had gathered, they believed, to hear the final secrets of the universe. At long last they were face to face with the Absolute, the Ultimate, finally, they thought, to hear the gems of wisdom for which prince and pauper have struggled since the beginning of time.
Imagine the dignity of it all, the solemnity, the air of expectancy that filled the room as the master entered. An electrified hush descended. The room became a cathedral. Every eye was upon the master and there were those who thought they saw his aura. There were those who saw angels hovering near.
The master sat down and prepared to speak. The audience leaned forward and with bated breath prepared to catch his every word. Finally, after what seemed an interminable time, The Master of Righteousness opened his mouth and taught them saying, “Today, this very moment, I am wearing fuzzy underwear.” And that was all that he taught that day.

Zen has a totally different approach toward life. It does not believe in the sacred, it does not believe in the profane. It does not believe in anything, it is all one. Dog and God, it is all one. Buddha, no Buddha, it is all one. The ignorant, the wise, it is all one. The sinner and saint, it is all one.
When asked, he answered;
No question, no answer;
Then master Daruma
Must have had
Nothing in his mind.
Try to go into each word. Mind in its own purity is just a mirror, an empty mirror. It contains nothing. It is a mirror because it is empty, because only emptiness can mirror. If something is contained already, then your reflection will not be the true reflection. When the mirror is absolutely empty, it is the most perfect mirror.
In meditation the mind becomes more and more mirrorlike. Slowly, slowly all the dust of the thoughts disappears, all the clouds of desire disappear – and then there is nothing left, anatta, no-self, nothingness, mu. Mind in its purity is just a mirror, undisturbed by passion and unclouded by thought. Everything appears as it is.
Daruma – Bodhidharma’s Japanese name – answered when questioned, ate when he was hungry, slept when he was tired. The true life of a sage: nothing in the mind, nirvana.
Listen: When asked, he answered… The enlightened person has no readymade answer. He has no thought ready to throw into your heads. He responds; his utterances are his responses. He is a mirror. The disciple comes in front of the master and he responds; he responds to the needs of the disciple. He has no fixed idea; he is not concerned with dishing something out and giving it to everybody. He simply waits there like a mirror. You come and you see your face.
Hence the contradictions of a master. A teacher is consistent; a master is bound to be contradictory, inconsistent. A mirror has to be inconsistent: one moment it is mirroring a cat; another moment it is mirroring a man; another moment it is mirroring tears, another moment, laughter. How can a mirror be consistent? You cannot tell the mirror: “Be consistent! Yesterday I saw tears in you, today I am seeing laughter. Yesterday I looked in you and you were sad, and today you look very happy. Yesterday I saw you were in deep meditation; today I see you are dancing and singing. This is inconsistent!”
Only a photograph can be consistent, not a mirror. The photograph is a photograph. If there are tears, they will remain there forever. The photograph is dead; it does not respond. If a monkey comes, the photograph will go on showing its tears. If a sage comes it will be the same. But remember, with a master it is different. If you are a monkey, then the master will show your face; then his answer will be in response to your being. He responds; he does not reply, he responds.
When asked, he answered; no question, no answer… That’s why it happened that Kabir and Farid, two great Indian masters, met and sat together for two days continuously and not a single word was exchanged. Two mirrors reflecting each other, what can they reflect? Just put two mirrors in front of each other: one mirror will mirror the other mirror, and so on and so forth, mirror and mirror and mirror, but nothing will be mirrored. There is nothing.
Two silences sat together, Farid and Kabir, looked into each other. There was no question, hence there was no answer. There was nobody, hence there was no response.
When asked, he answered; no question, no answer; then master Daruma must have had nothing in his mind. Yes, that is the mind of a master: he has nothing in his mind. To have something in the mind is to remain unenlightened. To have nothing in the mind is to become enlightened. Even if you have enlightenment in your mind, then you are not yet enlightened. To have nothing in the mind is to be enlightened, remember.
Let me repeat it: If you have the idea that you have become enlightened, then you are not yet enlightened. Even this idea is enough to keep you tethered to the road which leaks; even this idea is enough to keep you tethered to the world of desires.
Just the other day, somebody wrote me a letter. He thinks he has become enlightened, so he wants to come and shake hands with me. Shaking hands is perfectly good, but the very idea that you have become enlightened will keep you unenlightened. Wait. When you are ready, I will shake hands with you. Just wait, have a little patience. Let all ideas disappear, even the idea of enlightenment.
The day you come like a mirror, I will shake my being with your being – why hands? Hands won’t do.
…then master Daruma must have had nothing in his mind. Ordinarily, we are walking bundles of solutions to problems that no longer exist. Everybody is so. You are carrying thousands of solutions for problems which are no longer existent, and you call it knowledge. It is hindering your capacity to know. It is not knowledge.
Drop all the solutions that you are carrying. Drop all the answers that you are carrying. Just remain silent. And whenever a question arises, out of that silence you will hear the answer – and that will be the answer. It will not come from you, it will not come from scriptures, it will not come from anywhere. It will come from nowhere and it will come from nobody; it will come from your innermost nothingness.
The other religions call that nothingness God. Buddha often emphasizes the word nothingness, and significantly so, meaningfully so because once you use the word God, people start getting attached to it. Then they have some idea; they ask what God looks like. You cannot ask what nothingness looks like, can you? Once you have the word God, you start asking: “How to make the image? How to create a temple? How to worship? How to pray? What name to give to him?” And then there are many names and many images, and then the fight ensues.
That’s why Buddha emphasizes the word nothingness so much, because it is really beautiful. It does not allow any games to be played with it. It does not allow itself to be corrupted by you. But if you understand rightly, nothingness means God, God means nothingness.
Our mind –
Without end,
Without beginning,
Though it is born, though it dies –
The essence of emptiness!
Mind has to be understood in two ways. One: Mind with a capital M. That is the universal Mind, the cosmic Mind, the Mind of the whole, the whole itself, the consciousness that pervades existence. It is a conscious existence; it is alive, alive to the very core. Everything is alive. You may know it, you may not know it. It may not be tangible to you, it may not be visible to you, but everything is alive. Only life exists.
And death is a myth. Death is an illusion. So is unconsciousness. Even the rock is not unconscious – it is conscious in its own way. It may not be available to us, it may not be possible for us to know whether it is conscious or not, because there are millions of ways of being conscious; man’s way is not the only way: trees are conscious in their own way, and birds in their own, and animals and the rocks.
Consciousness can be expressed in as many ways as possible. This universe has infinities of every expression.
Mind with a capital M is the cosmic Mind that has to be attained. That’s what Buddha calls “nothing,” that’s what he calls mirror-like emptiness.
Then there is another mind that we go on talking about with a lower case m, the small mind. Then, my mind is different, your mind is different; man’s mind is different from the trees’ minds, and the trees’ minds are different from the rocks’ minds. Then there are differences and each mind has its own limitation; it is tiny.
One has to disappear from the tiny to the infinite. The lower case m has to be dissolved into the capital M.
The lower case m, the small mind, is part of time, and the capital M, the cosmic Mind, is eternity. The lower case m is also part of the capital M. Eternity penetrates into time just as the moon is reflected in the lake – not really there, but reflected.
Our small minds are only reflections of the great Mind. When the full moon rises millions of lakes on the earth will reflect it, and the seas and the rivers and the ponds. Wherever there is some water it will be reflected. But the moon is one and reflections are millions, so are our small minds. The Mind is one – you can call it the Buddha Mind, you can call it the Mind of the whole, the cosmic Mind, or the Mind called God. These are just different names for the same reality.
This small mind has a beginning and an end. That great Mind has no beginning, no end.
Now listen to the words: Our mind – without end, without beginning, though it is born, though it dies – the essence of emptiness!
A very contradictory statement. On one side Ikkyu says: Our mind – without end, without beginning…. He is talking about the Mind with a capital M.
Then he says: Though it is born, though it dies… Now he is talking about the lower case m mind, the small mind. The small mind is born and dies; the great Mind continues. The small mind is only a reflection; reflections are born and die.
As a reflection you are born and you will die. If you cling too much to the reflection, you will suffer. That’s what suffering is, that’s what hell is. Don’t get too attached, clinging to the reflection; this body is a reflection, this mind is a reflection, this life is a reflection. If you watch it silently, you will be able to see all these reflections are passing, and then you become aware of the mirror in which these reflections are passing.
That mirror is eternity. To attain to that mirror is to know what truth is.
All the sins committed
In the Three Worlds
Will fade and disappear
Together with myself.
The Three Worlds are the worlds of the past and the present and the future – the world of time. The sutra is of great revolutionary meaning.
All the sins committed in the Three Worlds will fade and disappear together with myself. The moment you know that you are not, then all that you have done in the past, are doing in the present, or will be doing in the future, has also disappeared. When the doer disappears, the doings have disappeared.
In the East, people have been too much concerned with karmas, actions. They have been very much afraid because whatever bad things they have done in the past, they have to pay for them, they have to suffer for them.
Ikkyu is giving you a great key: Don’t be afraid – because you are not, so you have not done anything. How can you? – because in the first place you are not. He is taking the very ground from underneath your feet. With it, all disappears.
All the sins committed in the Three Worlds will fade and disappear together with myself. So the only thing is to go deep into yourself and to see your nothingness. You need not do good things to weigh against the bad things that you have done. You are not to go and do good deeds because whether you do bad or good you remain in the illusion of a doer.
See the difference. Ordinary religions teach you to be moral, do good, avoid sins. Remember those Ten Commandments consist of the ordinary religion: Don’t do this, do that. The extraordinary religion says: Disappear as a doer; don’t be bothered about doing good or bad. And who knows what is good and what is bad?
In fact, nothing is good and nothing is bad, because existence is one – how can there be two? It is all one. Good turns into bad, bad turns into good; one never knows what is what. Things are changing continuously into each other.
You can watch it. You were doing something good, and something bad turns out. A mother tries to protect her child from all the bad things of the world, and just because she is protecting she is forcing the child to go into them – because she is creating the temptation.
Remember the old story: God said to Adam not to eat from this tree. He created the temptation. He must have been a good father, he destroyed the child. Just by saying, “Don’t eat from the Tree of Knowledge,” he created the temptation and the desire, the irresistible desire, to eat from that tree. Now, he wanted to do good, but what happened? The original sin happened.
All people who go on doing good prove to be very mischievous. Do-gooders are the most mischievous people in the world. The world has suffered a lot from them. Their intention is good, but their understanding is nil, and just good intention is not going to do anything.
Those who understand say it is not a question of good and bad: it is a question of the disappearance of the doer. Or we can say it in this way: to remain as a doer is bad; to disappear as a doer is good. Not to be is virtue; to be is sin.
This is Buddha’s understanding. All our doings are just dreams. When one becomes awakened, one simply starts laughing: all the bad, all the good, have been just dreaming.
Listen to this story…

Once upon a time there lived a working man who detested coffee. His wife did not know this, however. He had never told her. She loved coffee very much and took great delight in packing a thermos of the stuff in his lunch box every morning.
He always carried the box and the thermos to work, but being a frugal man brought them home again in the evening, the thermos of coffee still untouched. Then, to save a penny, and because his wife loved coffee as much as he detested it, he poured the java back into the coffee pot when she wasn’t looking. He was excused from the evening coffee on the grounds that it kept him from sleeping well.
One night the wife dreamed that her husband was unfaithful to her. The next night she had the same dream. It angered her, but she said nothing. A week or so later, the dream happened a third time, causing her much jealousy and anguish.
“It is true,” she thought. “It must be true. The worm is unfaithful to me!” So she set out to avenge herself. This she did by putting a pinch of arsenic in his thermos every morning until she killed herself.
At the husband’s trial of acquittal, the judge said, “It is always the same: those who believe the dream murder themselves.”

The greatest dream is that “I am” – and that has become our suicide. Now it will look very paradoxical. The idea that “I am” has proved very suicidal. And if you disappear as a self, if you commit that spiritual suicide, for the first time you will start living. For the first time you will be born to eternal life, for the first time you will know something which is not of time.
And then there is nothing good, nothing bad. Then a man eats when he is hungry, sleeps when he is tired, answers when a question is raised. Then a person has no idea how to live; then a person lives without mind. Then a person lives with nothingness in him, and this is the goal of Buddhism. To live as nothingness is nirvana.
Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
You said yesterday that science and religion are diametrically opposite. In the West there are many schools teaching scientific mysticism, and the paths of Tantra and Yoga are also very systematic. Your literature is also deeply and artistically rational. There seems to exist a bridge between the rational science and the irrational religion.
Please comment.
The bridge is possible, and the bridge is possible only because they are diametrically opposite. The gap exists, so the gap can be bridged.
Opposites can meet, and they can meet only because they are opposites. Opposites attract each other. That’s how the whole life moves, has dynamism. It is dialectical. It is through polar opposites: man/woman, yin/yang, matter/mind, the earth and the sky, this and that. There is a constant bridging, but the bridging is possible only because they are opposites. If they are not opposites there is no need for any bridge.
So the first thing to be understood: science and religion are diametrically opposite, but to bridge them is possible. That bridge will not make them the same. In fact, that bridge will make their diametrical opposition louder, clearer.
Religion can have a scientific flavor, it can be systematic, but it never becomes science, it remains mysticism. It takes the garb of a science, the methodology, the terminology of a science, but it remains mysticism, it remains poetry.
You can translate poetry into prose; the prose can be translated into poetry. Just by translating prose into poetry you will not make it poetry, it will remain prose. And just by translating poetry into prose, it will not become prose, it will remain poetry. Buddha speaks in prose, but what he speaks is poetic.
I am not a poet. I speak prose, but what I speak is poetic, its soul is poetic. And it remains poetic.
Religion can use scientific systematization – that’s what Tantra and Yoga have done. Science can also use mysticism as a method to inquire into reality, and all the great scientists have used it. But still it remains science; its basic trust is in reason. Religion’s basic trust is not in reason. On the periphery, religion can become scientific, but at the core it remains irrational. And science, on the periphery, can become very, very poetic, but at the core it remains rational.
Albert Einstein, or other great scientists, great explorers, are very much like mystics. Their search into reality is almost the same as the search of William Blake into reality. Einstein’s eyes are full of mysticism, but deep down his trust is in reason. Even if he stumbles upon something through his poetic feelings, through his intuition, he will immediately translate it into reason. He will trust it only when it becomes rational.
And just the opposite is the case with a mystic: even if he comes to know something about reality which is very rational, he will transform it into the irrational; he will turn and change it into poetry.
They are opposites, but they can be bridged, and they are always bridged wherever you can find a contradictory person. But then that man is going to be contradictory: he will speak two languages together and he will speak in contradictions, in paradoxes. All the great scientists are paradoxical, and all the great mystics also.
A master, whether of science or of religion, is bound to be paradoxical. He cannot be one-dimensional, he has to be in tune with both the realities – but then he becomes very, very difficult to understand.
That is your problem with me: I talk about the irrational, but I talk rationally about the irrational. I am all for the illogical, but my approach? – I slowly, slowly persuade you toward the illogical through logic. I argue for it. My argument for the illogical is bound to be logical, because no argument can be illogical in itself, it has to be logical.
The other day I mentioned that in old scriptures it has been said that each temple should have at least one maithun figure on the threshold of the temple, at least one. If it can have many, good. A master is a threshold, a door, an opening. His feet are rooted in the earth and his hands are reaching toward the sky: the master is the bridge between the rational and the irrational. The master is the bridge between religion and science, between love and logic. A master is a threshold; hence he can convince you, he can use all logical argumentation, and yet his goal remains illogical. Once you are convinced, he throws you into the mysterious. It is a quantum leap.

I would like to say something more about that ancient tradition. Mediaeval architects’ manuals, all the manuals in India, make it a rule that all temples must bear maithun sculptures on their doorways. Maithun is a Sanskrit word – very pregnant. It does not mean ordinary intercourse, it does not mean an ordinary couple in love, it means unio mystica, it means two persons so deeply dissolved into each other that they are no longer two. It is not just a couple making love; it is love, and the couple has disappeared into it. It is a state of being lost into each other, of oneness.
Other architects’ manuals say that the temple has to be a meeting of the sky and the earth. The earth is visible, logical, material. The sky is vague, nebulous, undefined. The temple has to be a place where the defined meets the undefined. The temple has to be a place where the known meets with the unknown.
Man is logic; man represents logic, mathematics, systematization, science. Woman is illogic, intuition, feeling, emotion, poetry – vague, undefined and indefinable. The maithun figure represents this meeting of logic and illogic, of mind and heart, of body and soul, of all the pairs of opposites of yin and yang. And when yin and yang meet and merge and become one, a temple is created. Love is the temple. Orgasm – that state of orgasmic flow where you don’t know who you are, man or woman, where you don’t know any identity, all identity is lost, when you are in an utter state of forgetfulness and remembrance, forgetfulness of all that you had known about yourself and remembrance of all that you really are, forgetfulness as an ego and remembrance as a whole – that is the meaning of maithun.
Maithun means lovers in a deep state of oneness, in a state of inner marriage, not just the outer marriage. You will be surprised to know that only man can come to that inner marriage, animals can’t. Have you ever seen animals making love? You will never find any ecstasy on their faces, in their eyes, never. Lovemaking is done as a matter of fact, as a biological phenomenon. They do it almost as a drag.
Biologists, physiologists, have agreed upon the fact that the female, except in human beings, has not known orgasm at all; no animal female knows orgasm. It is man’s privilege to know orgasm. Orgasm means the inner marriage, even in man.
Ninety percent of women in the past have not known orgasm: that means they never knew anything about the inner marriage. Their love remained biological. They were used by nature to reproduce, but there was no meditativeness in it. My own observation is this: because of this phenomenon, all the old religions were against sex because sex represented the animal. But they were not aware that man can transcend sex, and the transcendence can happen only through sex – that man can attain to something inner through the outer. That which is not possible for animals is possible for man. Man can move in an orgasmic state, in an ecstasy where sex becomes irrelevant, is left behind. Bodies become irrelevant, minds become irrelevant. One plunges into the very depth of being – for a single moment, of course, but godliness becomes available.
Maithun means: love so deep, so tremendously deep, that a glimpse of godliness becomes available.
Maithun means a couple which is no longer a couple, a state of being: a couple from the outside, but from the inside there is only one – it exists all alone. For a moment the duality is surpassed, for a moment the harmony attained, the accord has happened; hence orgasm is so relaxing. And Wilhelm Reich is right: if man can become capable of orgasmic joy, then madness, all kinds of neurosis, psychosis, will disappear from the earth.
That is the experience of Tantra, too. But to put a maithun figure on the threshold of a temple took great courage. The very step was of deep revolution. Those people must have been courageous; they declared something by it. They were saying: It is only through love that the polar opposites can be bridged.
A master is love. A master is in a state of orgasm – continuously. He is oneness. His duality is gone: he knows that only one exists. In that state, opposites can be bridged. The couple entwined in deep love stands there on the threshold of the temple in a great ecstasy of oneness – lost, merged, one with something deeper and higher than both.
You have to fall in love with a master. The master is a threshold to godliness. You have to learn how to merge with the master, how to become one with the master. Only through that will you know the bridging.
They stand there possessed by the God called Love. And that’s exactly the relationship between a disciple and a master: possessed by deep, immense love. It is non-sexual, it is non-physical – but it is the same that is attained by two lovers. It is the same, the peak is the same. Two lovers move through physiology, through biology; they go through a long way to reach the peak. A disciple and a master reach to that peak immediately. They don’t go round and about; they don’t pass through the body or the mind. That is the meaning of surrender, or shraddha, or trust. Their love opens the doors of a new perception, a new way of looking at reality. That new way of looking at reality bridges the polar opposites. They are passing from the ordinary to the extraordinary, from prose to poetry, from logic to love, from separation to unity, from the ego to the state of egolessness.
Have you not seen it happen? Deep in love, the ego disappears, you cannot find it. Hence I insist: while making love, remember always to look within at least once when you are reaching to the peak. Look in: is there any ego? And that experience can become a satori.
Ordinarily you don’t look within. You become so engrossed with the fun of love, with the joy of love, that you forget meditation. If you can remember in that moment when you are dissolving, if you can remember to have a look within, you will never be the same man again. Coming out of love, you will emerge a totally new man. A new being is born. You will have new ways of perception and new ways of seeing reality.
Once you have seen that the ego does not exist you cannot gather that ego again. And even if you gather it, you will know it is false, it is pseudo. Now that understanding has penetrated deep into you.
Lovers move from time to timelessness. Observe: when the peak happens, time disappears. For one moment, time stops, the whole world stops, all movement stops. That stopping of all movement and time is what we mean by peak, the climax, the orgasm.
Time can stop with a master too. And it stops! – it stops every day here for many people. For moments, you are just in tune with me. You are no longer there, I am no more here. We have both disappeared. Something exists which is beyond both. You have entered the temple; you have bridged the polar opposite.
Reality cannot really be divided; it cannot be divided into logic and love, into time and eternity, into body and soul, into godliness and matter – it cannot be divided. Although the polar opposites exist, they are not enemies, they are complementaries. They support each other: without the one, the other will not be possible.
Can you think of poetry if there is no logic left? Or can you think of logic if no love is left? They look opposite, yet deep down somewhere they support, they feed each other, they strengthen each other.
So, bridging is possible, but it always happens through love. It always happens through a threshold. I call the master the threshold.
In a moment of love or trust, you are just here and now – the eternal now, the absolute here. You are on the doorway.
Remember, doorways are openings. Porphyrus wrote: “A threshold is a sacred thing.” A threshold is that which joins the opposites. What is a temple really? – a threshold. It joins the world with the beyond; it joins the marketplace with meditation. That’s why the temple exists in the marketplace; it has to exist there.
That’s why I insist: Don’t renounce the world. Be there! And remaining there, search for the other and you will find it. It is hidden somewhere there in the marketplace. If you listen attentively to the market noise, you will be surprised. There is hidden music in it, great music in it. Just drop liking and disliking. Listen attentively, be in rapport with it. And everywhere in the known you will find the unknown, in the visible the invisible.
Porphyrus is right when he says a threshold is a sacred thing. A threshold is the boundary between this and that, between two worlds: ordinary, profane space and the sacred world beyond. The threshold is the point where we pass from one mode of being to another, from one level of consciousness to another, from one reality to another kind of reality, from one life to another kind of life. To enter into a temple is symbolic of entering into one’s own depths, or heights. Existentially they mean the same thing. You can call it depth or you can call it height – they mean the same thing. It is the vertical dimension.
There are two dimensions: the horizontal and the vertical. The threshold joins these two dimensions. The ordinary profane life is horizontal; the religious life is vertical. Let me remind you about the Christian cross: it is simply a representation of these two dimensions, the horizontal and the vertical. The cross is a beautiful symbol; the cross is a threshold. The cross is a bridge where the horizontal and the vertical meet, where the ordinary and the extraordinary meet.
And obviously, the most natural metaphor for opening and opener can only be the state of lovemaking. Another ancient text says: “Where cows have sported with bulls, accompanied by their young ones, or where beautiful women have dallied with their lovers, that place is an appropriate place for a temple.”
A strange statement. Listen again. You will be shocked, particularly Hindus and Christians and Buddhists will be shocked. But this comes from an old Eastern text. It says: “Where cows have sported with bulls, accompanied by their young ones, or where beautiful women have dallied with their lovers, that place is an appropriate site for a temple.”
Strange, but tremendously significant. That’s how it should be. A temple has to be a meeting, a bridging.
You ask: “You said yesterday that science and religion are diametrically opposite.” Yes, they are diametrically opposite, hence they are attracted toward each other as man and woman. They can fall in love. They are complementaries too. All opposites are complementaries too.
“In the West there are many schools teaching scientific mysticism, and the paths of Tantra and Yoga are also very systematic.” True. There is a way to teach scientific mysticism, but mysticism is always going beyond science. That’s what I am doing here! I am teaching you logical illogicalness, scientific mysticism, worldly religiousness.
Remember, whenever there is really something happening, there will be the paradox, because the bridge will be needed. But still, mysticism is mysticism. Science can be used as a device, but mysticism never becomes scientific. The ultimate flight remains unscientific, transcendental. And Tantra and Yoga are very systematic – but just on the way they are systematic. Once you have followed them long enough, they push you into the chaos, they push you into the chaos of existence where all systems have to be abandoned – because all systems are tiny, because all systems are small prisons made by the mind.
A prison is very systematic. Have you not seen it? Have you ever gone to a prison? Just go to see, it’s the most systematic thing in the world. Your house is not as systematic as the prison; everything is systematic, everything follows certain rules, and absolutely. People get up early in the morning at exactly a certain hour, they take their breakfasts, they take their baths, they move almost like robots. Everything is systematic.
In fact, when everything is too systematic you are imprisoned, freedom is crushed. Freedom needs chaos.
A strange thing has been observed by psychologists. The strange thing is that in the army people are taught to be very systematic and their goal is to create war, their goal is to create chaos, their goal is death, to kill and to be killed. Their goal is to destroy; their goal is Hiroshima, Nagasaki. But army people are absolutely systematic. The army lives in order to create disorder. Just see the complementariness: the army lives in order to create disorder.
And have you seen another polarity? Artists create order out of disorder, but they live very sloppy, lazy lives, very disorderly lives. If you see how an artist lives, you will start thinking of committing suicide. Just lousy! No system at all. You can go and see Chaitanya Hari – when he goes to sleep, when he gets up – there is no order. And he creates beautiful music, he creates order.
Artists create order; hence they have to complement it by disorder in their lives. And army people create disorder; hence they have to complement it by order in their lives. Things move in balance.
Buddhas talk very logically because their goal is illogic. And you can see modern physicists talking very illogically: the theory of relativity is illogical, the theory of uncertainty is illogical, non-Euclidean geometry is illogical, higher mathematics is illogical. They talk very illogically and they create logic, their goal is logic. They are moving toward order.
You will always find this balance happening. Life cannot be one-sided, otherwise it disappears. It needs day and night, summer and winter, birth and death; it needs love and hate.
So I say that science and religion are diametrically opposite, but I am not saying that bridging is not possible. Bridging always happens, is continually happening. It happens from the side of science and it happens from the side of religion. And when it happens, you have a great master, a Buddha or an Einstein. Whenever it happens you have the super phenomenon.

The second question:
Osho,
Won't you speak to us of dreams? I have taken to dreaming I am dreaming, or to living through painful situations of the past or future and dealing with them differently. Sometimes I wake in the dead of night or after a short sleep with such a sense of terror and vulnerability, I feel I am five years old. Your presence is in my dream-consciousness without fail, every dream since I've been here. What are all these new developments? I know you play down our dream-life, but aren't they as much part of the “Who am I?” quest?
Savita, whether you are dreaming or not dreaming, you are dreaming. Whether you are dreaming with closed eyes or open eyes makes no difference. You dream in the night, you dream in the day. There are night dreams and there are daydreams. You simply go on changing from one dream to another dream, one kind of dream to another kind of dream.
Listen. You dream in the night, and then abruptly the sleep is broken, then you feel horror – that too is a dream. Now you are dreaming of horror, of vulnerability, fear. Then you fall asleep again and you start dreaming. And in the morning you open your eyes and you start dreaming with open eyes. Dreams are a continuum. Your mind is made of dreams, your mind consists of dreams.
Remember the one who is seeing the dreams. Awake to that witness. Don’t pay much attention to the dreams. That is where the East and West differ. The Western psychology is too much addicted to dreams, dream analysis; one has to go deep into dreams.
Savita is a therapist, a psychoanalyst, so obviously she must be feeling offended when I put down or play down your dream-life. Don’t feel offended; this is a totally different approach. By analyzing dreams you will never come to end them. By analyzing dreams you may become a little more understanding about dreams, but awareness is not going to happen through it. By analyzing dreams you may even start dreaming better dreams, but better dreams are just dreams all the same. By analyzing dreams you may start feeling your motivations hidden behind the dreams, your repressed desires, your ambitions, but you will never come to know who you are. How can one come to know who one is by analyzing dreams? Dreams are objects and you are the subject. You have to take a paravritti – a conversion; you have to move a hundred and eighty degrees. You have to stop paying attention to the dreams; you have to pay attention to the one who has been dreaming.
The East is concerned with the witness, not with what it witnesses. You may be seeing a real tree or you may be seeing a dream tree – it makes no difference. For the Eastern approach it makes no difference whether the tree is real or just a dream tree. In both cases it is the object, in both cases you are not it. So what difference does it make whether it is there really or you have just imagined it?
The only thing that makes any difference is the one, the mirror, in which the tree is reflected. True or untrue, that is irrelevant, but the pool of pure water in you where it is reflected – pay attention, emphasize the witness, go deeper into the witness.
And that’s my purpose here: in order to help you, not to analyze your dreams. That you can do in the West in a far more scientific way. The West has become very, very skillful in analyzing dreams. But the East was never worried because the East says all is dream so what is the point of analyzing?
And there is no end. If you go on analyzing and the source that creates the dreams is there, it will go on creating new dreams. They will be coming and coming and coming. That’s why nobody is ever totally psychoanalyzed; there exists not a single person on the earth who is really and totally psychoanalyzed, because the goal of total psychoanalysis is that dreams should disappear. That does not happen. It didn’t happen even to Freud or Jung. They continued to dream. That means they continued to remain suppressed; that means they continued to remain the same as they were before. Dreams were still coming, because the source had not been radically changed.
The projector is working and you go on analyzing the film on the screen, and you go on thinking how to analyze it. And then you differ, your analysis differs; and then there are schools of psychoanalysis. Freud says something, Jung says another thing, Adler another, and so on and so forth. Now there are as many psychoanalyses as there are psychoanalysts, and everybody has his own opinion, and nobody can really be refuted, because all is dream work.
Whatsoever you say, if you can say it loudly, convincingly, with authority, with argument, with logic, it appeals to people, it must be true. And they all seem to be true. All those interpretations seem to be true, because no interpretation is of any worth. All interpretations are wrong.
The East has a totally different kind of approach: witness, don’t analyze. In analysis you become too much interested, focused, on the dream. Forget the dream: just look at the watcher. That watcher is constant. In the night it sees dreams; in the day it sees dreams. First you see the dream, and then you are awakened abruptly, and you see horror. Then you fall asleep again and you may see a sweet dream, a beautiful dream, a happy dream – or a nightmare again – and this goes on and on. One thing is constant: the seer, the watcher, the witness.
Turn upon the witness. And that’s what I am trying to say to you: while you are dreaming in the day and when you are dreaming in the night.
Only one good point about dreams is that you say: “Your presence is in my dream-consciousness without fail, every dream since I have been here.”
That’s good. At least one thing is constantly there which will help you to fall upon yourself. Emphasize that presence.

Gurdjieff used to say to his disciples, “Make one thing constant in your dreams and sooner or later you will get rid of dreams.” And he used to give small things, small techniques, devices – and they worked. To one person he said, “Whenever you dream, just in the dream see that you are raising your hands above your head. And in the daytime also, practice this many times so you become very accustomed and habituated to it, so it becomes almost mechanical, so even in dreams you can raise your hand above your head.” And the man said, “What will happen?”
Gurdjieff said, When you have become capable, come and tell me.”
Three months passed and the man continued, day in, day out, walking, eating, whenever he would remember, he would raise his hand, and would remember also, “Tonight I am going to raise my hand in the dream.”
And then, after three months, it happened: one night he was dreaming that he was walking on a road and there was much traffic and noise, and suddenly he realized, and he raised his hand above his head – and the dream was broken. And in that moment of broken dream, he suddenly saw himself for the first time – the turning, the conversion. It was in the middle of the night. He danced, he was so joyous. And since that day, dreams disappeared.
And when dreams disappear, reality comes closer and closer every day. It is the dreams that are hindering you from seeing that which is.
When he came in the morning to see Gurdjieff, before he had said anything, Gurdjieff said, “So it has happened – because I see your eyes have a different shine, a different light. They have clarity. That dream stuff that used to move behind your eyes is no longer there. So it has happened! So you were capable of raising the hand! Now don’t be worried: whenever it comes, raise the hand again.
“Every possibility is that it may not come again, because at least you have done one thing consciously. Even in your dream, just a small thing of raising your hand, you remembered a small thing. It was very small, but remembrance is great. You remembered, even in your dream. So the witness has reached there – now no need to worry.”

I would like to say to Savita: Invite me more and more in your dreams. Let me also enjoy your dreams. Go every night with a very conscious feeling that I will be there in your dreams. Make it an alert effort, deliberate, and one day it is going to happen. It will not be just a dreamlike phenomenon. I will be really as present as I am now, or even more, because right now I can see there are dreams in Savita’s eyes. If in your dream you can see me as I am even for a single moment, all dreaming will disappear.
Analysis has no point. Dreams have to go. When dreams are gone, reality comes in. By one door, dreams go out; from another door the reality enters in. And reality is silent, quiet, peaceful, blissful…

The third question:
Osho,
Why does it feel like you are dying when you are in love? Is falling in love a suicidal desire? Or just a self-destructive instinct like the lemmings' march to the sea or a moth's flight into a flame? It's weird.
Love is death, but the one who dies in love has never really existed. It is the unreal self, the idea of an ego, that dies.
So love is death, it is suicide, it is dangerous. That’s why millions of people have decided against love. They live a loveless life. They have decided in favor of the ego – but ego is false. And you can go on clinging to the false and the false will never become real. So the life of an egoist always remains in insecurity. How can you make something unreal, real? It is always disappearing. You have to cling to it, you have to constantly create it again and again. It is a self-deception. And it creates misery.
Misery is the function of the unreal. The real is blissful – sat-chit-anand. The truth is blissful, and the truth is awareness. Sat means truth, chit means consciousness, anand means bliss. These three things are the qualities of truth. It is so, it is alert, and it is blissful.
Unreality is misery. Hell is that which does not exist but you create, and heaven is that which exists but you don’t accept. Paradise is where you really are, but you are not courageous enough to move into it, and hell is your private creation. But because it is your creation, you cling to it.
Man has never left existence. He lives in existence, but still suffers because he creates a small hell around himself. Heaven need not be created, it is already there; you have to relax and enjoy it. Hell has to be created.
Take life in a relaxed mood. There is no need to create anything, and there is no need to protect anything, and there is no need to cling to anything. That which is, will remain whether you cling to it or not; that which is not, cannot remain whether you cling to it or not. That which is not, is not, and that which is, is.
You ask: “Why does it feel like you are dying when you are in love?”
Because the ego, the unreal, dies. Love opens the door to the real. Love is the threshold of the temple. Love opens you toward godliness. It brings great joy, but simultaneously it brings great fear: your ego is disappearing. And you have invested so much in the ego. You have lived for it; you have been taught and conditioned for it. Your parents, your priests, your politicians, your education, your school, college, university, they have all been creating your ego. They have been creating ambition – they are factories to create ambition – and one day you find yourself crippled by your own ambitions, caged by your own ego. You suffer much, but your whole life you have been taught that this is valuable, so you cling to it; you suffer and you cling to it. And the more you cling, the more you suffer.
There are moments when godliness comes and knocks at your door. That’s what love is – godliness knocking at your door. Maybe through a woman, through a man, through a child, through a love, through a flower, through sunset, sunrise; godliness can knock in millions of ways. But wherever godliness knocks, you become afraid. The priest, the politician, the parent – the created ego – is at stake. It starts feeling that it is dying. You pull back. You hold back. You close your eyes, you close your ears; you don’t hear the knock. You disappear back into your hole. You close your doors.
Love feels like death. It is. And those who want to be really blissful have to go through that death, because the resurrection is possible only through death.
Jesus is right when he says you will have to carry your cross on your shoulders. You will have to die. He says, “Unless you are reborn, you will not see my kingdom, you will not see what I am teaching to you.” And he says that love is God. He is right because love is the threshold.
Die in love. It is far more beautiful than to live in ego. It is far truer than to live in the ego. Life in the ego is death in love. Death in the ego is life in love. Remember: when you choose ego, you are choosing real death – because it is death in love. And when you choose love you are only choosing unreal death, because to die in ego you are not losing anything – you had nothing from the very beginning.
That is the whole emphasis of Ikkyu’s doka, yesterday. You are not, so why be afraid? Who is going to die? There is nobody to die! To whom are you clinging? Whom do you want to make safe? Whom do you want to protect and armor? There is nobody. There is only emptiness, emptiness – utter emptiness.
Listen to Ikkyu’s song. Accept this emptiness and the fear will disappear. Be a moth when you find the flame of love burning bright – be a moth! Jump into it – and you will lose the false and you will gain the real, you will lose dreams and you will gain the ultimate, you will lose something which was not there and you will gain something which has always been there.

The fourth question:
Osho,
Why is the relationship between an Indian man and a Western woman not successful? It always breaks at some point. What is the real problem which comes in, which stops the relationship from growing mature? Please say something.
All relationships break at some point; they have to break. You cannot make your house on the threshold, you should not. Love is a door; pass through it. Pass, certainly, don’t avoid it. If you avoid it you will miss the deity in the temple. But you should not make your house on the threshold, at the door. Don’t remain there.
The door is just an opening. You have to move.
Love relationship is a must, but not the destiny, not the end – only the beginning. I am all for love. But remember: love is something that has to be transcended, too.
There are two types of people and both become neurotic. One type is those who are much afraid of love because they are afraid of dying. They cling to the ego. They avoid love. They may call it religion, but it can’t be religion – it is just sheer ego and nothing else. That’s why the monks – the Catholic, the Hindu, the Buddhist – have such strong egos, subtle but very strong, hidden but very strong. The humbleness is only superficial, is just a sugar coating on the poisonous ego. They have pious egos, but egos are there. And a pious ego is more dangerous than an ordinary ego – because the ordinary ego is apparent, you can’t hide it, but the pious ego is deeply hidden and you can carry it in subtle ways for ever and ever.
So this creates one kind of neurosis: people avoid love and they think they are going toward godliness. You can’t go because you have avoided the door itself.
Then there is another kind of neurosis: seeing the beauty of love, taking the courage to jump into it, dissolving the ego for a few moments – because in love it can only be for a few moments. The ecstasy of love cannot be eternal, because it is ecstasy between two parts meeting, dissolving into each other. Unless you dissolve with the whole you cannot have eternal ecstasy. Dissolving with the part – with a man, with a woman – you will be dissolving only in a very small drop of existence. It can’t be oceanic. Yes, for a moment you will have the taste, and then the taste disappears. This creates another kind of neurosis: people cling to love affairs. If love dies with one woman, they change to another woman, another man; they go on and on. They start living on the threshold. They have forgotten the deity, they have forgotten about the temple. Love has to be transcended into prayerfulness.
Never be in the neurosis of the first kind, and never cling to the second kind of neurosis. Go on, move on.

A great emperor, Akbar, created a small, beautiful capital in India. It was never used because before it was completed Akbar died. So his capital was never transferred to it from Delhi. The place’s name is Fatehpur Sikri. It is one of the most beautiful towns ever planned – and never used by any man.
Every small detail was looked into. Great architects of those days were consulted, great masters were consulted. Akbar asked all the great teachers in India of those days to give him a small sentence which could be written on the door, the passage. A bridge led to Fatehpur Sikri; a river had to be crossed and Akbar had made a beautiful gate on the bridge. Some Sufi suggested a saying of Jesus, and he loved it. Many sayings were suggested, but he loved that saying and it was written on the door. That saying is beautiful. It doesn’t exist in the Bible; it has come from another oral source. It says: Life is a bridge – pass through it, but don’t make your house on it.
Love is also a bridge – pass through it.
So no love affair ever succeeds. It gives you hope, gives you great hope, but always ends in frustration. That frustration is inbuilt. Just as the ecstasy is inbuilt, so is the frustration. In the beginning it is ecstasy, in the end it is frustration. That frustration will lead you to go beyond, otherwise how will you go beyond? When will you search for the real deity in the temple if you cling to the door? If you think, “The door is enough and I am contented,” then nobody will ever move.
Jesus says man reaches to God through love; love is God. But this is only half of the truth. The other half is: man never reaches through love, man reaches only by transcending love. When both are understood together, you have understood the phenomenon of love. Love is God and love is not God. In the beginning it is, in the end it is not. In the beginning it brings ecstasy, those honeymoon days, and then the frustration, the boredom that every marriage ends in.
Just think of two persons sitting together, bored. All has been explored and there is nothing to explore anymore. This is the moment! Either you can start looking for another man, another woman, or you can start looking beyond love.
You have lived love, you have seen its beauties and you have seen its uglinesses; you have seen its joy, you have seen its misery; you have seen its heaven and its hell. It is not pure heaven, no; otherwise nobody will ever go toward godliness. It is pure heaven and pure hell – it is both. Hell and heaven are two aspects of it – in the beginning, hope; and in the end, frustration.
Passing through that hope and that frustration again and again, one day the understanding arises, “What am I doing on the threshold? I have to go beyond!” And not out of anger but out of understanding one goes beyond.
So the first thing: no relationship ever succeeds. And it is fortunate that no relationship ever succeeds, otherwise when will you relate to existence? Why should you think of godliness? Man thinks of godliness because love gives a glimpse. Man thinks of godliness because love gives hope. And man has to think about godliness because love gives frustration. All hopes turn into hopelessness.
Without love there will be no search for godliness because man will not have any experience of hope and meaning and significance and grandeur. Love gives you a glimpse of the beyond; don’t cling to it. Take a hint from it and search for something more, go on searching. Use love as a stepping-stone.
You ask: “Why is the relationship between an Indian man and a Western woman not successful?” The first thing: no relationship is successful, whether between an Indian man and a Western woman, or a Western man and a Western woman, or an Indian man and an Indian woman. It cannot succeed; its very nature prohibits it. It feels it is succeeding, but it never succeeds. It comes very, very close to success, but it never comes exactly to the point. It takes you on great journeys, but it never supplies the goal. It keeps your hope aflame, but just hope. But good, at least it takes you to the threshold. One step has been taken; half the journey is complete, but half the journey still remains.
And the second thing: it is more difficult between an Indian man and a Western woman, or a Western man and an Indian woman. The problem is not between man and woman, the problem is between Eastern and Western. Man and woman are just man and woman; East and West make no difference. But the minds are there. Those minds create trouble.
The Indian has one kind of mind and the West has evolved a different kind of mind. So when an Indian man is with a Western woman, or vice versa, there is no communication. They don’t speak the same language. It is not only that they don’t speak the same language – English, German or French or Italian – they may speak the same language, still they don’t speak the same language, because they have different kinds of minds. Their expectations are different, their conditioning is different. The Indian man says one thing and the Western woman understands another thing. The woman says one thing and the Indian man understands something else. Unless they drop the minds, unless they become pure man and woman, there will be great difficulty.
And Vedant Bharti must be asking this question out of his own experience. One night, eavesdropping on Vedant Bharti, I heard this dialogue:

Vedant Bharti: “Oh, my gorgeous, sweetest darling! Am I the first man you’ve ever been to bed with?”
And the American girl: “Of course you are! Why do all you Indians always ask the same stupid question?”

Different minds… The Indian mind is very male chauvinistic. The Western woman is now a liberated woman; she lives in a totally different kind of milieu. She is not the woman you have lived with for centuries in India. It cannot be possible now to possess a Western woman; she is no longer your property, she is as free as you are.
In India, the woman has been taken as property; man can possess her. Not only ordinary men, even great men in India think of a woman as a possession.
You may have heard the famous story of the Mahabharata. Yudhishthira, one of the most famous men in Indian history, has been thought to be very religious; he is known as dharmaraj, a religious king, or a king of religion. But once, when playing, gambling, he staked his wife. He gambled her, because it was thought that your wife is your property. He staked his kingdom, he staked his treasury, he staked everything; then only the wife was left – he staked the wife, too.
And still in India he is thought to be one of the greatest religious men. What kind of religious man is this? Just to think of staking a live person, gambling! But in India the woman has been thought of as property; you are the possessor, and the whole and sole possessor.
In the West there is no longer slavery , it has disappeared. It is good. It has to disappear from India too. Nobody can possess anybody, man or woman. No person can be possessed; no person can be reduced to property. This is ugly, this is sin. What can be a greater sin than this?
You can love a person, but you cannot possess. The love that possesses is not love – it is ego.
In India, the man is very male chauvinistic. And the Indian woman has not yet asserted her freedom. There exists nothing like the women’s lib movement in India. The woman still goes on living in the same way.
So when an Indian falls in love with a Western woman, the problem arises: he starts possessing. And the Indian mind is very much obsessed with sex; that too creates a problem. You will be surprised when I say the Indian mind is very much obsessed with sex, because you think India is very religious and moral. Yes, it is, but its morality and religion are all so much based on repression that deep down is the obsession with sex.
If his woman just holds somebody else’s hands, the husband is mad. Just holding hands! Holding hands can be just a simple gesture of friendship. There is no need to give any sexual color to it, but the Indian man cannot think that. If his woman is holding hands with somebody else, that means she is sexually relating to somebody else. He will be in a rage. He will not be able to sleep. He would like to kill the man or the woman or himself. Something has gone very wrong.
In the West, things are looked at in a different way. One can hold somebody’s hand just as a sheer gesture of friendship, of lovingness, of sharing. It need not have any sexual overtone to it. Or, even if it has, it is nobody else’s business. It is the person’s freedom. A person has to decide his life, how to live, with whom to live. Nobody else can be the decisive factor, but that creates problems.
Just listen to this: sex is not as important in the West as people in the East think it is. Sex has almost become a sharing of energy, a loving play with each other, a fun. It no longer has that seriousness that it used to have in the past. In India it is still very, very serious. And when something is serious, remember, ego must be involved in it. Ego is always serious; it makes everything serious. And whenever something is playful, that simply shows ego is no longer involved in it. And all playfulness is good because it is liberation.
When you fall in love… If an Indian falls in love – and here it is going to happen again and again – when an Indian falls in love, he is falling very seriously. That is the trouble. And the woman may not think it serious at all. She may think it is for the moment. You appeal to her – for the moment. There is no commitment in it; there is no tomorrow to it. But the Indian mind is bringing not only tomorrow – the whole life. Or there are people who even think of other lives in the future. Those are hidden sources; you don’t talk about them, but the clash is going to happen.
She has fallen in love with you because she enjoys loving; it is a beautiful experience. She has not fallen in love with you in particular, she is in love with love itself. That is the difference. You are not in love with love itself, you are falling in love with this particular woman. It is a life-death problem for you. If tomorrow she starts moving with somebody else, you will be mad. But you misunderstood. It was a gesture of the moment.

The American girl had just returned to New York from a holiday in England and was talking to her best friend.
“Mabel, I’ve been thinking about Keith ever since I left England. Now I’m back home, and I don’t think I should write to him as our friendship was only slight.”
“But, Wendy, you promised to marry him!”
“I know, but that was all.”

Marriage no longer has that seriousness that it has in the East. Marriage is just a kind of friendship – nothing special about it.
If you don’t understand these different minds it is going to be a difficult problem, communication will not be possible. Man in the East has always enjoyed freedom. They say “Boys are boys.” But the woman has not been given any freedom. Now in the West there is no discrimination. Man or woman, both are free. And whatsoever man has been doing, now woman is also doing, it; she has every right to do it.
In the East we played a trick. The trick was that we placed woman very high on a great pedestal; we worshipped woman. That was a trick to imprison her. We satisfied her ego through worship. We said: “A woman is a goddess, a woman is purity. A woman is not of this earth. A woman has to be a virgin before marriage and then she has to remain monogamous for the whole of her life.” And we gave so much respect for this, and we conditioned the women so much for this, that they became addicted to the ego, and they remained on the pedestal – imprisoned there, chained there! And man was enjoying all kinds of freedom. Boys are boys…
The woman in the West has come down from the pedestal. She says, “Either you also come up on the pedestal or I am coming down. We both have to exist on the same ground.” And that’s how it should be.

“I say, old man,” said Clive to the host of the party, “there’s this rather delectable young chick whom I’m getting along with really well, if you know what I mean.”
He winked and continued, “And I wondered if I might use your spare bedroom for a short while.”
“No, I don’t mind,” replied the host. “But what about your wife?”
“Oh, don’t bother about her,” said Clive. “I’ll only be gone a short time and I’m sure she won’t miss me.”
“I know she won’t miss you,” stated the host. “It’s only five minutes ago that she borrowed the spare bedroom!”

The male ego has never allowed that to happen. It has allowed itself all kinds of freedom; it has not allowed that freedom to the woman. Now things have changed in the West. Man and woman are standing on the same plane as human beings. The woman is no longer a goddess, and she does not pretend and she does not want to pretend.
But the Indian mind is very much clouded by the past.
If you drop these minds, if you are just a man and a woman, then there is no problem. The problems arise out of the Indian mind and the Chinese mind and the American mind. If you drop the minds then there are no problems; then love can flow and you can grow through it.
But still remember: no love can be ultimately satisfying. It can go a long way but it cannot go the whole way. Finally, you have to go beyond it. Learn how to love by loving people, then one day use that learning to fall in love with the whole, with existence itself. Only that day have you come home.

The last question:
Osho,
Nothing good, nothing bad. Nothing to gain, nothing to lose. Take it easy. With this as a reference, please explain the difference between an Epicurean hedonist and a Zen Buddhist.
There is none. The Zen Buddhist knows it, the Epicurean hedonist does not know it. That’s the only difference, otherwise there is none.
Between the enlightened person and the unenlightened person there is no difference at all, not even a single inch’s difference. The enlightened person knows it, the unenlightened person does not know about it, that’s all. The unenlightened person believes in the distance, in the difference, hence he creates it. The enlightened person has come to know there is no difference. The belief has disappeared.
Enough for today.

============================================================

If at the end of our journey
There be no final resting place,
How can there be
A way to lose ourselves in?

Sakyamuni,
That mischievous creature,
Having appeared in the world,
Misled, alas,
How many people!

The mind –
What shall we call it?
It is the sound of the breeze
That blows through the pines
In the Indian-ink picture.

The mind remaining
Just as it was born –
Without any prayer
It becomes the Buddha.

Tell a lie,
And you fall into hell.
Then what will happen to Buddha
Who contrived
Things that don’t exist?
Truth is not a commodity that is wanted by people. They think they already know it. And even if they think they don’t know it, they think “Who needs it?” Their need is for more magic in their life, for more illusions, for more dreams.
The ordinary mind is constantly seeking new dreams, new sensations. In fact, it is afraid of truth. The truth may shatter its magic; it may shatter its desires, it may shatter the beautiful dreams that one has been going through.
Truth is not needed by people. The moment a person becomes interested in truth he is no longer part of the mob; he becomes an individual. That very interest creates individuality, otherwise, you remain part of the crowd, you don’t really exist. You start existing only when you start searching for truth. But the search is arduous. It needs courage, it needs intelligence, it needs awareness.
Buddhism is no ordinary religion. It is not a religion of the mob, it is the religion of rare individuals. It is not the religion of the mediocre, it is the religion of those who are really intelligent. No other religion is so individualistic. And the paradox is that Buddha says there is no self, the paradox is that Buddha does not believe in individuality – but his religion is that of the individuals.
Just to be interested in what Buddha has said is a great adventure, because nobody before or after has been such a radical revolutionary.
Today’s sutras of Ikkyu are of immense importance.
The first sutra:
If at the end of our journey
There be no final resting place,
How can there be
A way to lose ourselves in?
You will have to meditate over it. Slowly, slowly, the meaning will dawn into your consciousness.
First: there is no goal, so nobody can go astray. Let it penetrate your heart, let it pierce you like an arrow. There is no goal in life, so there is no way to miss it. All other religions depend on that; all other religions go on telling people: “You are missing.” That is the meaning of the word sin – to miss, to miss the target. The original Hebrew root means to miss the target; not being able to reach the goal – that is sin.
According to Gautam Buddha, there can be no sin. You can’t miss it because there is nothing to miss. The goal does not exist; the goal is imaginary, it is your creation. You create the goal, then you create virtue and sin. Those who are moving toward the goal are virtuous, and those who are not moving toward the goal are sinners. You create the goal and then you divide humanity into saints and sinners. Drop the goal and saints disappear, sinners disappear, divisions disappear, the higher and the lower disappear – and valuation disappears, and then there is no heaven and no hell.
See the point of it: just the idea of the goal creates heaven and hell. Those who are moving toward the goal – the obedient people, the good people – they will be rewarded by heaven. And those who are not going toward the goal – the sinners, the bad people – they will be punished by hell. First you create the goal and then everything follows: then heaven and hell are created, then saints and sinners are created, and then fear is created – fear of losing the goal – and then ego is created, the ego of attaining the goal. You have created the whole mess, the whole neurosis of mind.
Buddha strikes at the very root: he says there is no goal. Just this simple statement can become a liberating force: there is no goal. Then one is not going anywhere. One is always here; one is never going anywhere. There is nowhere to go, and there is nobody to go. All has always been here, and all has always been available.
The goal means the future; then you start becoming more interested in the future, you start forgetting about the present. The goal creates tension, anguish, fear – whether you are going to make it or not – and competition and jealousy and conflict, and the hierarchy. Those who are coming closer to the goal are higher; those who are not coming closer to the goal are lower.
The whole Christian church depends on a single phenomenon: disobedience. Buddha says there is nobody to command and there is no way to obey.
Life has no goal as such. Life itself is its own goal; the goal is intrinsic. The value of life is in itself; it does not come from anything else. Life is not a means to some end somewhere in the future. Life is its own end, its own means. Life is all. Once you understand this you cannot say life is meaningless.

Socrates started a certain idea in the West which has culminated in its logical perfection in Sartre. Socrates says: “A life lived without meaning is not worth living.” Now this is the seed. From Socrates to Sartre this seed has been growing and growing down the ages in the West. Now Sartre says: Because there is no meaning, life is meaningless, not worth living at all.
Albert Camus says: “The only problem that man has to solve is the problem of suicide, the only metaphysical problem.” Why? – because he says life is meaningless, so why live? If Socrates is right, that a life is only worth living when it has some meaning, some goal; when it is moving somewhere, reaching somewhere, attaining something, achieving something – only then it is worth living – then if there is nothing to achieve and nowhere to go, life is meaningless. Then why live at all? why not commit suicide?
Buddha’s understanding is totally different. He says: Life is its own meaning. You need not create any other meaning – and all created meanings will become just sources of anxiety. The rose blooming in the garden is not blooming for something else, and the river flowing to the ocean is not flowing for something else. The flow is the joy, the flowering is the celebration.
You are in love – meditate over the phenomenon. Is the love leading you somewhere? Love is its own delight; it need not have any other goal. It is enough unto itself.
When you drop the idea of meaning and goal, a strange phenomenon happens: the idea of meaninglessness also disappears. With the idea of meaning, side by side, parallel, runs another idea: the idea of meaninglessness. Buddha cuts the root. He says there is no meaning to be attained, hence there is no question of feeling meaninglessness. Life in itself is its value.
Ikkyu comments on this beautiful existential intuition:
If at the end of our journey there is no final resting place, how can there be a way to lose ourselves in? There cannot be. Nobody has ever gone astray. Adam has never left the Garden of Eden. He is still living in the Garden of Eden – but he has become goal-oriented, so he cannot see it. He has started thinking of the future. Because of that thought of the future, his mind is clouded and he cannot see that which is around.
When you are too much future-oriented, you start becoming forgetful about the present which is the only reality.
These birds chattering, that faraway cuckoo, this moment, this herenow is forgotten when you start thinking in terms of achieving something. When the achieving mind arises, you lose contact with the paradise you are in.
This is one of the most liberating approaches: it liberates you right now. Forget all about sin and forget all about saintliness. Both are stupid, both together have destroyed all the joys of humanity. The sinner is feeling guilty, hence his joy is lost. How can you enjoy life if you are continuously feeling guilty, if you are continually going to the church to confess that you have done this wrong and that wrong? And wrong and wrong and wrong…your whole life seems to be made of sins. How can you live joyously?
It becomes impossible to delight in life. You become heavy, loaded. Guilt sits on your chest like a rock, it crushes you; it does not allow you to dance. How can you dance? How can guilt dance? How can guilt sing? How can guilt love? How can guilt live? So the one who thinks he is doing something wrong is guilty, burdened, dead before death, has already entered into the grave.
And the person who thinks he is a saint cannot live, cannot delight either, because he is afraid if he delights he may lose his saintliness, if he laughs he may fall from his high posture. Laughter is mundane, joy is ordinary; the saint has to be serious, utterly serious; he has to be a long face. He cannot dance, because dance may distract him. He cannot hold the hand of anybody; he may fall in love and attachment may arise. He cannot look at a beautiful woman or a man – who knows, somewhere lurking in the deeper layers of unconsciousness there may be a desire, a lust. He cannot relax, because if you relax, your repressed desires will start surfacing. He has to repress them continuously. A saint is never on a holiday, cannot be, because the holiday means he will have to allow all that he has been controlling. A saint cannot relax, and if you cannot relax, how can you enjoy, how can you celebrate, how can you be grateful?
The sinner loses because of guilt and the saint loses because of the ego, the pious ego. Both are losers. And both are parts of the same game, partners in the same game, and the game is created by the goal. Give a goal to humanity and humanity will remain in misery. Goals are misery-creating.
The achieving mind, the constantly achieving mind, is the original source of all illness, of all disease.
Buddha says: There is nowhere to go – relax. You can’t miss in the first place – relax. How can you miss? There is no target! Wrong has never been done, and right has never been done. There is nothing right, nothing wrong. In fact, there is no doer – how can you do wrong or right? There is no doer – how can you be a sinner or a saint? Deep inside you are just a hollow bamboo and existence flows through you for no other motive than the sheer delight of flowing.
Existence flows because it delights in flowing. There is no utilitarian goal.
That’s why I say religion can only speak the language of poetry. It cannot speak the language of arithmetic, it cannot speak the language of logic – it can only speak the language of love. Logic is always goal-oriented; arithmetic is always goal-oriented. Watch the roseflowers and the grass leaves and the rivers and the mountains, live with nature, and slowly, slowly you will see nothing is going anywhere. Everything is moving, but not in any particular direction to a particular goal.
Movement is delight.
That’s what William Blake, one of the great mystic poets of the West, says: Energy is delight.
If there is no way to lose yourself, no way to sin, no way to become a saint and no way to feel guilt, the so-called religion disappears, the church becomes meaningless, the dogmas and the rituals lose all significance. Then life becomes religion, and then there is no other religion beyond life, other than life. Then life becomes the only scripture, then life becomes all that is there.
Live and know, live and feel, live and be.
The religion of Buddha is a religionless religion, and Zen is its culmination, Zen is its fragrance. What was a seed in Buddha has become a fragrance in Zen. Zen is the pure essence of Buddha’s heart. What this man, Gautam Siddhartha, realized, what this man came to see, has been expressed by Zen in its uttermost beauty. It rarely happens.
Ordinarily what happens is… Jesus comes and he himself is the greatest expression of what he has experienced. Slowly, slowly, the followers are less intelligent, more mediocre. And by the time the church has become established, it has become part of the mob, of the crowd, of the lowest – the lowest in intelligence, awareness, love. It has lost its glory. It has lost its snow-capped peaks. Now it moves in the dark valleys.
With Buddha, a totally different phenomenon happened. He was one of the most fortunate masters of human history, because what he found has been going on higher and higher in its expression, in its poetry, in its rhythm. In Zen it has come to its uttermost flowering. Zen is pure essence, just fragrance. Only those who are really intelligent will be able to understand it; otherwise, the mediocre will feel offended – even mediocre Buddhists feel very offended.
Just listen to Ikkyu’s words… The mediocre man cannot find any security in them. He lives through goals – the mediocre sinner and the mediocre saint both live through goals. Only an absolutely intelligent person can live without goals; only intelligence can live herenow. Only intelligence can live in the moment without bringing anything from the outside.
Jesus says to look at the lilies of the field. They think not of the morrow, they toil not. And yet even Solomon, attired in all his costly clothes, was not as beautiful as these poor lily-flowers.
What is so beautiful in these lily-flowers? Solomon is not so beautiful with all his kingdom and riches. Even he was not attired in such grandeur, in such splendor as these poor lily-flowers. What is so beautiful in these flowers? They live in the moment, they think not of the morrow.
A man of absolute intelligence becomes a flower. He lives herenow. He has no past and he has no future. And because he has no past and he has no future, you cannot say that he lives in the present either, because present is just a midway station between the movement that happens from past to future. The present is just a station on the way. When past and future disappear, present also disappears. What is left is timelessness. Now is a timeless moment. It is eternity – and Buddha calls it meditation.
If guilt disappears, religion disappears. And guilt disappears if the goal disappears. Guilt is a shadow of the goal.
Now, Christianity won’t like it, Islam won’t like it, Hindus won’t like it – they all live on the goal. They will not like this flight to the beyond; they will not like this poetic, aesthetic religion. They have become accustomed to a very ordinary religion, businesslike; it is part of their marketplace.
Buddha is very wide-winged. He goes to the farthest sky. He wants you to come to those heights of being, depth of being – and they are all available now. So remember again and again: he is not giving you a goal somewhere in the future, he is simply making you aware that all that you need is available now. Nothing more is needed. Nothing more will ever happen, nothing more can ever happen. If you want to live, all is happening now. Become part of it, dissolve into it. And to help you dissolve into it he emphasizes that there is no self – because if there is a self you cannot dissolve. You can dissolve only if there is no self.
With one stroke of his sword, Buddha makes all religions disappear – the priest, the saint, the sinner, the commandments, Adam and Eve, disobedience, the original sin. With one stroke of his sword they all disappear, they are annihilated. Man is left alone – and nature. And because there is no self inside you, there is no division between inside and outside, there is no boundary between outside and inside. Outside is inside, inside is outside.
That’s why a strange paradoxical statement has been made by Zen people: Samsara is nirvana – this very world is enlightenment, this very earth is the lotus-land of buddhas, and this very body the Buddha.
Second thing: this understanding has not to be practiced. You cannot practice it, because practice implies the goal. This understanding either is there or is not there. There is no methodology to practice it.
Practicing means you are again thinking to do something tomorrow, or at least you can do it tomorrow and you can reap the results tomorrow. But the tomorrow has entered somewhere deep in your unconscious, it has come back. No practice can give you this understanding. This understanding is not a question of practice; this understanding is only a question of understanding.
So it was not accidental that Buddha and his teaching were destroyed in India, because the mediocre mind could not tolerate him, his insight: it was too much. They could not understand it. They wanted some methodology to be given, to be practiced, and Buddha was talking of pure essence. And he says: Right now is deliverance.
And a very strange phenomenon happens: if there is no sin and no saintliness, whatsoever you have been doing starts changing. Not that you change it, in fact, to commit a sin, first it has to be a sin. Go deep into it. The temptation of a sin is because of the denial, the joy of committing it comes because it is a sin. If it is no longer a sin, the very temptation disappears.
If Adam had not been told, “Don’t eat from this Tree of Knowledge,” he would have never bothered about it. The very commandment created the temptation.
Watch your own mind, how it functions. If it is said about something, “Don’t do it!” a great desire to do it arises. One feels offended by the commandment. One wants to rebel; one wants to assert oneself. One wants to say, “I am myself, and I will do my own thing, and I am not going to listen to anybody.”
Each child passes through that stage, and each man and woman is stuck in that stage. Whatsoever your parents have been telling you not to do you have been doing. In fact, by their telling you constantly not to do they are creating temptations. Freedom is very non-tempting, remember it. If the world has freedom to do things, sins will disappear of their own accord; there will be no need to make them disappear.
And man has tried down the ages to make them disappear and has not succeeded. But the same stupid, vicious circle continues. Again and again man has tried to force laws on people, and the more those laws are enforced, the more people become rebellious. They have to become rebellious, because that seems to be the only way to protect their freedom, their being. Otherwise, they will be turned and reduced to slaves.
Adam did well; otherwise he would have been in paradise, but a slave. What is the point of being in a paradise and a slave? That doesn’t appeal to the dignity of your inner consciousness. It is better to be in hell but to be oneself; it is better to suffer but to be. It is better to suffer and to go to the very end of suffering, but not to lose one’s ground, one’s freedom, one’s dignity.
Adam did well. If he had lived in paradise and had not rebelled and had not eaten the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge, he would have been an impotent person, he would have been spineless, he would have been bloodless, he would have been dead. He did well. He came out; he risked, he was courageous. It was worth losing that paradise for freedom’s sake.
And this happens to everybody, and the society has not yet understood this simple phenomenon. People go on prohibiting: “Don’t do this!” “Don’t do that!” And the same commandment creates a great urge to go against it. Sins exist because of the saints.
I have heard…

A small boy saw a small girl carrying an apple. He told the girl, “Would you like to play a game with me?”
The girl asked, “What game?”
He said, “Adam and Eve.”
The girl said, “Good – what has to be done then?”
The boy said, “You tempt me, you say, ‘Don’t eat this apple!’ and I will eat it.”

The human mind functions that way.
Buddha says: If goals disappear, virtues and sins will automatically disappear. And people will be transformed, because there will be no temptation to do anything, because there will be no commandment. Just see the point of it. Just watch that inside you. What have you been doing?
My own observation of thousands of sannyasins is that they are still fighting with their parents, continuously. Their deep problem is their parents have told them not to do something: if they do it, they feel guilty, if they don’t do it, they feel they are not free. Either way they are in a trap, and they go on fighting.
A man becomes free only when he is no longer reacting to his parents, when those parental voices have disappeared from consciousness, when they have no more impact this way or that, when they no longer create for or against in you. When you are almost able to ignore them, to be indifferent to them, you have become a mature person.
People ask me: “What is the definition of a mature person?” The person who is free of his parents is a mature person.
Jesus is right when he says to his disciples that unless you hate your parents, you will not be able to follow me. Now, a man who preaches love saying that looks very absurd – but he is right.
My own feeling is that the word hate is a mistranslation from the Hebrew. I don’t know Hebrew, but I know Jesus. That’s why I say it must be a mistranslation. He must have said: Be indifferent, ignore. Don’t be attached anymore. He must have used some term which means “be detached” from your parents, because the word hate cannot be used for many reasons.
One thing: if you hate your parents, you are not yet detached, you are not free. Hate means you are against, so they will control you still. They will control in a subtle way: you will go on doing things that they wanted you not to do because you hate them. Your parents were saying, “Don’t smoke,” and you will go on smoking because you hate them. This is the way you show your hatred. But you are attached, you are still connected. You have not been able to disconnect yourself. You are still tethered; you are still holding the apron string of your mother. You are still childish.
Neither love nor hate – the parental voice has to disappear. You have to just watch it disappearing.
Buddha goes even further. He says: Unless you kill your parents… “Unless you kill your parents” – he does not mean that you have to actually murder them, but deep inside you have to murder them. You have to drop them. You have to forgive and forget. Don’t react to your parents’ voices inside you.
And a modern trend in psychoanalysis – transpersonal psychoanalysis, transpersonal psychotherapy – will agree perfectly with Buddha and Jesus. Once you are free from the goal, the guilt, the ego, you suddenly lose all temptation.
It happened once…

A young man wanted to commit suicide. He was my friend. His parents were very worried. He closed himself in a room; his father came running to me. First they tried to persuade him to come out of the room, but he wouldn’t listen to them, he wouldn’t answer. The whole neighborhood gathered there; they were all trying to persuade him. He stopped talking to them; he became quiet, absolutely quiet. They would knock on the doors and he would not answer. There was great fear: “Has he committed suicide? Is he going to commit? What is happening?” There was a panic.
The father came to me and said, “You come – something urgently needs to be done. His life is in danger.”
I went there and they were crying. The mother was crying – he was the only child. The father was crying and the friends had gathered. The whole neighborhood was there. I went to the door, I knocked on the door and I said, “Listen, if you really want to commit suicide, this is no way. Why gather such a crowd? Why make so much fuss? I have brought my car. I will take you to a beautiful place on the Narmada River. You can jump from there.”
He opened the door; he looked at me with very suspicious eyes. He could not believe it. I said, “You come with me.”
He came with me. I asked him, “Would you like to do anything before you commit suicide? Would you like some food – some Italian dish, spaghetti, or something else? Would you like to go to a movie? Would you like to see your girlfriend, or anything? – because this is your last chance. And I have other things to do also, so you just finish soon. I want to be back home by twelve o’clock at night. So eleven we will leave, you take the jump, I say goodbye to you – and it is finished! Why make so much nonsense? And this is not a place to die, in the marketplace.”
And the place where I used to live, Jabalpur, has a beautiful spot. If anybody wants to commit suicide, I have never come across a more beautiful spot. For three, four miles, marble hills, just marble hills, and between those hills flows the River Narmada. People say there is no other place in the world so beautiful. The Taj Mahal is nothing compared to it. It is unbelievable. When you go into it on a full-moon night on the boat, you cannot believe your eyes that such a thing can exist.
Many times when I took people for the first time, they could not believe it. One of my old teachers went with me, and he started crying and he said, “I would like to touch and feel the rocks, because I cannot believe that they are real. This is more beautiful than any dream I have ever seen.”
So I said, “In such a marketplace, trying to die? Come on!”
By and by – and he was just listening to me and he was not saying yes or no – he said, “I have nothing to do, but I am very tired. I would like to sleep for a few hours.”
I said, “Okay, you sleep in my room. I will also sleep and we can fix the alarm and we will go.”
So I fixed the alarm, and I saw he could not sleep. He was turning and tossing, and when the alarm went off he immediately put it off. And I said, “What are you doing?”
He said, “I am very tired!”
I said, “I am not tired, that is my problem because I will have to come back, too. You will be finished once and forever. These are not questions a dying man has – tired, this and that. What is the point of being tired or rested? Just get into the car!”
He became very angry and said, “Are you my friend or my enemy? I don’t want to commit suicide! Why are you forcing me to commit suicide?”
I said, “I am not forcing – you wanted to commit. I am simply a friend and helping; I am simply cooperating. If you don’t want to commit, that is your business. But whenever you want to commit, come and I will be here!”
And he never came. Not only that, he started avoiding me. I have not seen him for years.

Temptation comes out of denial. All those people clamoring and shouting and crying and weeping would have helped him to die; they were tempting him. He was getting more and more into the idea. When so many people are saying no, it is very natural to get tempted.
Just watch inside yourself: what have you been doing? Are you still fighting with your parents, going against them, doing something that they never wanted you to do, doing something that they were very angry with? Are you fighting with your priest and your politicians? Then you will remain in their power.
Buddha says: Once the denial disappears, the temptation also goes with it. Temptation is a shadow of the denial.
So remember, don’t think that Buddha is saying: Go on committing suicide, go on committing sins, go on doing this and that. He is simply saying: Understand it. And through understanding you will simply see that life takes a new turn, a transformation happens. You start living in a totally different way than you have ever lived before. You start living silently, joyously, celebratingly.
The second sutra:
Sakyamuni,
That mischievous creature,
Having appeared in the world,
Misled, alas,
How many people!
This can be said only by a Zen master. It is said in utter respect and love. Sakyamuni is the Japanese name of Gautam Buddha. Now, Ikkyu is a follower of Gautam Buddha, in tremendous love with Gautam Buddha, a Buddha himself. Now, very jokingly he says:
Sakyamuni, that mischievous creature, having appeared in the world, misled, alas, how many people! What is he saying? Christians can’t understand it, Hindus can’t understand it. This is a totally different language – a language of love, a language of understanding. Buddha will understand; Ikkyu knows that. Others who are buddhas will understand it; Ikkyu knows it. It can be said.
He is saying: There is no goal, there is no way, then what were you teaching to people? If there is no goal and nobody can go astray, then what were you doing for forty years continuously, guiding people? You mischievous person, having appeared in the world… In the first place there was no need for you to appear in the world, because Buddhists say – traditional Buddhists, not Zen Buddhists – Buddhists say Buddha appeared in the world to guide people to salvation. Ikkyu is referring to that.
Buddhists say Buddha appeared in the world to guide the ignorant toward enlightenment. Ikkyu is saying: “What nonsense! Buddha says there is no goal, there is no enlightenment, there is nowhere to go – why did he appear in the first place? And for forty years teaching people, naturally, is mischievous – because all guidance is misguidance. There is nowhere to go, then what is the point of guiding?”
Sakyamuni, that mischievous creature, having appeared in the world, misled, alas, how many people! And millions and millions of people have been following Buddha. They have not understood. If they had understood they would have become buddhas, not followers.
And, being with me, you have to remember that. Become enlightened, don’t try to become enlightened. Trying is missing the whole point. I am not here to guide you. I am here to take all guidance away. I am not here to lead you into some other world. I am here to make you aware that there is nowhere to go and there is nobody to lead and nobody to be led.
Seeing the point, laughter arises, and that laughter is enlightenment. Seeing the point, one relaxes – that relaxation is enlightenment.
Jokingly, Ikkyu is teasing the master. He is saying: Sakyamuni, that mischievous creature, having appeared in the world, misled, alas, how many people! See the beauty of it, the love and the tremendous respect. If some Christian says such a thing about Jesus – “mischievous creature” – all Christians will be very offended. That person will be immediately excommunicated from the church; he will be condemned as a sinner. You can’t call Jesus a mischievous person – because you have never loved him so deeply. You are afraid. Love is not afraid. You have not really respected Jesus. You are afraid if you say such things, your respect will be destroyed. But Ikkyu knows the respect is so deep that it cannot be destroyed by anything. He can burn Buddha on a cold night, and no fear arises. No Christian can do that, no Hindu can do that, no Jaina can do that. That simply shows there is some fear: you are afraid it may be disrespectful. But the fear arises only if you have some disrespect somewhere.
Ikkyu is so certain, so absolutely certain, so unhesitatingly certain – that’s why he can burn Buddha, and he can tie Buddha to a pole and can say to him, “Now you cool yourself.”
There is no goal, there is no way – and Buddha taught the way? There is no way to be there, but to be there. And, moreover, there is no there either, but only here. All leadership is misleading, and to guide is to misguide. Buddha was not a guide and Buddha was not a leader.
Neither am I a guide; I am simply sharing my understanding, not guiding you. If you love me, if you love this moment of sharing, you will see a few things immediately. You need not wait for tomorrow, because all that happens, happens now. The trees are green now, and the birds are singing now, and the rivers are flowing now, and I am speaking now. And you are thinking to get enlightened tomorrow? Now or never!
It is a sharing. It is not guidance. There is no way, so there cannot be any guide, and there cannot be any guidebooks, either.
The master is one who guides without guiding and leads without leading – who simply shares his understanding, his being, his love; who makes himself available to people who are ready to see, who are ready to open their eyes, who are ready to open their hearts. I am available. If you are also available to me, then something is going to happen this moment. Then something is already happening. In that availability between the master and the disciple, something is immediately transferred, some transformation happens.
One cannot get out of illusion, because illusion is that which is not. You have never been in it. See the point and you are out of it – the goose is out! The great illusion is to think that there is illusion.
The mind –
What shall we call it?
It is the sound of the breeze
That blows through the pines
In the Indian-ink picture.
Ikkyu has expressed it perfectly well. What is this mind, this illusion in which we are living? What to call it? The mind is not something and it is not nothing. It is something between the two. It is not real, otherwise you could not get out of it. It is not unreal either, otherwise it would not have been there. Then what is it?
The mind – what shall we call it? It is just in between the two; it is unreal and appears as real – it is an appearance. You see…
One evening, the sun has set and it is darkening. The night is descending, and on a footpath in a forest you come across a rope. But you don’t see the rope, you see a snake. The rope is there, but the rope has triggered the idea of a snake in you. Many things must have contributed to it. You were afraid; it was getting dark and you are not yet home and the forest is dangerous, and the animals and snakes and lions and – who knows? – and ghosts. And when you are alone in a forest all kinds of things start becoming, taking shape in your mind. And out of that fearing mind you see a rope, but you can’t see the rope. Your eyes are so full of fear, ideas, imaginations, you see a snake. And maybe the wind was blowing and the rope had shaken a little bit, was trembling. And you start running away, and you scream, and you are in danger.
Such is the mind! A rope not seen as rope, a rope seen as a snake, is the mind. One has to come closer to the snake to see what it actually is.
That’s what meditation is all about. Come closer to the mind, become a witness, watch it. Watch silently. Don’t analyze – just watch. Look into it, what it is, what is happening. And sooner or later you will see there is only a rope, no snake. The moment the rope is seen, the snake has disappeared. Then you will not ask, “What am I going to do with the snake now? Should I kill it?” That question is meaningless.
This is the situation of the mind. We have not seen it clearly, we have not seen it from a closer viewpoint. We have not seen it through awareness, alertness. We have not watched it.
The mind – what shall we call it? It is the sound of the breeze that blows through the pines in the Indian-ink picture. A beautiful illustration: fragile Indian-ink on a fragile Japanese rice-paper, and pine trees and wind blowing.
Have you seen Zen paintings? No other style of painting can paint breeze. For that, that fragile rice-paper is needed and the fragile Indian black ink, and a Zen master to paint it because he knows the mind. Just an idea – but you can see in the painting the breeze blowing and the trees bending and the river has ripples. And a small, small human figure, and his clothes are also showing the wind; you can see the flow of the wind. The wind can’t be seen, but you can see the impact of the wind. It is not unreal, it is not absolutely unreal, otherwise how can you see it? It is not real either, because how can it be real? – it is just an ink painting. So it is somewhere between the two; it is maya, it is magic, it is illusion, it is dream.
So don’t fight with the mind and don’t flee from the mind either. In both cases you have taken it for granted that it is real. There are two types of people: those who follow the mind – they have taken it as real – and those who either fight or flee; they have also taken it as real. There is no need to follow it, there is no need to fight or flee. All that is needed is to look deep into it.
A deep look, and you see the pine trees bending in an ink painting. The breeze is just a painted breeze; nothing is real there, nothing is really happening there. Have you not seen your mind as just a movie, millions of pictures moving?
Aldous Huxley has imagined in some future century that movies will change into feelies. It is possible, and it is going to happen, because whatsoever a man once imagines sooner or later becomes a reality. A feelie is going to happen. A feelie means you will be sitting in a movie house, but you will not only see, you will also feel.
For example, it is raining…then you will feel the wetness in the air, the wind blowing, even a few drops of water coming to you. You see on the screen a rose garden and the whole house will become full of rose fragrance. If the film is three-dimensional and creates all the sensations that are moving in front of you, it will create more illusions.
And it can be done in such a way… That too is possible. In Disneyland they have some place like that, where the screen is not only in front, but the screen is all around you. You are sitting just in the middle, just as you are sitting here in the middle. If you look at the back, you see the trees. If you look at me, I am here; if you look at the side, the people. You are sitting in the middle and the screen is all around.
They have made a few films, experimental. For example, you are flying in an airplane and you look out of the window this side and you see the clouds and the sun setting, and you look from the other side and it is darkening, and you look at the back and you see the clouds going further away, back, and you look ahead and you are reaching into something else. And if you can also smell, then the reality will become more and more real. It can almost grip you absolutely; you can forget for a few moments that what you are seeing is just a movie or a feelie. You can be lost.
And this is the situation we are in; this is what mind is. Mind is a feelie. It is simply making many dreams available to you, but in three dimensions, with all the feelings.
Just think: it is possible one day, sitting glued in the chair before your TV, you see a beautiful woman walk out of the TV, hug you – and you know this is just a feelie. This is possible! This is going to happen. And you know deep down that this is just nonsense, there is nobody, but still, you can smell the woman, the French perfume. You can even touch her, the curves…
How can you protect yourself? This is possible; this is not impossible. This is going to happen. Theoretically it has become possible; now practically it is going to become possible. Then you may be lost for a few seconds in a great love affair. You will forget – you would like to forget. Who wants to remember the truth when such a beautiful woman is there? You say, “Okay, let it be a dream or whatsoever it is, but let me enjoy right now.” And she is hugging you and you can feel her all over your body. And still deep down somewhere a consciousness goes on saying that this is just a feelie, there is nobody.
This is what happens to a meditator. A meditator will still love a woman, but he knows this is a feelie. He will hold hands and will know. Who knows whether there is anybody or not? There is no way to prove that somebody else exists outside you. In a dream you think whatsoever you are seeing is true; in the morning it is not true, no longer true. Now, is there any way to say, right now, whether you are seeing me in a dream or in reality? It may be just a dream! You have fallen asleep and you are dreaming the morning talk. Is there any way to distinguish whether it is real or unreal? There is no way. It may be just a dream; you may be just seeing things and they may not be there.
And the problem becomes very, very deep, because in a dream you forget that it is a dream. And you have seen the dream so many times, millions of times, and always in the morning you find it was all unreal. But the next day again you see the dream and it is real again.
The day-dream becomes unreal in the night, and the night-dream becomes unreal in the day. Now what is the way to decide which is which, and which is really real and which is only apparently real?
Buddha says it is all a mind game. Closely watch the mind, and slowly, slowly you can start seeing the mind game. Not that you need not be there anymore, because it is all a mind game – where are you going, where can you go? There is no need to go anywhere, but just to know.
You can enjoy this picture all around you in Disneyland: you are flying in an airplane, and you can see Niagara Falls and the mountains receding back, and you can see from every side…and then you are disillusioned for a moment. There will be a continuous shifting of consciousness: one moment you will think it is real, one moment you will think, “It is not real; I am just in Disneyland.”
Mind is a Disneyland.
The mind –
What shall we call it?
It is the sound of the breeze
That blows through the pines
In the Indian-ink picture.

The mind remaining
Just as it was born –
Without any prayer
It becomes the Buddha.
A very revolutionary statement: the mind remaining just as it was born. If the mind remains just a mirror and reflects nothing, is not conditioned by anything, has no content… The content-less mind is the only reality we can be certain about and certain of.
That’s why Zen people say: Look into the original mind. “Original mind” means when there was no impact of anything on the mind: before conditioning started, before you were told who you are, before you were taught, before you learned, before your mind started collecting contents. Just go deep down into that first moment where there was no content but only the container, just the mirror reflecting nothing. That is real. The witness is real.
The mind remaining just as it was born – without any prayer it becomes the Buddha. Then there is no need to pray, no need to do anything; no methodology, no technique is needed. Just go deep down and see the original mind, the contentless mind – the mirror without dust, the mind without thoughts, without clouds – and you have arrived, and you are a buddha.
The difference between you and Buddha is only this: you have more than Buddha. Buddha has less than you, because Buddha is just a pure mind and you are a thousand and one things added to that purity. So remember, Buddha is poorer than you, I am poorer than you. You are far richer than me. I am lacking many things, missing many things: misery, meaninglessness, frustration, anger, passion, greed…and a thousand and one things you can count. You are really rich!
When Buddha attained enlightenment, somebody asked him, “What have you gained?”
He laughed. He said, “I have not gained, I have lost much. I am far poorer than I used to be. I have lost all ignorance, all illusions, all dreams. Now I am just my originality.”
Tell a lie,
And you fall into hell.
Then what will happen to Buddha
Who contrived
Things that don’t exist?
Again, Ikkyu is again and again teasing Buddha. He says: Tell a lie… Buddha has said: Don’t tell lies. Buddha says: “Tell a lie and you will fall into hell.” “Then what about Buddha himself?” Ikkyu asks. “He has been telling all kinds of lies.”
In the first place, truth cannot be said, so whatsoever you say about it is a lie. And Buddha talked for forty-two years, day in, day out, morning, evening, he was talking and talking. And he says truth cannot be said! Then for forty-two years, what was this man doing? Was he crazy? Truth cannot be said, and he went on saying and saying…and that’s what I am doing.
I say truth cannot be said, never has been said, will never be said – so whatsoever I am saying cannot be true.
Ikkyu asks:
Tell a lie, and you fall into hell. Then what will happen to Buddha who contrived things that don’t exist? And Buddha not only says a thousand and one things about truth, he also goes on devising methods, meditations – vipassana, anapansatiyoga. And he says there is no way to do anything, there is no need to do anything, and still he teaches people what to do, how to do. He says there is no goal and he talks about the path. He says there is nowhere to go and he says: I will teach you the right path to it. Now what kind of nonsense is this? It is nonsense, but still of great significance.
Through talking for forty-two years continuously and saying again and again that truth cannot be said, he made many people aware of the phenomenon that truth cannot be said. He made many people realize the phenomenon that truth cannot be said – that truth can only be experienced. By devising methods, meditations, he helped many people to come to a point where one knows no meditation is needed and no meditation was needed in the beginning, either.
But people are such that even if they come to truth, they come very, very slowly, very grudgingly, very hesitatingly. Inch by inch they have to be pushed. The phenomenon can happen in a single jump, but they have to be pushed inch by inch. And to push them, a thousand and one lies have to be invented by the master, have to be invented. I go on inventing lies – and just have mercy on me, otherwise I am going to hell!
Listen and understand what I am saying, otherwise I will have to invent more lies. If you don’t listen then there is no other way than to go on inventing lies. It is like this – Buddha has told a story:

A man returns home – he has been to the market. When he comes home, suddenly he sees the house is on fire. His children are playing inside, and he calls them and he shouts, “The house is on fire. Come out!”
But the children don’t understand what it means that the house is on fire. In fact, they become very intrigued, and they jump and shout and they enjoy the flames all around the house. They have never seen such a beautiful scene. Children are children. And the father is very worried. He cannot go in; the whole house is surrounded by fire. He can simply shout.
He devises a method. The children are not ready to understand. They don’t understand that the fire is dangerous – they can’t understand, they have no experience of it. He simply remembers that when he was going to the market they had said, “Bring some toys for us.”
So he shouts, “I have brought those toys for you. Come out!” And they all come rushing out. He has not brought the toys, but the children are out – that is the point.

That is the whole work of a master. You come to me and I give you toys: go to the Encounter group, go to Tao, go to Tai Chi, or – if you are a little toughie – then to go to the torturers, Rolfing, etcetera. These are toys. You don’t want to come out of the house; I have to create toys. But these are all lies.
Ikkyu is just jokingly saying this: Tell a lie, and you fall into hell. Then what will happen to Buddha who contrived things that don’t exist? If you meditate over these sayings, great will be the revelation out of them. All teaching, the teaching of Buddha included, the teaching of Ikkyu included, my teaching included, all teachings included, are lies, false, as far as words are used in them – because the moment truth is said it becomes a lie. It can be experienced but not expressed.
The Buddha tells us the way to salvation, but there is no way and no salvation! Then what is he saying? He is simply saying there is no way and no salvation. See it, and the salvation has happened. There is nowhere to go – see it and you have arrived. It is a question of seeing it.
And if you start seeing, your whole dream-life disappears.
I was reading…

Tucker N. Callaway has written in his memoirs: It was twilight as I wandered through the spacious grounds of a Zen temple, Nanzenji, in the ancient city of Kyoto. Overhead the rush of water through the brick trough of the ivy-covered aqueduct mingled with wind sighs from boughs of gigantic pines. Tasting the fragrance of burning needles, I moved toward the red glow of a tiny fire deep in the shadows. A black-robed monk was at his task of raking clean the sand. After timeless moments of pregnant silence, I spoke: “What is your intention in Zen?”
“To be this smoke,” he replied.
All had been said.

If you understand what Ikkyu is saying to you, your dream-life will disappear like smoke. You will disappear like smoke. And then what is left is truth. And then what is left is nirvana. One never becomes enlightened. When one is not, there is enlightenment.
Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
Today you said that the way to enlightenment is long and arduous, and also that it is here and now, now or never.
As it is herenow, how can it be long and arduous?
That’s why it is long and arduous – because you are not herenow. You are far away from herenow. You will have to come, you will have to journey.
When I say truth is not far away, I mean truth is herenow – I don’t mean you are not far away from truth. You are far away from truth. Truth is not far away from you, truth cannot be far away from you. Truth, godliness, exists in you as you. It exists as eternity, not as past or future. It simply is. How can it be far away? There is no place for it to be far away. It is all over the place. It is everywhere – in your breathing, in your heartbeat. But you are not here.
Truth has not gone away: you have gone away from it.
You have to understand this. For example, in the night you sleep and you dream – you dream you have gone to the moon. You are here, but the dream has taken you far away. In the morning when you awake, you will not find yourself on the moon – you will be here in Pune. But in the dream you were far away from your reality. You have to come back from your dreams…and the journey is arduous because you have invested so much in those dreams, and you are hoping to gain so much from those dreams, and you have lived in those dreams for so long that they have become reality, your reality.
The East calls this dreaming state of mind maya – illusion. And then you can go on searching for truth in your illusions and you will not find it. You have to awake. And to be awake is arduous because a thousand and one dreams will be shattered. And in those dreams all your joys, all your so-called successes, ambitions, are involved. Your whole ego is involved. The ego will be shattered.
You are here, but the ego has gone to the moon – and the ego can only live through dreams, it can only live through illusions. It is nourished by illusions. The more illusions you have, the more grandiose an ego you have. The greater your illusions, the bigger your ego. It is very difficult to renounce those dreams.
In the East this is called sannyas: to renounce those dreams. When it is said, “Renounce the world,” it is not meant the actual world – the wife, the husband, the children, the house, the marketplace. No, not at all. What is really meant is this dream-world in which you go on constantly moving away from yourself and away from reality. Renounce the dreams! And that is arduous.

Now, let me read your question again: “Today you said that the way to enlightenment is long and arduous” – it is – “and also that it is here and now” – it is. “As it is herenow, how can it be long and arduous?”
That’s why. You are not to go anywhere, you have to come here! You have already gone somewhere. You have moved away from your innermost core. You never come home. And truth exists there, but you keep truth at the back. Your eyes are roaming far away in distant stars; they never come back. From one star to another you go on hopping. Your mind is a vagabond.
So it is arduous and yet it is easy. The contradiction is only apparent. It is arduous because of you: it is easy because of existence. If you think of existence you can take it very easily, you can relax. If you depend on yourself, it is very arduous.
That’s why I say if you depend on yourself, if you depend on your effort, you may never come back – because it is through effort that you have gone away. You have to surrender. In that very surrendering, grace descends.
And what can you surrender? What have you got? Why are you so afraid of surrendering? You have only dreams and nothing else, just soap bubbles.
Surrender your dreams and the truth is herenow. That’s why I say now or never – because existence always exists in the now, and the mind exists in the then. Existence is here and the mind is always there, and they never meet. Here and there never meet; now and then never meet. Just look deep down in your mind: it is very rare to come across a contemporary.
Somebody is living five thousand years back; he is still part of the days of Rig Veda. He is still reading Rig Veda; he is still following the Vedic ritual. Five thousand years have passed, but he has not come here, now. He lives there: in the dead, in the gone, in the memory.
Why do you call yourself a Hindu or a Christian, or a Mohammedan or a Jaina? To call yourself these things simply means you cling to the past. These are names that come from the past. Herenow you are only a consciousness, neither Hindu, nor Mohammedan, nor Christian. If you get entangled with the past, you are a Hindu, or a brahmin or a sudra. Or there are a few other people who think they are very progressive: Communists, Socialists. They are involved in the future; hence they think they are very progressive. But to be in the past is to be as far away from the present as to be in the future. It makes no difference.
There are two kinds of mind in the world. One: involved with the past, the orthodox mind; and the other: involved in the future, the so-called revolutionary mind – but both are minds. The orthodox thinks the golden age has passed, the Ramrajya has passed. And the revolutionary, the so-called revolutionary, thinks the golden age has to come, the Utopia has yet to happen. His eyes are there on the distant future. But there is no difference between these two; they are the same kind of people. Both are avoiding the present, both are escaping from the present, both are denying reality. So a Communist or a Mohammedan, a Socialist or a Hindu, to me are all in the same boat – the boat of time.
Whom do I call religious? The man who is no longer in the boat of time, who starts living in eternity, who lives in the now, who has no past and no future. Who does not go to the Rig Veda and who does not go to Das Kapital – who simply goes in himself. Who looks at the sun that is there on the horizon, and who listens to the birds that are singing right now, who looks at the trees that are blooming. Just see that quality of being; here, that collectedness, that integrity, that centering I call religiousness.
Religion does not mean affiliation. Religion means being in reality without any dreams. Dreams come either from the past or from the future. A religious man is an empty man, a hollow bamboo. He allows the reality to live through him, he flows with it. He has no goals, he is not going anywhere. He is just being here, as godliness is just being here…hence the meeting.
That’s why I say now or never. Now is eternity. But I am never denying time: I am saying you will not find truth, godliness in time.
The present is not part of time; that has to be remembered. Ordinarily you have been taught that time has three tenses: past, present, future. That is absolutely wrong. It has no understanding about time. Time has only two tenses – past and future. The present is not part of time: the present is part of eternity. The present is that which abides, which is always. To relax into it is meditation, or call it prayerfulness. And to know it is celebration. Infinite joy starts showering on you, great benediction descends; with the past and the future all worries disappear, all dreams disappear.
That’s what Ikkyu means when he says the original mind is clean, clean of all ideas. It is a mirror without dust. It simply mirrors that which is.

The second question:
Osho,
It has been my experience that it is not so much that the religious experience is illogical as it is supra-logical; that is, it seems to transcend the more limited and fear-invented logic that is of the head alone in that it includes the logic that is of the heart and beyond. For it has been that whenever I have allowed myself to feel rather than think, that which emerges only seems illogical at first to that aspect of mind which is strictly limiting my perspective. But then whenever I have allowed myself the freedom to plummet to the depths of the feeling, then the cosmological reason for my particular need to express has been shown in terms post-birth, birth, pre-birth and past life trauma. Could there be anything more grandiosely logical than the infinite interconnectiveness of the vast emptiness? How could it be any other way? If it cannot be any other way, then it must all hold supra-logically together as it so obviously does.
From such an analysis it would seem logical to conclude, as mystics have always done, that the head's fear of taking the quantum leap into the much vaster logic is where the problem sits, rather than it being a problem of logic per se.
The question is from Swami Anand Parad. He is a well-known author. And the answer is in the question itself.
That’s why my people were laughing – they have answered. They have not left anything for me to answer. It is all logic, logic-chopping.
And remember, logic is very cunning. Cunningness is intrinsic to logic. It can pretend, it can talk in terms of supra-logical, but that supra-logical is nothing but an extension of the same logical mind.

Go slowly into this question: “It has been my experience that it is not so much that the religious experience is illogical as it is supra-logical.”
Now the logic is trying to defend itself. The logic is afraid of the illogical. If it is called supra-logical then it is okay – just by changing the label? A rose is a rose is a rose – what you call it will not make any difference. It will be a rose called by any other name whatsoever. Just by calling it “supra-logical,” why does your mind feel better? Calling it supra-logical, the mind has claimed it. It says, “It is within my limits – supra maybe, but it is within my limits. I can cover it, I can hold it. You need not go beyond me.”
You have just to become a little more logical. You have to just make your boundaries a little bigger.
Your imprisonment will remain. The jail becomes a supra-jail. It has bigger boundaries; you push the boundaries farther away. You can push them so far away that you cannot see them. That’s what is happening in the world, has been happening always. What you call a nation, what is it? It is a supra-jail. The boundaries are so far away that you cannot see them. But when you cross the boundaries of a country to another country, you remember then that you are a prisoner. Then you know that you are surrounded by police and the army, that a visa is needed, that a passport is needed. That you don’t belong to the earth, that the whole earth does not belong to you, that it is a big jail called India, China, Pakistan, America, Canada. There are many jails on the earth, but they are so big! Unless you come closer to the boundary you will not know them.
Have you not felt it? Crossing the boundary of a country you feel great uneasiness; you simply feel yourself a prisoner. You are not a free man. And the freedom seems to be just talk.
Freedom cannot exist on the earth unless nations disappear. Nations cannot allow freedom. All the constitutions of the world, even the so-called democratic constitutions, talk and only talk about “freedom of movement.” What kind of freedom of movement is this? And you must know it from bitter experience, because you are here suffering all kinds of indignities. The police are after you, the government is after you, telling you: You have to leave the country; your six weeks or eight weeks are over. What kind of freedom is this? Freedom of movement, you call it, and a man cannot move from one country to another country.
The prison is big. It is a supra-prison. If you are not a Hindu you cannot go into a Hindu temple. If you are not a Jaina you are not allowed in a Jaina temple. These are again prisons. And there are prisons and prisons and prisons… Mind is very cunning in deceiving itself.
That’s why I don’t call it supra-logical. I simply call it illogical – for a certain reason. The reason is this: by calling it illogical I want to shatter all the walls. Supra-logical and the wall remains. It recedes farther back, it may almost become invisible, but it remains. Hence I insist that it is illogical. The jump into godliness is illogical, it is not logical.
I agree with the Christian mystic Tertullian: “Credo quia absurdum.” He says: “I believe in God because God is absurd, illogical, irrational.” A rational God will not be much of a God; it will be just a concept. A logical God, a logical universe, cannot be a real universe – because logic is an imposition, it is an invention of man. The trees don’t know about it. The stars don’t know anything about it. It is only man who imposes a certain pattern.
All patterns are imposed out of fear. That fear is why man always wants to label things – once he has labeled a thing he feels very at ease. Now he thinks he knows. This naming business has gone very deep.
Somebody asks, “What kind of tree is this?” and you tell him, “This is a pine.” And he is satisfied, as if he now knows what it is. Just by calling it a pine, he thinks he knows. If he had not been told what kind of tree it is, he would have felt uneasy, because that illogical tree, beyond human language, human comprehension, is standing there as a challenge. Pin it down, put a label on it, and you are satisfied. What have you come to know by putting a label on it? Thousands of talented people simply go on doing this naming business – they call it research. What kind of research is this? This is not research at all, it is not even one search; it is just making mind feel easy. Small children go on asking, “What is this?” you just answer anything – ABC – you say anything, and they are satisfied. Then they are asking about something else: “And what is this?” They go on just asking, “What is this?” From that very curiosity, all naming business arises.
When I say life is illogical, I mean it is not nameable. Try to understand what I mean. I mean it is not nameable. You cannot pinpoint it. Call it supra-logical and you have pinpointed it, you have pinned it down. Now it is no longer a live butterfly; it is a pinned butterfly in an album, dead. You have transformed its quality completely, you have destroyed it.
When I say illogical I mean unnameable, I mean no word will be able to express it.

Lao Tzu says: “Truth cannot be said.” The moment you say it, it becomes untrue. This is what I mean by calling reality illogical, irrational. It is beyond the comprehension of mind. Call it supra-logical, and you feel at ease; then you are no longer afraid of it. You have the feeling that you know about it.
Absence of knowledge creates deep insecurity. There is still something which we don’t know. It has to be known! Maybe there is danger. Have you not felt it when you meet a stranger? The immediate curiosity is who he is: what name, what religion, what country? Immediately you start inquiring. Just within four, five questions you have pinned the man down – he is a Hindu, an Indian, works as a clerk in an office. “How much salary?” In India they even ask that, and they even ask how much you get on the side. Nobody feels any insult; nobody feels, “What is being asked?” People say, “Answer!”
Once you have known the financial position, the status, the name, the religion, the caste, you relax. So you can relax, you know this man. You have known this type of man before. But can any man be pinned down like that? No two men are alike. Each individual is only like himself. By calling him a Hindu you are just misinterpreting the whole thing. You may have known other Hindus, but they were other Hindus, and this Hindu is a totally different phenomenon. You cannot understand him by understanding other Hindus. You may have known other clerks, but this is a totally different man.
There is no way of understanding him through these queries. If you really want to understand a man, you will have to go deep down into this man’s mystery – and that is illogical. You will have to go into love. That’s what I mean when I say illogical.
You say, “It has been my experience that it is not so much that the religious experience is illogical as it is supra-logical.” You have not experienced religion yet. You don’t know what you are talking about. You may have felt a few emotions, very elevated, but that is not religion. Any experience as such is not religion – religion is not an experience. Try to see the point. Religion is not an experience because there is no experiencer left; it is a dissolution. One disappears into it. One cannot experience it. One is not found. One simply dissolves, just like a drop of water falls into the ocean and disappears into the ocean. Is this an experience? It is death, it is disappearance. And yet the drop has become the ocean itself.
When a man disappears into existence like a drop disappearing in the ocean, this is religious experience, but can you call it experience? The experiencer is no longer there. The subjectivity is no longer there; there is no object to it. Our ordinary experiences are divided into three things: the knower, the known and the knowledge. The religious experience is a unique phenomenon. There is nothing known, there is no knower, there is only knowing. The knower has gone, the known has disappeared, there is only knowing. The lover is no longer there, the beloved is no longer there, there is only loving. It can’t be called an experience ordinarily. If you want to call it “experience,” put it in inverted commas.
You say: “It has been my experience that it is not so much that the religious experience is illogical as it is supra-logical.” Then whatsoever you have experienced is a mind phenomenon. Your mind can comprehend it. Then you can make it supra-logical!
For example, if you feel a certain energy arising in your spine, this is supra-logical. In fact, I will not even call it supra-logical – this is just logical. There is no need to bring that supra, that big word. It is all experience, a physical, tangible experience. Or you see light deep down in your third-eye center, great light arises – this is an experience. And this you can call supra-logical because it is not an ordinary experience. But this is not religion.
Religion is still far beyond all this. There is no light, there is no energy, there is no God to be encountered, there is no you left – all has disappeared. There is utter emptiness, what Buddha calls shunyata – nothingness. That is not supra-logical: it is simply illogical. Logic cannot exist there because mind as such is no more. Logic is a shadow of the mind. When the mind itself has disappeared, logic cannot exist, and supra-logic can exist only when logic is in existence; they are linked together.
You say: “That is, it seems to transcend the more limited and fear-invented logic that is of the head alone…” What you are calling “the logic of the head alone” is the only logic. Sometimes you can even start calling the logic of the heart a different kind of logic, but it is not logic at all. If it is still logic, ordinary or supra, then it is still of the head. Head is logic, heart is illogic – that is their polarity. And if you call it also logic, then you have made your heart also an appendage to the head; it is no longer the polar opposite. Head is logic and heart is supra-logic – you have put them into one line; they have become part of one syllogism. Heart is not part of the same syllogism. Heart cannot think, so how can it have supra-logic? Heart feels; feeling has no logic. It is illogical.
You fall in love with a woman, what logic is there? And if there is logic, there can’t be love. If you think she is rich, if you think that she is the only daughter of her parents, if you think power and prestige are going to come through her, then there is logic but there is no love. That is the problem. Your parents think logically about your love affair, and you think illogically. That’s why parents and children can’t communicate – the gap, the generation gap. The young person is still brave enough; life has not cowed him down. He can still take the risk; he would like to take the risk. He has energy and vitality to go into the unknown.
But the older generation, the people who have lived their lives, they know that it is dangerous, that it is insecure: better be logical. Marriage was created by logical people. They killed love affairs completely; it was dangerous. India is one of the most logical countries in the world. The logic was: let the children get married, even when they don’t know anything about love – child-marriage. That was the logical conclusion.
Once they become youths, they will want to fool around. It looks foolish to the older generation: they will get into difficulty; they will start falling in love with people who may not be economically secure. Or there will be a thousand and one other problems. A Brahmin boy can fall in love with a Sudra girl, and that will create difficulties. A rich man’s girl can fall in love with a poor man’s boy, and there will be difficulty. It is better to avoid all difficulties: child-marriage was invented. That was a logical conclusion. Before they know anything of love let them get married, so they will grow like brother and sister, as brothers and sisters do. You never choose your sister, you never choose your brother – and still you love. That love is not real love; that is only liking, familiarity. Living together, playing together, one starts liking.
India reduced marriage. There is only one relationship with all freedom to choose. You cannot choose your father, it is given; you cannot choose your mother, you cannot choose your sister, you cannot choose your brother. You cannot choose, you cannot choose your uncles – they are all given. There was only one freedom left which was dangerous: you could choose your wife or your husband. India destroyed that freedom too. You were not allowed even to choose that. Small children, four years old, five years old were married.

When my mother got married she was only seven years old. I was asking her again and again, “Tell me how you felt?”
She said, “I didn’t know what was happening. I was simply joyous that something was happening. I used to run out to see what was happening, and they would pull me back inside the house. And they locked me in on the day when the real ceremony was going to happen, because I was so interested in the bands and the music and the horses. And the people were coming…”
And I asked my father, “What did you feel?”
He said, “I don’t know, I just enjoyed the horse ride!”
He was just a small child, he must have enjoyed it. And with so many people walking around, he must have felt like a king. Something was happening, but what was happening?

Then they grew together. Then naturally, when you grow together you start liking each other, but love has been denied, love has been killed. It is very rare, there is not much possibility of love growing, because all romance has been destroyed.
Heart is illogical, mind is logical. Don’t call heart supra-logical. That is again your fear. You are afraid of the heart; you want to bring it under the rule of the head. Logic is head’s rule.
There are people who don’t love. They think they love: their feeling also comes via thinking. When they come to me and they say, “I think I am in love,” I ask them, “You just be true: either you are in love or you are not in love. How can you think you are in love?” Thinking is bogus and false, but thinking has become so predominant. We have been taught to think and to avoid feelings.
Feelings are dangerous. They have no utility. Thinking is utilitarian; it makes you capable of living in the world, of fighting in the world – for survival, for your ambitions. It makes you calculating, cunning, clever. It gives you power. Feeling? Feeling does not give you any power. Feeling has no politics in it – that is the problem. Thinking is political, feeling is religious – and I have never come across a political person who is religious or can be religious, unless he renounces politics. I have never come across a religious person who can be political. It is impossible. If he is political, then his religion is false. Then his being religious is also part of his politics.
You say: “For it has been that whenever I have allowed myself to feel rather than think…” My feeling is that you were still thinking – you were thinking that you were feeling.
“…that which emerges only seems illogical at first to that aspect of mind which is strictly limiting my perspective. But then whenever I have allowed myself the freedom to plummet to the depths of the feeling…” Who are you going into “the depths of feeling?” – the head, the mind, the thinking, the logic? Yes, if you go into feelings with logic… Logic is a chronic systematizer; it is obsessed with systematization. Wherever it goes, it systematizes, it immediately starts categorizing. It cannot allow chaos; chaos seems to be like a death. It immediately starts putting things in order.
Who is this one who goes deep into the feelings? About whom are you talking? You are identified with the head; feelings are something accidental into which you are going. You are not the feeling. You are the head, you remain the head. Then, naturally, sooner or later, you will systematize. And, if you cannot systematize something which goes on rebelling against the systems, you will deny it; you will say it doesn’t exist. You will ignore it, you will forget about it. Nobody wants to allow something which becomes a constant strain.
Millions of people have denied God because the very presence of God, the very idea that God is, is frightening. That means sooner or later you will have to encounter him; sooner or later you will have to face him. That makes people very much afraid. They start trembling – the very idea: facing God! Then what are you doing? Is it worth it? Will you be able to say to God that this is what you have been doing? This is what you have wasted your life in? That you were a prime minister? That you were so stupid as to waste your whole life for power-politics? That you were a rich man; that you wasted your whole life in collecting rubbish? Will you be able to face God?
And all that you attained in life will be left here. You will not be able to carry your money or your power. You will be standing naked, utterly ashamed.
There is a beautiful story…

When Alexander the Great was coming to India, he met one strange man, Diogenes, on the way. Diogenes is one of the rare flowerings of human consciousness. Alexander was interested in the man; he had heard many stories about him. He was afraid to go to him. It was beneath him, it was against his ego. But he was coming to India, and on the way he heard that Diogenes was living just by the side of the river. Then he could not resist the temptation and he thought, “Nobody will know back home that I have gone to see Diogenes. And I can always say that I was just passing and I met him by accident.”
He went to see Diogenes. It was a winter morning, a cool breeze was blowing, and Diogenes was lying on the river-bank, on the sand, taking a naked sunbath. He was a beautiful man. When there is a beautiful soul, a beauty arises which is not of this world – which is illogical. If Alexander looks beautiful, it is logical, remember, because he has all that you think one should have. He has power, money; he has all that one can think or imagine to have. His beauty is that of possessions.
Now, here was a man lying naked, with nothing – he had nothing, not even a begging bowl. At least Buddha had a begging bowl. Diogenes didn’t have a begging bowl, because one day when he was walking, and going toward the river with his begging bowl to get some water to drink, he saw a dog rushing to the river. Of course, the dog reached first, and the dog jumped in the river and drank. Diogenes laughed and he said, “This dog has taught me a lesson. If he can live without a begging bowl, then why can’t I?” He threw away the begging bowl; he also jumped like the dog into the river and drank. Since then he had had nothing. And this dog must have felt something for Diogenes, because they became friends; they lived together.
Alexander came. He could not believe the grace of the man. He had never seen such a graceful man, such utter beauty, something from the unknown, something illogical because there was no reason: you could not pin it down, where it was coming from. He was in awe and he said, “Sir…” He had not said “Sir” to anybody in his life. He said, “Sir, I am immensely impressed by your being, and I would like to do something for you. Is there something that I can do for you?”
Diogenes said, “Just stand to the side because you are preventing the sun… That’s all. I need nothing else.”
Alexander said, “If I have another chance to come to the earth, I will ask God, instead of making me Alexander again, to make me Diogenes.”
Diogenes laughed and he said, “That you won’t ask for, because who is preventing you right now? You can become Diogenes. Where are you going? For months, I have seen armies moving and moving – where are you going, and for what?”
And Alexander said, “I am going to India to conquer the whole world.”
“And then what are you going to do?” Diogenes asked.
And Alexander said, “Then I will rest.”
And Diogenes laughed again and he said, “You are mad – because I am resting now; and I have not conquered the world. I don’t see the necessity of it. If just in the end you want to rest and relax, why not now? How are they related? Who has told you that before resting, you have to conquer the world? And I tell you: if you don’t rest now, then never. You will never be able to conquer the world, because something or other will always remain to be conquered, and life is short and time is fleeting. You will die in the middle of your journey – everybody dies in the middle of the journey.”
Alexander said, “I will keep it always in mind, but right now I cannot do it. But many, many thanks for your advice.”
And Alexander died when he was returning from India, he died on the way. He never reached home, he died on the way. And that day he remembered Diogenes. Only Diogenes was in his mind: he could never rest in his life, and that man rested.
And then a strange story has been told down the ages, that Diogenes also died on the same day. And they met on the way to God, just crossing the border river. Alexander was ahead, a few feet ahead, when he heard somebody behind. He looked back, and he was surprised, surprised and ashamed. It was Diogenes, the same beautiful man.
Alexander tried to hide his shame. He said “So again! Again we are meeting, the emperor and the beggar.”
And Diogenes said, “That is true. But you misunderstand one thing: you don’t know who is the beggar and who is the emperor. You are the beggar, and I am the emperor, because I lived my life totally, I enjoyed it. And I can go to God, I can face him. You will not be able to face him, because I can see: you cannot even face me! You are trembling, you are ashamed. You cannot look into my eyes – what will happen to you when you have to face God? Your whole life has been a waste.”

People deny God – they have to deny because the presence of God makes them very, very uneasy. My own experience is that people who are very much in fear, deeply in fear, deny God. They deny all that is incomprehensible to them. They always want everything to be systematized, because once you systematize something, it is within your control, it is in your fist, you are the master. When something goes on slipping out of your systematization, you start freaking out.
And life is illogical. If you don’t understand the mystics, ask the physicists – they have also stumbled upon the same fact. Ask Albert Einstein or Eddington, ask these people, because they are now seeing very strange phenomena, strange and illogical.
Looking into matter deeply, physicists have stumbled upon the same illogicality. Electrons behave in a way that is not logical; there is no way to predict the behavior of an electron. And its behavior is contradictory – that’s why it is called quanta. Quanta means – and from quanta the word quantum leap that you have used in your question – quanta means a particle is behaving in such a strange way that you can think of it as a particle or as a wave – both together, simultaneously. That is impossible. That is very much against Euclidean geometry. Either something is a dot, a point, or something is a line; either something is a particle or something is a wave. One thing cannot be both together, simultaneously. But that’s how it is.
When Heisenberg was asked, “How can you say it? It is illogical,” he said, “It is illogical, but what can we do? We cannot order those quanta to behave rightly and logically. We have no power over them. That’s how they are behaving. So if it is illogical, change your logic – but we cannot change quanta. We cannot put policemen there to say, ‘Behave! Behave logically, behave morally!’”
Hence, the theory of indeterminacy. Uncertainty has arisen. Physics has become almost mysticism, because they have also come across the phenomenon. It is illogical, it is incomprehensible. That is the meaning of a mystery. If the mystery becomes comprehensible, then it is no longer a mystery; you have solved it.
And man, out of fear, has been trying to solve all the mysteries. If he cannot solve them, then he denies. That’s why scientists go on denying the soul – because they cannot solve it. The very idea creates so many problems. It becomes insoluble: “There is no soul.”
There are things which are not comprehensible and yet can be experienced. Just think of two persons going to listen to great music. One is a musician, the other is a non-musician. Both listen to the same music. The musician will listen to the harmony, the melody, and the non-musician will listen only to the single notes, individual notes. He will hear the noise – one note, another note, another note, notes following notes – but he will not see the thread running between them, he will not be able to see the melody that arises out of them. That melody remains invisible to his ears; it is not heard. But the musician will be able to hear the melody, although he cannot prove it – it is incomprehensible.
What is melody? That is godliness. What is melody? Melody is that music which is something more than the parts; it is something more than the sum total of the parts. That is the meaning of soul: something more than the sum total of the body-mind is soul. And what is godliness? Something more than the universe, more than the sum total of all the parts. But that is incomprehensible, and that is not supra-logical, because supra-logical is again comprehension of the same mind – the same mind trying to become more and more clever.
“From such an analysis,” you say, “it would seem logical to conclude, as mystics have always done, that the head’s fear of taking the quantum leap into the much vaster logic is where the problem sits rather than its being a problem of logic per se.”
Logic is fear. They are the same thing. Logic is out of fear! Out of the fear of the uncomprehended, out of fear of the chaos, logic creates a small world, clear-cut. Logic is like a garden that you have planted, and not even like a Zen garden, but like an English garden – clean-cut, symmetrical, rational. That’s why English gardens are so ugly, because they are so artificial and so unnatural. In nature there is no symmetry. If you go into a jungle there is no symmetry; trees are growing in their own ways and every tree is doing its own thing. But that is the beauty of a jungle. You can feel something godly there, but you cannot feel anything godly in an English garden. You can feel something Victorian, but not godly.
That’s the beauty of a Zen garden.
It happened once…

A great emperor was learning from a Zen master about Zen gardening. He had been learning for three years, and he had made a beautiful garden; he had thousands of gardeners working on it. He was learning from the master and he was implementing everything that he learned.
After three years the master came. It was the examination. The emperor was trembling, because he had known the man for three years: he was ferocious, and you could not deceive him. The emperor had tried every way, whatsoever the master had said had been implemented, but still he was afraid, because he had not yet learned the secret. He was still logical, he was systematizing things. although he had made a very asymmetrical garden – but in the asymmetry itself there was logic, there was symmetry hidden behind.
The master came. He looked around, and he never smiled. For hours he went around and around. He looked at the whole garden. The emperor was perspiring. He had failed; the master had not said a single word. And then finally he said, “I don’t see a single dead leaf in the garden. Where are all the dead leaves? How can such a big garden be without dead leaves?”
And the emperor said, “I told my servants to remove all the dead leaves because you were coming.”
He said, “Tell them to bring all the dead leaves back!”
They went outside the garden, they brought all the dead leaves back, and the master threw the dead leaves in the garden. And the wind started playing with the dead leaves and it took them all over the place. He laughed and he said, “Now it is okay, now it is natural. But you have failed. Three more years, then I will come again.”

What is a quantum leap? A quantum leap is going from system to no system, going from cosmos to chaos, going from the finite to the infinite, going from the knowledgeable to the unknowable. A quantum leap cannot be from logic to supra-logic. What leap is there? There is no leap; there is a connection, a continuity. Logic and supra-logic are in one continuum – where is the quantum leap? The quantum leap is when you break away from the continuity, when the old disappears and the new suddenly exists – and there is a gap between the two, there is no connection. That needs courage.
That’s why I insist again and again: religion is only for the courageous people. Religion is only for those who dare enough, who love to live dangerously.

The third question:
Osho,
I don't believe in ghosts and yet I am afraid of them. When I am alone in the night, I feel that they are there and they want to speak to me.
In fact, you deny things which you are afraid of. Your denial simply shows your fear. You say, “I don’t believe in ghosts.” If you really don’t believe in ghosts, then from where can the fear come, then why should you be afraid? For what? But your disbelief is nothing but a way of hiding your fear.
Remember: your belief is out of fear; your disbelief is out of fear. If you live in fear, whatsoever happens to you is going to happen out of fear. I see religious people going to the temples and the mosques and the churches out of fear, and I see atheists denying God out of fear. If I look deeply I don’t see any difference between the theist and the atheist. They are both the same – reacting differently, but the situation is the same, and the fear is the same. Their differences are only superficial.
In each atheist the theist is hidden. And in each theist the atheist is hidden – that’s why it is so easy to convert them. Have you heard the famous story of Khalil Gibran?
It happened in a city:

There were two great philosophers – one was a theist, the other was an atheist – and the whole town was getting bored with them, because they were both continuously trying to convince the town. They puzzled everybody because they would roam around and talk to people, and one day a person would talk to one philosopher and would become a theist, and another day he would come across the atheist and he would convince him of atheism, and so on and so forth. The whole town was in great confusion. Their life became impossible.
People want to live. They are not much concerned about atheism or theism. These are just their ways to deceive themselves. But the confusion was too much, and deceiving was impossible because the other was always there – and both were very convincing.
The people of the town decided, “Let these two discuss and debate and decide. Whosoever wins, we will be with him. We are always with the winner.”
People are always with the winner.
In Soviet Russia they are Communists and atheists; they have the power. In India they are all theists. Do you know that before 1917 in Soviet Russia everybody was as religious as they are in India? It was one of the most religious countries – and what happened? What kind of religion was that? What happened? The same country turned absolutely anti-religious! This country can turn absolutely anti-religious. Once Communists are in power, this country will turn absolutely anti-religious. This religion is all bogus. This is just fear. So whosoever is in power, people follow him. If atheists are in power, then they must be right. Power is right; power convinces people.
So in that town, people gathered and they said, “Tonight is a full-moon night and we will stay awake the whole night, and you both discuss and debate and decide. And whosoever wins, we will follow him. We always follow the victorious.”
In India we have an ancient saying that truth always wins. In fact, the case is just vice versa: whatsoever wins becomes the truth. People are always with the winner.
So it happened: that full-moon night, both philosophers debated and discussed. They were both very great logicians. But by the morning the town was in even more confusion: they had convinced each other, so the atheist became the theist and the theist became the atheist. But the trouble continued.

These are not really two different things.

You say: “I don’t believe in ghosts…” You believe; you are simply trying to deceive yourself – hence the fear. You know that when you are alone in the night they are there. But you are unnecessarily afraid of poor ghosts. Compared to human beings, they are very innocent people. Have you ever heard of any ghost turning into an Adolf Hitler, or Genghis Khan or Tamerlane? Have you ever heard of ghosts creating Hiroshima, Nagasaki, preparing for the Third World War? Have you ever heard of ghosts doing any harm? Their harm, if sometimes you hear some stories, is more or less trivial – small things.
I have heard about one young ghost…

The young ghost got very scared when his friends told him too many human stories.

And I have also heard…

Then there was the ghost who did not believe in people.

They are also afraid of you! And you say you are afraid that when you are alone in the night: “I feel that they are there and they want to speak to me…”
I have also heard…

The father ghost told his son, “Spook only when you are spoken to.”

Don’t be worried. They are already very worried; they are afraid of you. Ghosts are simple people, very simple. In fact, they are the same people as you; they just don’t have bodies so they can’t do much harm.
But the fear does not come from ghosts. Fear is there, and out of fear come the ghosts. You are afraid and you would like to project your fear somewhere or other – because to be afraid without any reason to be afraid makes people more frightened. Just to be afraid will be too much; you will not be able to bear it. You need something to be afraid of. So people create their ghosts.
In America they are afraid of Communists. In Russia they are afraid of capitalists, and so on and so forth. People create their ghosts. Hindus are afraid of Mohammedans; Mohammedans are afraid of Hindus. Everybody is afraid of everybody else. Man is afraid of woman; the woman is afraid of man. Children are afraid of their parents, and parents are very deeply afraid of their children. Students are afraid of their teachers, and teachers are very much afraid and trembling inside because of their students.
It is fear, fear is there. And to know fear in its purity is to get beyond it. So don’t bother about ghosts. If somebody convinces you there are no ghosts, or somebody convinces you that they are very beautiful people, that won’t solve the problem. You will simply shift your fear onto something else. Fear will remain; you will find another cause.
It makes no difference. Down the ages man has been changing his philosophy, the causes, but basically human reality remains the same. For example, in the past people were afraid of ghosts; they used to become possessed by ghosts. Jesus relieved many people of ghosts. Then philosophies changed. Sigmund Freud created new ghosts, new explanations of the same fear: schizophrenia, paranoia – new explanations, new dressings, but the same old problems.
First people were possessed by ghosts – and it was easier, those ghosts were not so difficult. Even a simple man like Jesus relieved many people just by a single touch. Those ghosts were simple. The ghosts that Sigmund Freud has created are very difficult: you have to lie down on a couch for five years, and then you get up and all the ghosts get up with you! And again you will be lying on another couch with some other psychoanalyst…and the same story will be repeated again and again. Slowly, slowly, if you don’t have much money, understanding will arise that one has to live with these ghosts. There is no point, why not enjoy them? But if you have money then there is a great problem; then the understanding will never arise. Understanding never arises in rich people because they can afford it. Understanding arises only in poor people because they can’t afford it, they have to understand. They are forced to understand.
That’s why psychoanalysis is not a business in poor countries. Who can afford lying down on a couch for five years talking nonsense to a stupid person looking at you? Nothing happens. But in the West people have money and time – and what to do with it?
And communication has become so impossible. Nobody wants to talk to you, so you have professional listeners. They are the psychoanalysts: they are professional listeners: you pay for them; you talk and they listen. You feel good. At least you have one audience, and a very expert one. And he listens very attentively; at least he shows that he is listening attentively. It feels good – at least there is one person who understands you, listens to you, pays attention to all the rubbish that you are talking. You feel good, enhanced; your ego feels good. But the problem remains where it was. It doesn’t change.
The problem can only be changed if you understand it directly, immediately. Fear is there. Don’t bring any cause as to why the fear is there – of ghosts, of illness, of disease, of old age, of being fat, of falling in love, of being killed, or of being a murderer. Listening to thousands of people, I have come to see all kinds of fears. Somebody is afraid that if he does not control himself enough he will commit suicide. Now that fear is there. Somebody is afraid that if he doesn’t control himself he will kill somebody. Somebody is afraid that he is becoming old, somebody is afraid that he is getting fat, or she is getting fat – people are afraid of a thousand and one things. If you are not getting fat, you are afraid maybe you are getting thin. One has to be afraid. It is very difficult to find a person who is not afraid of something or other.
So, to me, those things are irrelevant. Fear is the basic thing. Why is man afraid? Don’t go into reasons and causes and explanations. Go directly into the fear.
So the next time you are alone in the room, just close the eyes and go into your fear. Don’t bother about ghosts, just go into the fear. Tremble if trembling comes, but don’t find any explanation that you are trembling because of the ghosts. That is just an explanation to explain away the fear. Just go into trembling, tremble for no reason at all. If you feel like screaming, scream for no reason at all – but go into the fear itself; don’t bring anything else in-between you and the fear. That is a trick of the mind. And if you can go deep down into the fear, you will be surprised: the deeper you go, the more and more fear dissipates, disappears.
When you touch the very core, the very bottom core of it, it has disappeared. You are simply there, utterly silent. There is no ghost there, even you are not there. All is silent, utterly silent, absolutely silent. That silence is joy, that silence is fearlessness.

The last question:
Osho,
One of your old sannyasins says that there are three steps to enlightenment: witnessing, choiceless awareness, suchness. What do you say?
The question has not been signed. I don’t like questions which are not signed, because the person who is not signing his question is being very cowardly. You don’t want to say that you have a question. You want to hide that fact.
It always happens to knowledgeable people – they don’t want to ask a question because that shows that they are ignorant. But if you are ignorant, you are ignorant! Accept the fact. Through that acceptance, some transcendence is possible.
And what is the fear? If you cannot even ask a question, how will you be able to receive the answer? A question deeply, rightly, asked prepares the ground for the answer to be received. When you are committed to a question, when you are involved in it, when it is a life-and-death problem to you, then only will you understand the answer; otherwise the answer will be cheap, and it won’t go deep in you. So never ask a question if you cannot sign your question.

And secondly, you have not mentioned who this old sannyasin is. You should mention it, because here I am working with individuals, not with a mass. And I want to relate to you individually. Who is this old fool? You should mention it because all these three words mean the same thing. And there are not three steps to enlightenment. There are no steps to enlightenment. Enlightenment is an explosion, it is a sudden awakening. It is a quantum leap!
Steps mean continuity: you remain the same, you become a little more polished; you remain the same, you become a little more decorated; you remain the same, you become a little more modified. There are no steps in enlightenment. Those steps are also created out of fear: you don’t want to jump so you need steps. But only the jump is needed.
You will have to gather courage and take the jump into the abyss, into the chaos of existence, into the chaos of love, into that illogic that I have been talking about.
You say: “There are three steps – witnessing, choiceless awareness, suchness. These are the same. What is the difference between witnessing and choiceless awareness? Witnessing is choiceless awareness. If you choose, you are not witnessing. You have liked, disliked. You have chosen; you have become identified.
For example, in your mind there are a few thoughts moving. Witnessing means you simply stand there seeing that they are moving, like clouds moving in the sky or the traffic moving on the road. You don’t have any choice. You don’t say, “This is good, let me keep it” and “That is bad, let it go.” If you talk this way you are not witnessing. You are getting involved, you are getting identified. You are creating love-hate relationships. And when you relate, you cannot be a witness.
Witnessing means choiceless awareness.
And what is suchness? When you don’t choose, things are as they are. Now anger passes by: so there is anger, there is witnessing and there is anger. You are not angry, you simply watch. If you choose, you are angry; if you choose against it, you become repressive of it. The anger comes, the greed comes, and they pass by. They come and they go, and you watch, you don’t choose. So things are as they are: you don’t give value. You don’t say this is higher, this is lower; this is spiritual, this is material; this is sin and this is a very holy act. You don’t bring any evaluation. You drop all evaluation. You simply see like a mirror, an empty mirror. Whosoever passes by, the mirror reflects. This is witnessing.
And the mirror never chooses, because the mirror is not a photographic plate. The photographic plate immediately chooses. It gets caught, trapped. The mirror remains clean: you have passed, the mirror is again clean, empty. In fact, when you were passing, then too there was only reflection, but the mirror was not having any content in it. It was only a shadow, a shadow passing by.
When you don’t choose, things are as they are. That is suchness – that is tathata. Witnessing comes from the Upanishads – sakshin. That is the word used by the seers of the Upanishads. Choiceless awareness comes from J. Krishnamurti – a new word for the same old thing. Suchness is a Buddhist word – tathata. It comes from Buddha. But they all mean the same thing. Don’t be caught in words, and don’t start becoming knowledgeable through words.
But these problems arise because you never go into any practice; you never go into any experience. Everything remains theoretical.
I have heard…

The slightly worried parents inquired of their son how the lesson on sex went that day. They were hoping that the teacher had not been too “progressive.”
The boy gave a somewhat bored reply, “Oh,” he said, “it was useless. We only had the theory today!”

Remember, only the theory won’t help. Something has to be experienced, something was to be practiced. Something has to become living in you. Only then will you understand.
If you had witnessed a little bit, you would have known; there would have been no need to ask the question. You would have known that it is choiceless awareness; you would have known that this is suchness, and all distinctions between words would have disappeared. But you have not experienced any meditativeness, hence the question.
And you talk about some old sannyasin. He may be old, but he cannot be a sannyasin. He may have lived here, but he has not lived with me. Otherwise this is impossible.
People go on reading books, go on cramming scriptures; they become very, very efficient with words. And then they start using words without knowing what they are doing.
I have heard…

As the doctor said to his girlfriend: “I love you with all my heart – and my kidneys, liver, epiglottis, spinal cord, etc., etc.”

This is what happens to people who go on cramming words. Wake up a little. Wake up from your linguistic patterns. Drop your drunkenness with language, and things will become very easy.
Things are easy. Things are very simple. Truth is simple, only you are complicated. Truth is herenow, only you are far away, lost in words, scriptures, theories, systems, philosophies. Come back home.
Enough for today.

============================================================

Of heaven or hell we have
No recollection, no knowledge;
We must become what we were
Before we were born.

Rain, hail, snow and ice
Are divided from one another;
But after they fall,
They are the same water
Of the stream in the valley.

Should you seek
The way of the Buddha
All night long,
Searching, you will enter
Into your own mind.

When they ask you,
“Where is your country?
What is your native place?” answer,
“I am a man
Of Original Inactivity.”

The figure of the Real Man
Standing there –
Just a glimpse of him,
And we are in love.
Man can live in two ways: the natural and the unnatural. The unnatural has great attraction in it because it is new, unfamiliar, adventurous. Hence, every child has to leave his nature and go into “un-nature.” No child can resist that temptation; to resist that temptation is impossible. Paradise has to be lost. The losing of it is inbuilt; it cannot be avoided, it is inevitable. And, of course, only man can lose it. That is man’s ecstasy and agony, his privilege, his freedom and his fall.
Jean-Paul Sartre is right when he says: Man is condemned to be free. Why condemned? – because with freedom, choice arises: the choice of being natural or being unnatural. When there is no freedom, there is no choice.
Animals still exist in paradise; they never lose it. But because they never lose it, they can’t be aware of it. They can’t know where they are. To know where you are, you will have to lose it first. That’s how knowing becomes possible: by losing.
You know a thing only when you have lost it. If you have never lost it, if it has always been there, you naturally take it for granted. It becomes so obvious that you become oblivious to it.
Trees are still in paradise, and the mountains and the stars, but they don’t know where they are. Only man can know. A tree can’t become a buddha. Not that there is any difference between the inner nature of a buddha and a tree, but a tree can’t become a buddha, a tree is already a buddha! To become a buddha, the tree first has to lose its nature; it has to go away from itYou can only see things from a certain perspective. If you are too close to them, you cannot see them. What Buddha has seen, no tree has ever seen. It is available to trees and to animals, but only a buddha becomes conscious of it – and paradise is regained.
Paradise is only when it is regained. Nature’s beauties and mysteries are revealed only when you come back home. When you go against your nature, when you go farthest from yourself, only then, one day, does the return journey start. When you become thirsty for nature, when you start dying without it, you start returning.
This is the original fall. Man’s consciousness is his original fall, his original sin. But without the original sin, there is no possibility of a buddha or a christ.
The first thing to be understood is: man can choose. He is the only animal in existence who can choose, who can do things which are not natural, who can do things which should not be done, who can go against himself and against existence, who can destroy himself and all his bliss, who can create hell.
By creating hell, the contrast is created, and then one can see what heaven is. Only through the contrast, is there the possibility to know.
So remember, there are two ways: one can live naturally or one can live unnaturally. When I say one can live naturally, I mean one can live without improving upon oneself in any way. One can live in trust – that’s what nature is. One can live in spontaneity, one can live without being a doer, one can live in inaction, what Taoists call wei-wu-wei, action through inaction.
Nature means you are not to do anything; it is already happening. The rivers are flowing – not that they are doing something. And the trees are growing – not that they have to worry about it, not that they have to consult any guide for it. The trees are blooming – not that they have to think and plan about the flowers, of what color, of what shape. It is all happening.
The tree is blooming in a thousand flowers without a single worry, without a single thought, without a single projection, without any blueprint. It is simply blooming! Just as fire is hot, the tree grows. It is natural, it is in the very nature of things. The seed becomes the sprout, and the sprout becomes the plant, and the plant becomes the tree, and one day the tree is full of foliage, and then another day buds have started appearing and the flowering and the fruits…and all is simply happening!
The child growing in the mother’s womb is not doing anything; he is in wu-wei. But it is not that nothing is happening. In fact, so much is happening that never again will so much ever happen in his life. Those nine months in the mother’s womb contain so much happening that if you live ninety years, that much happening won’t be contained by you.
Millions of things are happening. The child is conceived only as an invisible cell; then things start happening, things start exploding. The child is not sitting there in that small cell like a little man and thinking and planning and worrying, and suffering from insomnia. There is nobody!
To understand this is to understand Buddha, that things can happen without your ever being worried about them. Things have always already been happening. And even when you become a doer, you become a doer only on the surface; deep down, things go on happening.
When you are fast asleep, do you think you are trying to breathe? It is happening. If man had to breathe, had to remain constantly aware to breathe, nobody would ever be able to live, not even for a single day. One moment and you forget and it is gone. You forget to breathe in, and you are finished. Then how will you go to sleep? You will have to be constantly alert; you will have to wake yourself up many times in the night to see whether you are still breathing or not.
You eat food, and then forget all about it. And millions of things are happening: the food is being digested, broken down, destroyed, changed, transformed chemically; it will become your blood, your bones, your marrow. Great work goes on. The blood is circulating continuously, throwing all the dead cells out of the body.
How much is going on within you without your doing at all. Doing remains on the surface. Man can live on the surface in an artificial way, but deep down in the innermost core you are always natural. Your artificiality becomes simply a layer upon your nature. But the layer thickens every day – more thoughts, more plans, more activity, more doing. More of the doer, the ego, and a crust grows. And that is the crust Buddha calls samsara, the world.
The phenomenon of the doer, of the ego: this is losing nature, going against nature, going away from nature. One day you have gone so far away that you start feeling suffocated. You have gone so far away that schizophrenia arises in your being. Your circumference starts falling apart from the center. That is the point of conversion, the point when religion becomes relevant, the point when you start searching for a way out, the point where you start thinking, “Who am I?” The point where you start looking back: “Where am I coming from, what is my original face, what is my nature? I have gone too far and now it is time to go back. One step more and I will fall apart. I have broken all the links; only a small bridge has remained.”
All neurosis is nothing but this. That’s why psychology itself cannot cure neurosis. It can give you beautiful explanations about it; it can satisfy you, console you, solace you; it can teach you how to live with your neurosis; it can help you not to worry too much about it. It can give you a pattern of life in which neurosis can exist and you can also exist – it can teach you a kind of coexistence – but it cannot dissolve it. Only religion can dissolve it. And unless psychology takes a quantum leap and becomes religion, it will remain partial.
Why can religion cure the neurosis? Why can religion cure schizophrenia? – because it can make you whole, one. The circumference is no longer against the center; they are holding hands, they are embracing each other. They are one, they function in one rhythm, they vibrate as one vibration. That is real health, and wholeness, and holiness. That’s where buddhahood arises – a man has become sane again.
Unless you are a buddha you will remain insane, more or less. Insanity is bound to remain a part of your being. You can manage to live with it somehow, but it is going to be just somehow. It is a management; you cannot relax about it.
Have you not observed? Everybody is afraid of going mad. One keeps oneself in control, but the fear is always there: “If something goes wrong, if one thing more goes wrong, then I may not be able to control myself any longer.” Everybody is on the verge of it. People are just about ninety-nine percent on the verge. One percent more, any small thing, the last straw on the camel – the bank fails, your woman leaves and escapes with somebody else, the business dwindles – and you are no longer sane, all sanity gone. It must have been just a facade, that sanity that goes so easily. It must have been very thin, fragile. In fact, it was not there.
The change between the ordinary man and the insane is only of quantity, not of quality. Unless you become a buddha or a christ or a krishna – these are all names of the same state of consciousness, where center and circumference function in a dance, in a symphony – unless that symphony arises, you will remain phony, you will remain false, you will remain arbitrary, you will not really have a soul. And it is not that you cannot have it; it is always yours just for the asking. Jesus says: “Knock, and the door shall be opened unto you. Ask, and it shall be given” – just for the asking you will get it.
But there is great attraction in the unnatural, because the unnatural is alien, the unnatural is opposite to you, and the opposite always attracts, the opposite always intrigues, the opposite is always there as a challenge. You would like to know…
That’s why a man becomes interested in a woman, a woman becomes interested in a man. That’s how people become interested and attracted to each other: the opposite. And the same follows deep down. Your natural being seems to be already yours, so what is the point of getting hold of it, of being it? One wants something new.
And that which you have, you lose all interest in. That’s why you are missing godliness, because you already have godliness and you cannot be interested in it. You are interested in the world, in money, in power and prestige – those things you don’t have. Godliness is already given. Godliness means nature. Who bothers about nature? Why think about it when in the first place you already have it? We are interested in that which we don’t have. And the unnatural attracts: one becomes focused on the unnatural and the artificial, and one rushes from one unnatural style of life to another unnatural style of life.
And remember: not only are the so-called worldly people unnatural, the so-called religious are also unnatural. That is the great understanding that Buddha brings to the world – and that understanding has become a ripe fruit in Zen. That is the fundamental contribution of Buddha.
A man remains artificial in the so-called world: earning money, power, prestige. Then one day he becomes religious, but he is moving into another kind of unnaturalness. Now he practices yoga, stands on his head – all stuff and nonsense. What are you doing there, standing on your head? Can’t you stand on your feet? But to stand on your feet seems so natural that it has no attraction.
When you see somebody standing on his head, you think, “Yes, he is doing something. Here is a man.” And you are attracted – he must be gaining something that you have not known yet, and you would also like to practice it.
People start doing all kinds of stupid things, but those are all again the same. The pattern is the same, the gestalt is the same. The change is very slight; the quality is the same.
You were earning money, now you are more interested in heaven, the next life. You were interested in what people think about you, now you are interested in what God thinks about you. You were interested in making a beautiful house here, now you are interested in making a beautiful house in paradise, in the other world.
You were being unnatural; you were eating too much, now you start fasting. Just see how one changes from one unnatural attitude to another unnatural attitude. You were eating too much, you were obsessed with eating, you were continuously stuffing yourself, then one day you are fed up with this – literally fed up with this – so you start fasting. Now, again, a thrill arises in you; now again you can hope something is going to happen. And you can go to the extreme of fasting, which is as much against nature as eating too much.
To be natural is just in the middle. Buddha has called his way “the middle way,” because the natural exists just exactly in the middle between opposite extremes.
You have been chasing women your whole life, and then one day you decide to become a celibate and move to a Catholic monastery, or become a Hindu monk and go to the Himalayas. Now, this is the same person who was continuously chasing women; now he is tired of it. Now he wants to drop it absolutely, he wants to move into the opposite direction. He escapes into a monastery. Now he enforces celibacy on himself, which is as unnatural as the first attitude. But one unnaturalness leads to another and one can go on in circles… Beware of it.
To be natural has no appeal, because to be natural means your ego will not be satisfied in any way. And Buddha is preaching only one single thing: to be ordinary, to be nobody, to be natural.
The natural man is the enlightened man. To be natural is to be enlightened. To be as natural as animals and trees and stars, to have no imposition upon oneself, to have no idea of how one should be, is to be enlightened. Enlightenment is a state of being natural.
It is not something like an achievement. When you think of enlightenment you always think of it as an achievement. People come to me and they ask, “Osho, how are we going to achieve enlightenment?” It is not a state of achievement because whatsoever you achieve or you can achieve will be artificial. The natural need not be achieved: it is already there. It has never been otherwise.
You are not to achieve enlightenment; you are simply to drop the achieving mind. You have to relax into it. It is available; from the very beginning it is available. Relax into it.
An enlightened person is not somebody who has reached to the pinnacle, who has reached to the topmost rung of the ladder. You are all ladder climbers; you need a ladder. It may be in the marketplace or in the monastery – it makes no difference – but you need a ladder. You carry your ladders with you. Wherever you can find a place, you simply fix your ladder and you start climbing. And nobody asks, “Where are you going? Where is this ladder going to lead you?” But after one rung there is another rung. And you are curious: “Maybe something is there!” so you go one step more. Another rung is waiting for you, and you become curious and you start moving.
That’s how people move in the world of money, that’s how people move in the world of politics. And it is not only that you have to move: because many people are going on the same ladder, you have to push others. You have to pull their legs, you have to make a place for yourself, you have to make space for yourself; you have to be aggressive, you have to be violent. And when there is so much violence and so many people fighting, who bothers where they are going? People must be going somewhere when so many people are interested.
And if you become too much of a thinker, you will lose the race. So there is no time to think about it, to think “What is the point of it all?” Thinkers are losers, so one has not to think; one has just to rush and go on rushing.
And the ladder is non-ending – rung upon rung, rung upon rung. The mind can go on projecting new rungs. And when you move into a monastery the same continues. Now a spiritual hierarchy is there and you start moving in the hierarchy. You become very serious and the same competitiveness comes in.
This is just an ego game, and ego can play its game only in the artificial. Wherever you see a ladder, beware – you are in the same trap. Enlightenment is not the last rung of a ladder. Enlightenment is getting down from the ladder, getting down forever and never asking for any ladder again, becoming natural.
I have to use the word becoming which is not true. It should not be used, but that’s how language is: it is made by those ladder-climbers. You cannot become natural because whatsoever you become will be unnatural. Becoming is unnatural; being is natural. So, forgive me, I have to use the language, the same language, which is not meant to be used for something which is natural. So you have to understand it. Don’t be caught by words.
When I say become natural, I am simply saying: stop becoming, and fall, relax into being. You are already there!
Why do people go on moving in circles? First, they have become very, very skillful in it, and nobody wants to drop his skill, because the skill gives you a feeling of confidence, it gives you a feeling of strength. There are millions of people in the world who go on in the same rut again and again because they have become skillful. If they change, in the new space they may not be so skillful – they will not be – so they go on running in the circle. And they go on becoming more and more bored. But the more they move in the circle, the more skillful they become. Then they can’t stop themselves, and they can’t stop because of others too, because others are rushing by. If they stop, they will be defeated. It is really a mad world.
Then one feels very good repeating the same thing again and again. Monotony is very consoling. People who are bewildered and frightened by too much change find relief in monotony. That’s why teenagers like beat music, and some mental patients repeat the same act or word over and over.
You can go and see in a mental asylum, and you will be surprised that all the mad people are some kind of mantra doers, they have their mantras. Somebody is washing his hands continuously: day in, day out, just washing his hands. It is his mantra: it keeps him engaged, it keeps him occupied, it keeps him unafraid. And he knows how to do it; it is a simple act. If he stops doing it he becomes frightened with nothing to hang onto. If he stops doing it, he is empty with nothing to cling to. If he stops doing it, he does not know who he is. He has his identity as the hand washer. He knows himself perfectly well who he is when he is washing his hands. Once he stops it, difficulties arise.
In a mental asylum, those people who have devised their own mantras – in action, in words – are just consoling themselves. This is the whole secret of transcendental meditation and its success in America. America is today a great mental asylum; it needs something to repeat, monotonously, continuously; it helps people. Just the same gesture, the same posture, the same mantra – you know that territory perfectly well. You go on moving in it. It keeps you away from yourself. Transcendental meditation is not meditation, and it is not transcendental, either. It is just a consolation: it keeps you unaware of your insanity. Only an insane person can be convinced to repeat a mantra, otherwise not.
So people go on doing the same thing that they have done down the ages, in so many lives. Just watch yourself: you fall into one love, then into another, then into another…this is transcendental meditation, the same act. And you know that the first time it was frustration, the second time it was frustration, the third time it was frustration – and you know beforehand the fourth time is also going to be frustration. But you don’t want to see it, you don’t want to look into it, because if you look into it then you are left alone with nothing to do.
Falling in love keeps you engaged, keeps you on the run, keeps you moving. At least you can avoid yourself, you can escape from yourself. You need not look into the deepest question: Who are you? You know that you are a great lover, so you go on counting how many women you have loved. There are people who keep count; they go on keeping count: three hundred and sixty, three hundred and sixty-one, three hundred and sixty-two… They have not loved a single woman. And there are people who keep count of their mantras, how many times they repeat the mantra. There are people who go on writing in their books: Rama, Rama, Rama… They go on writing it.

Once I stayed in a man’s house. I was surprised at his great library. I asked, “What kind of scriptures do you have?”
He said, “Only one kind of scripture: I go on writing Rama, Rama, Rama – that’s my mantra. From the morning to the evening I do only one thing; I have written it millions of times, and these are all my records.”

And that man is respected very much. Now, he is just a madman, utterly mad. If he is stopped from doing this nonsense, he will immediately go mad. This mad activity is keeping him sane in some way. Ninety-nine percent of your religion is nothing but a device to keep you somehow sane.
Buddha is a totally different kind of person. He is the arch enemy of showbiz. He is somebody who wants to tell the truth, and wants to tell it as it is. He shatters all rubbish, religious ideologies. He simply shocks you to the very roots. And if you become available to him, he can become a door – a door back home, a door, a threshold that can make you able to fall back into nature.
In every complicated culture, in every complicated civilization, there are professional liars and professional truth-tellers, but they are not very different; they are the same people. The professional liars are called lawyers, and the professional truth-tellers are known as priests. They simply repeat scriptures.
Buddha is neither a liar nor a professional truth-teller. He simply makes his heart available to you; he wants to share. Hence, the whole Indian priesthood was against him. He was thrown out of his own country, his temples were burnt, his statues were destroyed. Many Buddhist scriptures are available now only in Chinese translations or Tibetan translations. Their originals are lost; they must have been burnt.
Thousands of Buddhists were killed in this nonviolent country. They were burnt alive. Buddha shocked the professional truth-tellers very deeply. He was bent upon destroying their whole business. He simply made it an open secret.

Listen to these words of Ikkyu. They describe the Buddhist approach profoundly.
Of heaven or hell we have
No recollection, no knowledge;
We must become what we were
Before we were born.
Everything finally returns to its source. That’s the law of nature. Nature moves in a perfect circle, so everything has to return to its source. Knowing the source, you can know the goal because the goal can never be other than the source.
You plant a seed, and the tree arises. It will take years, and the tree will spread its wings in the sky and will have dialogues with the stars, and will live a long life…and finally what happens? The tree produces seeds again and the seeds fall into the earth and again new trees arise. It is a simple movement.
The source is the goal!
Your body will fall back into the earth and will become part of the earth because it comes from the earth. Your breath will disappear into air because it comes from the air. The water that is in your body will go back into the sea from whence it came. The fire that is in you will go into fire. And the consciousness that is in you will move into the consciousness of the whole. Everything goes back to its source. This fundamental has to be remembered – because by knowing it, by understanding it, you drop all other goals, because then all other goals are arbitrary.
Somebody says, “I want to become a doctor, an engineer, a scientist, a poet.” These are all artificial goals that you have fixed upon yourself. The natural goal is the innocence that you had in your mother’s womb, or go even deeper: the nothingness from where you came, that is the natural goal. And to live naturally means to know this; otherwise, you are bound to create some artificial goal.
Somebody wants to become enlightened – that is an artificial goal. I am not saying that people don’t become enlightened, but I am saying not to make it a goal. People become enlightened only when they have fallen back to their original source; when they have become natural they are enlightened.
Let me repeat again: enlightenment is a natural state. It is not some supra-conscious state, supra-mental. Avoid Sri Aurobindo and his terminology; that is all a mind game. It is not something very special; it is very ordinary. It is so ordinary that there is nothing to brag about in it.
Everything finally returns to its source, so heaven and hell are arbitrary goals, created, invented by the priests to dominate people. A great strategy – it worked for thousands of years. Buddha wants to burn hell and heaven and the whole ideology surrounding it.
There is a beautiful anecdote in one great Sufi woman’s life, Rabiya al Adabiya:

One day she was found running in the marketplace – she was known as a mad woman. She was carrying a pot of water in one hand and a burning torch in the other. People gathered together and asked, “What is the matter? Where are you going? And why are you carrying this burning torch and the water in your hand?”
She said, “I want to drown hell with this water, and I want to burn your heaven with this torch. Unless these two are utterly destroyed, man will never know what religion is.”

The idea of heaven and hell is a political strategy to repress people. It is a simple psychological phenomenon and we know it: people can be persuaded to do things either by reward or by punishment. This is a simple game; parents play it with their children. They say, “If you do what we say, you will be rewarded – you will get more ice cream or more toys or a visit to the movie. And if you don’t follow what we say, you will be punished, you will have to miss one meal.”
Heaven and hell is the same strategy just stretched to its logical conclusion. Man has been made very much afraid of hell, and whenever man is afraid you can dominate him. A fearful man is ready to become a slave. Make any man afraid and you will become the master. You can dominate him then very easily, because a man who is afraid wants to lean on something, wants some consolation, some promise, some shelter.
The priest makes people afraid of hell. That’s why hell has been painted with such ugliness, with such cruelty, violence. The people who have painted hell and have talked about it must have been great sadists. Their ideas are great. And you have been thinking all along that these people were saints. Either they were sadists or they were very cunning and crafty priests.
And for those who will follow the line, who will be obedient, who will not disobey the priest and the politician, heaven is the reward. That, too, has been painted beautifully. And whatsoever was needed at a particular time, in a particular country, has been provided. And that you can see.
The Indian heaven, obviously, is very cool. You can understand it, sitting in Pune! Very cool; constantly, twenty-four hours, cool breezes blow. The sun rises but it is not hot. In other words, it is air-conditioned. And hell is all fire. But the Tibetan hell is different, it has to be, because it was invented by other people to dominate another kind of country. Fire is not allowed at all in the Tibetan hell, because Tibetans love fire; they are dying because of cold. So the Tibetan hell is completely, absolutely snow; the snow never melts, it is eternal, and you will be buried in that snow. In the Indian hell you will be thrown into fire, eternal fire; it burns continuously.
Now see the point. The Indian hell is different from the Tibetan hell. If there is a hell, it can’t be different.
I have heard…

A man died, an Indian; he reached hell. He was very surprised because no Indian believes that he is going to hell. All Indians are such great religious mahatmas. Seeing himself in hell, he thought, “Something has gone wrong – that red tape and some official mistake…”
He said, “What is the matter?”
The man on the gate said, “There is nothing wrong. You have been brought to the place where you belong. Now choose! Which hell would you like to have?”
He said, “Which hell? Are there other hells also apart from the Indian?”
“Of course, there are other hells. You can have the German hell, you can have the Italian hell, you can have the Indian hell, you can have the Japanese…”
He was puzzled. He said, “I had never thought about it. But what is the difference? What is the difference between the Indian and the German hell?”
The man said, “There is no difference on the surface. The fire is the same, the burning is the same, the torture is the same.”
“Then why do you tell me to choose?”
He said, “But there is a subtle difference: in the German hell things are done with German efficiency. And, of course, in an Indian hell, things are done with Indian lousiness.”
The man said, “I will choose the Indian hell!”

Hells can’t be different. But priests were trying to dominate different kinds of people in different situations. Heaven is also different, has been taught by the priests differently. Whatsoever people were asking for has been provided. In the Mohammedan heaven homosexuality is provided for. In the Indian heaven you cannot conceive homosexuality, but in the Mohammedan heaven, homosexuality is provided for because it has been prevalent in Mohammedan countries, and acceptably prevalent. There has been no condemnation about it. These are just rewards. Whatsoever you like will be given to you. All that you have to do is be obedient to the priest.
Buddha says there is no heaven and no hell. And by denying heaven and hell any reality, he has taken the very ground from underneath the feet of all the priests. Naturally, they were angry; naturally, they were absolutely enraged. They are angry with me, and their anger has a reason. It is not irrational, it is very rational, because I am also pulling the very earth from beneath their feet.
I also say to you: There is no heaven and no hell; there is no punishment and no reward in the afterlife. There is nobody to punish you or reward you. Each act has its own punishment and reward intrinsic to it. When you are angry, you are punished in your anger, in your being angry. There is no other punishment than that. When you are loving, in that very loving act, love is its own reward. There is nobody keeping accounts, there is nobody writing down what you are doing here – good or bad, and finally at the last judgment day you will be rewarded or punished. That is stupid. Each moment, each act brings its own reward or punishment. The priest is not needed. Even God is not needed to punish you or reward you.
Existence is autonomous. Just help somebody and you feel such a joy arising in you. Hurt somebody and you are hurt. It is a natural process. It should not be exploited by the priests.
So Ikkyu says: Of heaven or hell we have no recollection…
Ikkyu says: Ordinarily, do you remember anything of hell and heaven before you were born? If you don’t remember anything, then know well you will not be going back to them – because one only goes back to that from where one has come. The source is the goal.
And Ikkyu says: You may not remember much, but I recollect absolutely. In my consciousness, in my awareness, I recollect absolutely – there has never been any hell or any heaven in the beginning, so it is not going to be in the end.
If you go deep down into your source – which is easier to go into because you have been there once. The goal is difficult: thinking about the goal is going to be imaginary because you have never been there.
See Ikkyu’s pragmatic attitude. He says: Don’t bother about the goal, because how can you know about it? You have never been there. It is in the future. But you can go into the source; you come from there. You can go deeper and deeper into your being and touch the very source. It is there. Nothing is ever lost. Seeing that, you will know the goal too.
And those who have gone, layer upon layer into their being, and have touched the very ground, they agree with Ikkyu. That very ground has no hell, no heaven. In fact, you are not there, just pure non-being, emptiness – shunyata – nothingness, no-thingness. We come from that no-thingness, and we will be going back to that no-thingness.
If this is understood through meditations, through your own inner search, then you will never choose any artificial goal. All artificial goals lead you astray. Then one starts relaxing into nature; one becomes one’s original nature; one becomes one’s originality. And in that originality, in that ordinary naturalness, is buddhahood, is enlightenment.
Rain, hail, snow and ice
Are divided from one another;
But after they fall,
They are the same water
Of the stream in the valley.
All distinctions are arbitrary: rain, snow, ice. All distinctions are arbitrary: the same river can become frozen, the same river can flow and become water, and the same river can evaporate, can become vapor and clouds, but it is the same river.
Out of the same nothingness, the trees arise and the animals and man and woman. And these are all distinctions, utilitarian, but not true; necessary, but not absolute. When we disappear, we disappear again into that cosmic-ness, into that oneness, into that simultaneity.
Buddha never uses the word God, because God has become so much associated with wrong things – with the priest, with the temple, with the scripture, with the ritual. So Buddha avoids that word. His word for God is nothingness. And why does he insist on nothingness? Because you cannot pray to nothingness. And when there is no possibility of prayer, the priest will disappear.
You cannot talk to nothingness. It will look so foolish. You can talk to God. You can say, “Father, who art in heaven…” but you cannot say to nothingness, “Nothingness, who art in heaven…” It will look so foolish. You cannot say to nothingness, “Save me!” It will be ridiculous.
You cannot pray to nothingness. You cannot create a ritual, you need not have a priest, you need not go into the scriptures. That’s the beauty of the word nothingness, it simply cuts the very root of so-called religion. It creates a different kind of religiousness – a religiousness which understands but does not pray, a religiousness which falls into silence but does not start talking with existence, a religiousness which knows no dialogue except silence, utter silence.
See the beauty of it. Buddha has chosen one of the really very potential words: shunyata. The English word, the English equivalent, nothingness, is not such a beautiful word. That’s why I would like to make it no-thingness, because the nothing is not just nothing, it is all. It is vibrant with all possibilities. It is potential, absolute potential. It is yet unmanifest, but it contains all.
Rain, hail, snow and ice are divided from one another; but after they fall, they are the same water of the stream in the valley. And so we all disappear into nature when we fall back. In the beginning is nature, in the end is nature, so why in the middle do you make so much fuss? Why in the middle? Becoming so worried, so anxious, so ambitious, creating such despair?
Nothingness to nothingness is the whole journey.
There is a Buddhist expression for it. Buddha used to say: In a cold night, in a cold winter night, dark night, a bird enters into a palace by one window, flutters in the room for a while – the coziness of the room, the king’s palace, the light, the warmth – and then is again out of the room by another window. Buddha says such is the life’s dream – just a moment’s warmth, a moment’s coziness, a moment’s palace and the pleasures of it, and again we plunge into nothingness.
From nothingness we come and to nothingness we move, and just in the middle a momentary dream. Why be so attached to it? Why be so obsessed with it? Seeing it, that we come from nothing and we move to nothing, in the middle also we can be nothing. That is buddhahood: just being nothing, nothing special, nothing extraordinary.
That’s why the Zen monk is the most ordinary man in the world. Chopping wood, carrying water from the well, and he says, “How marvelous! How wondrous!” He continues doing the small things of life. That is the beauty of it. But people start looking for something extraordinary.

Just the other day I was reading a lecture of U.G. Krishnamurti. He says he went to see Ramana Maharshi. He was not attracted because Ramana Maharshi was chopping vegetables. Yes, he was that kind of man, very ordinary. Chopping vegetables! U.G. Krishnamurti must have gone to see somebody extraordinary sitting on a golden throne or something. Ramana Maharshi just sitting on the floor and chopping vegetables, preparing vegetables for the kitchen: U. G. Krishnamurti was very frustrated. “This man knows nothing. This man is very ordinary.” He left the ashram; it was not worth it.

But I would like to say to you: This man, Ramana Maharshi, is one of the greatest buddhas ever born to the world. That was his buddhahood in action.
U. G. Krishnamurti must have been in search of a pretender. He could not see the ordinariness and the beauty of it and the grace of it. And this same man, U. G. Krishnamurti, lived with Swami Shivananda of Rishikesh for seven years – and that chap was just stupid – and practiced yoga with him. And after seven years he recognized that he has nothing. But only after seven years – it took him seven years! That simply shows that he also has a mighty dull mind. Seven years to see that Shivananda has nothing – seven seconds are more than enough! And with Ramana Maharshi, seven seconds were enough, because he saw him chopping vegetables or reading jokes, looking at cartoons. That’s how the ordinary mind, the egoistic mind functions.
The ego is always searching for something bigger, some bigger ego. And the true sage has no ego; he is an ordinary man. He is utterly ordinary: that is his extraordinariness!
Should you seek
The way of the Buddha
All night long,
Searching, you will enter
Into your own mind.
Should you seek the way of the Buddha all night long. The ordinary mind is interested in the outside. The outside is intriguing, wondrous, worth exploring. So we explore it for money, for prestige, for other things, and then one day when we are finished with the so-called worldly things, we start looking for a master, for Buddha, for Christ – still outside! We start looking for the way, but still outside. And the buddha is not found outside, and the way is not found outside.
To go seeking outside is to go farther and farther away from the way, because the way is inside, the buddha is inside.
Should you seek the way of the Buddha all night long… And you can go on seeking all night long, this dark night of millions of lives, and you will not find anything – except this truth. If you stumble upon it you are fortunate.
Searching, you will enter into your own mind. If you can find only one thing out of all kinds of frustrations – that there is nothing to be found in the outside, nothing at all – and seeing it, realizing it, you turn in, then your own mind is the whole thing; then inside you is all:
Searching, you will enter into your own mind. By and by, as you go deeper into your own mind, you penetrate from mind to no-mind. The superficial layer is of the mind, but the inner content is of no-mind. The superficial layer is of the ego, the inner content is of egolessness. If you enter in, first you will come across mind, thoughts, desires, fantasies, imagination, memory, dreams, and all that stuff. But if you go on penetrating, soon you will come to silent spaces, thoughtless spaces. Soon you will start coming closer and closer to the innermost core of your being which is timelessness, which is nowhere-ness, which has no time and no space.
When you come to a point where you can’t see any time and you can’t see any space, you have arrived. But this arrival is arriving back to your own nature. You have not arrived to something new: you have arrived to that which was already given and has been always yours.
When they ask you,
“Where is your country?
What is your native place?” answer,
“I am a man
Of Original Inactivity.”
When you have arrived at this point you can understand that there is no need to do anything; all is happening. There was never any need to do anything; all was already happening. You were unnecessarily worried. You carried all those weights because you were ignorant. Otherwise, things were happening.
The world is running so smoothly and so beautifully and so perfectly, but because we think we are separate from it the problem arises: How to run our lives? If you know that you are part of it, there is no need to worry. This cosmos, such an infinite cosmos, running so perfectly well – can’t you remain in it without any worry? But the separation is there.
You have taken one thing for granted: that you are separate. Going deep inside, that separation disappears. That is the meaning when I say: Egolessness arises. Ego means separation. Ego means, “I am separate from the whole.” Ego means the part is claiming to be the whole in its own right. Ego means the part is claiming, “I have my own center and I have to survive and fight and struggle for myself. If I don’t fight for myself, who is going to fight for me? If I don’t try to survive, I will be killed.”
Insecurity arises because of the ego. When the ego is gone there is simply security. In fact, there is no insecurity and no security; all those dualities have disappeared. To live in that is to live nirvana, is to live enlightenment.
When they ask you, “Where is your country? What is your native place?” answer, “I am a man of Original Inactivity.” It does not mean that you will not be doing anything. For example, I am speaking – this is doing. But still I say to you: I am not doing it, because there is no doer in it. Speaking is happening just like trees are flowering or birds are singing, just as new leaves are coming to the trees. Seeing you, seeing your questions, new answers are coming into me. Otherwise, there is nothing in my mind. It is a response; you call me, I respond.
What I am saying to you is what you have provoked in me; there is nobody saying it. There is nobody: while I am walking, there is nobody walking; while I am eating, there is nobody eating. Eating is happening, walking is happening, talking is happening, listening is happening, but there is nobody behind it. There is pure nothingness, a mirror-like nothingness. Not that activity disappears, but the doer is found no more.
Buddha disappeared when he was forty. Still he lived up to eighty-two years, forty-two more years. And he did all kinds of things, but there was no doer; it was all natural. Natural means that which happens of its own accord.
That’s why Zen people say: When you feel hungry, eat, and when you feel tired, sleep.

A great master died and his chief disciple, who was known all over the country as an enlightened person himself, started crying. Many had gathered and it was very shocking to them, because they had been thinking this man was enlightened. In fact, because of this man the old master had become famous; otherwise, nobody would have known him. He was a very silent man, a man of few words, few and far between. Because of this disciple – this disciple had a charisma, this disciple had a magnetism – the old master had become known.
And now this disciple is crying? People felt this was not right. They told him, “Please don’t cry, otherwise what will people think? So many people are coming to see the old master, to give him the last send-off, and seeing you, an enlightened person, crying will have a very, very bad effect on them.”
But the enlightened person said, “But what can I do? Tears are coming and I am no longer there to prevent them. When laughter comes, I laugh. And when tears come, tears come. When it happens, it happens. I am not there to prevent, I am not there to create; the doer is no longer there.”

In this state, this natural state, this utterly ordinary state – Ramana Maharshi chopping vegetables, or this Zen man crying, or Bodhidharma laughing – there is nobody behind it. You just watch: you also do a few things when there is nobody behind it, and those are the only things which bring bliss to you.
Have you not observed some moments in your life when you are not there? The morning, the sun is rising, and it is cool and the birds are singing, and suddenly you lose track of yourself, and you become so absorbed in the rising sun and in the beautiful morning that for a moment you forget that you are. Immediately, there is beauty. The beauty does not arise out of the sunrise, because there will be many who are passing by the same road and they are not looking at the sunrise. It has happened to you because you are not there.
Making love, sometimes you disappear. When you disappear there is orgasm, there is great beauty and great joy and great blessing, ecstasy, but only when you disappear. If you are looking for orgasm then there is no beauty, then there is no grace, because you are there continuously hankering. How can orgasm happen when you are there? Orgasm is when you are not. Ecstasy is when you are not, beauty is when you are not, godliness is when you are not, love is when you are not.
But these moments come to everybody, because this is a natural phenomenon. You can avoid, but not always. Sometimes in spite of you it happens. A child giggling, and suddenly something opens in you. Doing nothing, sitting in your room, and suddenly something drops like a weight from the head – and it is there! Yes, I call it “it.” It is there: the benediction.
This is original inactivity. Ikkyu says: Let this be your land. This is where you really belong, this is from where you come, and this where you should relax and be.
The figure of the Real Man
Standing there –
Just a glimpse of him,
And we are in love.
A tremendously beautiful sutra. The figure of the Real Man: this is the figure of the real man: original inactivity, doing without the doer, being there without being there. Action flows, but it is natural; it is a happening, not a doing. This flow, this spontaneity, this responsiveness, this oneness with the total, with the whole, is what Ikkyu calls the original man or the real man.
You are unreal – as you are, you are unreal. Let me remind you. Man can live in two ways: real, unreal; natural, artificial. Everybody has become unreal. It takes great effort to remain unreal; hence, unreality is agonizing. It is very arduous to remain unreal. It is a constant work, because you have to go against nature. It is going up-current, it is pushing the river; with your tiny hands pushing the gigantic river. You feel tired, you feel washed out, you feel dissipated. And sooner or later you will feel defeated; the river will possess you and you will be thrown with the current of the river.
Being real means going with the river, flowing with the flow, allowing the flow to flow through you.
The figure of the Real Man standing there… And once you have seen the figure of the real man in you… And it is always standing there, waiting for you to look back. The figure of the Real Man standing there – Just a glimpse of him, and we are in love.
Just a glimpse of him… and suddenly all hatred, all anger, all aggressiveness, all violence, disappears. Just a glimpse of the Real Man…of your reality, of your authenticity, of your naturalness …and we are in love. In fact, we are love. Then life takes a new color, a new aroma, a new fragrance, a new flavor. The flavor is called love.
Buddha has said that when a man attains to the insight, from the outside there is only one indication to know whether he has attained or not, that is love. I would like to say to U.G. Krishnamurti: You should have looked in the eyes of Ramana Maharshi. He looked only at the hands which were chopping vegetables. He should have looked into his eyes to see with what love he was chopping the vegetables. He should have looked into his eyes to see what love he was. He was the real man.
There is only one indication and that is love. But to understand love you have to be a little silent, a little loving, a little open. If you are full of prejudices about how the enlightened man should be, then you will go on missing. You should not have any prejudices.
Just look into the eyes of a real man, and suddenly something will start stirring in your heart too. Tears will come to your eyes, your energy will have a great delight, your heart will throb with new vigor, your soul will spread its wings.
Just a glimpse of him, and we are in love. A single glimpse transforms the whole life. Once you have looked into your innermost core, you are never the same again. Then your life is nothing but love. Then you live love; then you are love.
And that love is not the love that you know. What you know is nothing but lust camouflaged as love. What you know is a kind of exploitation, a mutual exploitation of two persons who are not capable of being alone. They exploit each other and help each other to be together. Real love arises only when the real man has been looked into, when the real man has been encountered. Then love is a state of being, not a relationship. Then you give because you can’t do anything else. Then you share – not that you decide to share, then you find sharing happening. Then you bloom in love, then great lotuses open up and the fragrance is released.
Buddha has said two words: pragya and karuna. Pragya means samadhi, wisdom, enlightenment; and karuna means love, compassion. These two are two aspects of the one phenomenon of encountering the real man.
Look in! You have looked out enough. You have searched out enough. You have lived in the dark night for many, many lives; it is time, it is the right time to look in. You have become very artificial, very unnatural.
Let me introduce you to yourself. Become acquainted again with who you are. And a single glimpse transforms, and transforms forever.
And again I would like to repeat: this transformation is not something special – it is very ordinary because it is just your nature. Knock and the door shall be opened unto you. Ask and it shall be given to you. Seek and ye shall find.
Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
You said life and existence have no goal, they are a purpose unto themselves. Other masters, for instance, Sri Aurobindo, teach evolution as the aim of the world, evolution in always reaching for still higher levels of consciousness – from the kingdom of minerals to the kingdom of vegetables, animal, man, from present man to enlightened man.
Are these teachings wrong? Or is there a bridge to purposelessness?
Sri Aurobindo is a great philosopher but not a master at all. He is very intelligent, very scholarly, a great intellectual, but not an enlightened master. He talks about God and talks beautifully, but it is all talk, it is all abstraction; it is not a realization.
If it is a realization, then there cannot be any goal. For example, if the world has evolution as the goal, then what will be the goal of evolution? Why evolution at all in the first place? You will have to create another abstraction, and it will be a regress ad infinitum. Whatsoever you fix as the goal, the question will remain relevant about that. Why?
If this is the goal of evolution, to realize godliness, then what is the goal of realizing godliness, the ultimate? Just ask that question and you are back to the same place. If enlightenment is the goal of life, then what is the goal of enlightenment? And then you can see the point: enlightenment will have no purpose. And if the ultimate itself has no purpose, then what is the point of saying that life has purpose and the world has purpose? If the ultimate is purposelessness, then that ultimate permeates all.
This goal-orientation comes from the ego. The ego cannot accept that there is no goal. The ego cannot accept that there is no hierarchy. The ego cannot accept that minerals and trees and animals and man and enlightened people all exist in a great simultaneity – there is no gradation. You would like to be higher, you would like to be somebody special. You are man, not a mineral. But what is so great in being a man? What is so great in being an animal, or a man or an enlightened man? Why create the hierarchy? Finally the whole thing falls flat – in the end God has no purpose, and God is all.
Those who have experienced, those who have not just been thinking about God, but those who have experienced will say godliness is nothing but the cosmic simultaneity of all. Minerals are exactly where man is, in their own way, in a different form. Trees are exactly where enlightened people are, in their own way, in their own form. Nobody is higher and nobody is lower. The ego cannot accept that, because if there is nobody higher, nobody lower, it cannot exist at all. The ego can exist only through comparison; it has to put somebody lower and somebody higher. It can exist only in the middle of these two falsities. It has to put somebody lower so it can feel good: “I am special.” Then it has to put somebody higher so it can go on striving, so that it can go on achieving, so that it can go on ladder-climbing.
But if the ultimate has no purpose, what purpose is there in enlightenment? Buddha is purposeless – just think of it – and you are purposeful; existence is purposeless, and you are purposeful. If existence is purposeless, you are purposeless, because you are not separate from existence. Who is existing in the trees? Who is treeing in the trees? Who is hidden in the rocks? Who is singing in the birds? Who is speaking in me and who is listening in you? It is all one. The speaker and the spoken to are one, the knower and the known are one, the lover and the beloved are one.
Once this becomes comprehensible to you, you relax – you relax in the cosmic simultaneity. That’s what I mean when I say, “Be natural.” Ego brings unnatural desires in you; it drives you crazy. Life is simple, but to be simple one has to be purposeless. Any goal, and you can’t be simple; any goal and you can’t be herenow. Any goal and the desire to reach it will rock you. Any goal, and you are on the way, again moving, unable to enjoy this moment, the grace of this moment, the benediction of herenow.
Once you understand this, all goals disappear and with all those goals, you disappear – then what is left is enlightenment. To know that there is no purpose is to become enlightened, to know that all is good as it is. And we are all participating in the same reality. Nobody is higher and nobody is lower; no comparison is needed.
Which is higher, ice or water? Is vapor higher than ice? We know that there is nothing higher or lower – ice, water, vapor, are all manifestations of one reality called H2O. H2O has these three forms. Existence has millions of forms: man, woman, beautiful, ugly, stupid, intelligent, sinner, saint. Nobody is higher, nobody is lower. To see it is to be transformed. From that very moment you start disappearing, you start melting.
People like Sri Aurobindo will give you a new kind of ego, a spiritual kind. You start striving for supra-mental states, supra-conscious states, and you are again in the same rut, the race has started again. First it was for money, power, prestige; now it is for supra-mental states. And all that comes as a shadow with it will be there. There will be competition: somebody going higher than you, you are lagging behind, or going higher than somebody else. Everybody has to prove that he is higher, and has to continually fight those who are competing, and the whole nonsense has entered again. Then you are in a marketplace again, a spiritual marketplace, of course, but what is the difference? In the ordinary marketplace somebody was richer than you, now somebody has more satori quality in him, now somebody is more meditative, now somebody is more enlightened.
If there is a goal, then even enlightenment will be in degrees – more or less. If there is no goal, you can become enlightened this very moment. You are! You just need the courage to recognize it, the courage to be it. It hurts because the ego will have to be left, and all that you have tried in your life has been because of the ego. You may even be meditating because of the ego and for the ego. You want to have that attitude of “holier-than-thou” so you can condemn the whole world and you can say, “I am a spiritual person, you all are materialists.”
You can go around India and you can see: every Indian thinks that the whole world is materialist except Indians – holier-than-thou. And then people have to invent ways so they can prove that they are holier-than-thou. They will eat this and they will not eat that; they will live according to a certain pattern, they will have a certain style. All these are mind games. Beware of people like Sri Aurobindo!
My approach is not that of evolution. Nothing is going anywhere: all is here. Things are changing, certainly, but there is no evolution. Things are moving, certainly, but nothing is going higher and nothing is left behind as lower. Drop those categories. By dropping them you will immediately be entering into a new world. Suddenly you will find friendship with trees, because they are no longer lower; you will find a great affinity with birds, because they are no longer lower. Suddenly you will look into the eyes of your dog, and you will find a buddha there too. Then the sheer joy of it is infinite. You will look into the eyes of your woman, and a buddha is hiding there too.
I make all things divine. I don’t want you to go to God – I bring godliness to you. And not only to you – I bring godliness to the whole existence. It is really there; there is no other reality; this is the only reality there is. This is the only dance there is. Don’t miss this dance! Don’t get obsessed with ideals, otherwise you will be losing an opportunity.
Sat Bodhi asks: “You said life and existence have no goal, they are a purpose unto themselves.” Yes, it is so. It is not a philosophical statement. I am simply sharing my experience. I am not saying anything which I have not seen, felt, lived. I am simply opening my heart to you.
It is so. It is not an argument. I am not trying to convince you of anything at all. I am simply making it clear to you what has happened to me. And I say to you: this is available to you too, this very moment. Not a single moment’s postponement is needed because enlightenment is a state of nature.
Relax, don’t be tense about goals, because all goals make tension, create tension, stress, strain – because you always have to look ahead, to look far away. You have to think of future things, to plan for them; you have to strive. Naturally, tension arises, anxiety arises, anguish arises. You are torn apart: your reality is here and your heart is somewhere else. You become schizophrenic.
When I say relax, I mean drop all goals, drop all ideals. Relax into this moment, listen to this moment, live this moment, have a taste of it. Be surrounded by the reality that is already here, and suddenly you will also have the same taste I am talking about. It is an experience, existential. It is not speculation.

You say: “Other masters, for instance, Sri Aurobindo, teach evolution as the aim of the world… I don’t teach you anything “as the aim of the world.” I teach you only life, love, joy. I don’t want you to become obsessed with the future. Now is my teaching, if it can be called a teaching. Rather than calling it a teaching I would like to call it a sharing. I am not a teacher in that sense. I am not giving you a doctrine so that you can adapt yourself to the doctrine and you can become a follower. I want you to become me, not a follower.
But you are so miserly. Not only in giving: even in taking you are miserly. To hide that miserliness you philosophize in so many ways – these are strategies. You are afraid to relax. First you were tense for money, for a better house, for a better job, for a more beautiful woman. Now you are tense for evolution: how to become enlightened, how to become a buddha. You need a good kick in the pants! That’s exactly what happened…

A great seeker, a philosopher, a thinker, came to Ma Tzu. Ma Tzu is one of the rare Zen masters. The philosopher, a university professor, asked how to become enlightened, how to become a buddha. Ma Tzu, who was sitting in the temple just by the side of a great Buddha statue, said,, “To talk about such solemn and serious things, let us start by the right approach: you first bow down to Buddha.”
It looked so right: to talk about buddhahood, to talk about enlightenment, and Ma Tzu had said with great seriousness, “Bow down to Buddha,” so the philosopher bowed down. Ma Tzu gave him a good kick, a terrific kick in the pants. And something happened – not only that you are laughing: the philosopher started laughing, seeing the whole ridiculousness of it – his first satori; in that moment he had some taste of buddhahood.
What really happened? He was not expecting such a kick from such a great man, such an enlightened sage. You never expect such things. It was such a shock that for a moment, his thinking stopped; for a moment, he could not think at all. This was so unexpected.
That moment, bowing down to the statue of Buddha, and Ma Tzu kicking him so unexpectedly, was like an electric shock. It must have gone to the deepest core of his mind. For a moment, all thinking stops, all time stops and he is looking at Buddha’s statue. In that very moment, that meditative moment, he started laughing.
Years later, he was asked again and again, “What happened to you? – because you have never been the same man since.” He would answer, “Something strange happened. Since the day Ma Tzu kicked me, I have not stopped laughing. Whenever I bow down to Buddha, I remember Ma Tzu and the kick is there again. For a moment my thinking stops and I can see what this man means. He taught me without using a single word.”

That’s exactly what you need: a kick in the pants – a terrific kick. You are buddhas, you have simply forgotten. You need only remembrance, not evolution. It is not that you have to become a buddha, you are a buddha, fallen asleep. Somebody needs to kick you, somebody needs to shout at you, somebody needs to hit you. That is the purpose of a master. Ma Tzu is a master.
Sri Aurobindo is not a master; Sri Aurobindo is just philosophizing, giving consolation to people. Many people come to him, thousands became interested in him because it is cheap to become interested in philosophy. Nothing is lost, nothing is at stake, and you learn beautiful words, and you start dreaming about things, and somebody systematizes the whole thing. He is a great systematizer: he labels things, categorizes them; he goes with a system that has great appeal to the logical mind, the modern mind. But his appeal simply shows that he suits the modern mind, and anything that suits the modern mind is not going to change it.
You need somebody who can possess you unexpectedly, who can shatter your ideas, who can shatter you, who can take the very earth from beneath your feet. Only very courageous people become interested in a master. To be with a master is dangerous. One never knows what he is going to do; one never knows what he is going to say. He himself does not know! Things are happening. He is in tune with the whole, so whatsoever happens, happens.
Remember, Ma Tzu has not kicked this man: if Ma Tzu had kicked this man there would have been nothing, maybe a fight. Existence has kicked through Ma Tzu; Ma Tzu functioned only as a hollow bamboo.
The ways of a sage are strange, illogical, paradoxical. Sri Aurobindo cannot be a sage: he is so systematic, so logical. His very logicalness is enough proof that he knows nothing. He is clever with words, a genius with words. I don’t think anybody else in this century has been as capable with words, or had his talents of logic, scholarship, reading, research. But behind all that jargon there is nothing.
Another man was alive in Sri Aurobindo’s day, Ramana Maharshi. He had the experience. Very few people went to him, very few, but those who went were benefited. But to see Ramana Maharshi needs a totally different kind of approach. He will not speak much; he will not try to convince you. He will be sitting there – if you are available, he is available. And his ways will be very simple; unless you have a heart to feel that vibe, you will miss him.
It is not always so. J. Krishnamurti is there. He talks; talks very intelligently. Remember, I will not say logically: he talks very intelligently; goes into the analysis of any problem as deeply as is humanly possible. But he is not a philosopher. All of his talk is like uprooting weeds from the garden; he destroys your problems through his analysis. He does not give you anything; he simply takes away all that you have been carrying in your mind. For a moment you are utterly lost, and in that very moment you can see his reality. His experience starts flowing in you. People can miss him also.
People used to miss Sri Ramana because he was silent; he would not say much. Just the other day I mentioned U.G. Krishnamurti. When he saw Ramana Maharshi reading joke books and looking at cartoons, he was very frustrated. Not only that: a man asked a question about God and U. G. Krishnamurti was present there when, very seriously, bowing at his feet, the man asked about God. And what did Sri Ramana do? – do you know? He gave him a joke book and said, “Read it!”
Naturally, U. G. Krishnamurti was very much offended: “Is this a way? This seems to be disrespectful to the man who has asked such a serious question, giving him a joke book.” This is again a kick in the pants, in its own way.
What he is saying is, “What nonsense are you talking about? God? It is not a thing to be talked about – better read a joke book and have a good laugh.
“If you can laugh, maybe you can know God – not by what I will say. But if you can laugh a hearty laugh, a belly-laugh, in that moment thinking stops.”
Now, he has given a great message without saying a single word. Have you not watched it? When you laugh, for a moment you are no longer in the mind. Laughter takes you somewhere else. Where does it take you? It takes you to the same place where meditation takes you. So if you see a very serious and sad man and he claims that he is meditating, know well that he is not meditating. Meditation is always dancing; it is never serious, sad. It is sincere, of course, but never sad; it is joyous, it is gay.
You must have heard the old proverb: “Laugh and the whole world laughs with you; weep and you weep alone.” They have changed this proverb a little bit in modern times. Now they say: “Laugh and the whole world laughs with you; weep and you sleep alone.” But it is the same.
In the moment of laughter, you are suddenly one with the harmony of existence. Weep, and you have fallen apart, you are no longer part of it. In sadness, in seriousness, in despair, you are not in rhythm with existence. In laughing, in dancing, in singing, in loving, you are in rhythm with existence.
There is no evolution, only rhythm or no rhythm. These are two states, and they are available right now. You can be in rhythm, you can be not in rhythm – that is the freedom of man. Trees are continuously in rhythm, birds are continuously in rhythm. Man can choose. These are different manifestations. Because you can choose, you have chosen the wrong. The wrong has an appeal: by choosing the wrong, you become important; by choosing the right, you disappear. And you have been taught from the very childhood to be important, to be the first in the world. You have been taught ambition; you have been poisoned to the very core. You always want to be important.
Now, this U. G. Krishnamurti missed Sri Ramana, and something great was happening. Sri Ramana giving a joke book to a man who is asking about God, is almost like Buddha giving his flower to Mahakashyap or Ma Tzu giving a terrific kick in the pants. U. G. Krishnamurti missed Ramana. Then he missed J. Krishnamurti, too, and he lived for years with J. Krishnamurti.
Now, J. Krishnamurti is totally different in his expression, very logical, very rational. The beginning of his work is always with the mind; then slowly, slowly he leads you beyond the mind, But U. G. Krishnamurti thought it was all abstraction, philosophy. He stopped going there because “it is all abstraction.” He left Sri Ramana because there was no philosophy, he left Krishnamurti because there was too much philosophy; in both cases he missed.
He lived with Sri Shivananda of Rishikesh for seven years doing yoga postures. For seven years there he thought, “Something is here.” And there was nothing! Shivananda is a very ordinary teacher. You can find dozens of them all around this country teaching people how to stand on their heads, teaching people stupid things. U. G. Krishnamurti remained there for seven years and became a disciple.
Now, he missed two pinnacles. This is what goes on happening. You have a mind, a certain mind, and when you go to a master, you look from your mind. If it fits, you are happy; you start clinging. But that is not going to help, because if it fits, it will strengthen the same mind that you brought with you. If, by chance, you come across a real master, nothing is going to fit. He is going to disrupt all your ideas about how a master should be; he is going to sabotage you. He is not going to meet your expectations. He is going to frustrate you, he is going to disappoint you in every possible way because that is the only way real work can start. And if you still can be with him, then you are going to be awakened.
Sleep is easy, cheap; awakening is arduous. You will have to renounce your dreams and you will have to renounce much comfort, much convenience. You will have to renounce many ideas that you have always thought were very valuable.
My approach is that no evolution is happening. The world is exactly where it has always been, and will remain there. And I don’t mean that things are not changing – bullock-carts have disappeared and cars have come, and cars are on the way to disappearing sooner or later; soon private airplanes will be around.
Many things have changed, but really nothing has changed. At the core, everything is exactly the same. Do you think that if you become enlightened today you will be more enlightened than Buddha because twenty-five centuries have passed and man has evolved? Do you think the people who were there in Buddha’s day were more unenlightened than you are? Or go still further back to Moses, or still further back to Krishna. Do you think in the days of Krishna, five thousand years ago, there were fewer enlightened people or more unenlightened people than there are today? It is exactly the same.
Time makes no difference. When you become enlightened, the date will not be a decisive factor. When you become enlightened, you become enlightened! You simply become aware. You are no longer asleep. You remember, you recognize your reality, and you are in tune. Cars may be passing by, or bullock-carts – do you think it makes any difference? Would Buddha have been more enlightened if cars had been passing by in Bodhgaya and trains had been shrieking and airplanes had been rushing from one airport to another? What happened to Buddha in Bodhgaya twenty-five centuries ago would have been the same – bullock-carts or cars or airplanes or spaceships make no difference. And the people who were unenlightened were as unenlightened as the people are today.
At that depth nothing ever changes, there is no evolution. Otherwise, Buddha will have to come back to become more enlightened this time – and then there is no end. Then, every time you become enlightened, after a few centuries you have to come back and become more enlightened because now more sophisticated enlightenment is available. At the deepest core, nothing is changing. Only on the periphery do things change.

“Other teachers, for instance, Sri Aurobindo, teach evolution as the aim of the world…” These people appeal to you because you want something – longing, ambition, desire, passion – and these people supply you with it. Whatsoever is demanded is supplied. Because you want something to cling to, they give you spiritual commodities. You can’t remain without desires, so you say, “Now I am no longer interested in the world” – and they give you otherworldly desires.
They say, “Okay, take this, now worry about this. You have worried enough about the world, now worry about meditation, worry about enlightenment. You have competed enough to reach to Delhi, now forget about Delhi and reach moksha, nirvana, paradise, but go on reaching!” You feel very happy: a new toy has been given to you and you start playing with the new toy. Sooner or later you get fed up with that toy, then some other toy has to be given to you.
Just the other day, somebody had written a letter to me. In Germany, somebody has invented something new, far superior to enlightenment that is called “transformation.” Now you have played with the word enlightenment too long, now somebody is bound to come and say, “That is nothing. Take transformation. Enlightenment is simply enlightenment – we transform! We take you to another, a new formation. Enlightenment means you remain the same and light comes to you. Transformation means you become totally new.” Now this has appeal, it is a new toy. Then somebody will come and will give another word. People go on playing with words. Beware!
I really want to do work here. I don’t want to give you any more toys; I want to destroy all toys. It is going to be hard work; it is going to be painful. But if you can move with me just one step – I ask only one step – your dreams, your sleep, will have gone for ever, and then real life starts. Real life is with the whole; unreal life is alone.

“Are these teachings wrong?” Sat Bodhi has asked. They are neither right nor wrong, they are simply illusory. You cannot call them wrong. They are not right, they are not wrong, they are simply illusory. They have nothing to do with truth. They have something to do with your mind. Your mind demands those things; somebody comes and supplies you. It is a con game.

The second question:
Osho,
Does anything or anyone need correction? It puzzles me.
Nobody needs correction. And who is going to correct? The moment it is said that somebody needs correction, sooner or later somebody is needed to dominate you, to manipulate you, to make a slave out of you.
That’s why leaders down the ages have been calling and shouting from the housetops that everything needs to be corrected, everything needs to be changed, improved. If nothing needs to be corrected, they won’t be leaders any more. They live on the idea that things need to be improved, revolutions have to be done, then they are great leaders.
And nothing is ever improved, nothing can ever be improved. You can either be fast asleep or awake. And awakening is not a correction, remember. It is not correcting your sleep. If sleep is corrected that will mean a few more tranquilizers are injected in you so that you can sleep better. This is correction: new pillows, more comfortable; a new bed, more convenient; a better bedroom. These are corrections so you can remain asleep in a better way, so you can almost remain in a coma.
Sleep does not need correction. Awakening is not a correction in sleep, it is simply dropping sleep. It is moving into another kind of reality, having a totally different kind of relationship with existence.
Moralists, politicians, puritans, priests, they are always after you, calling for correction. Everything needs to be corrected, every person needs to be corrected – that is their power. Because of this, the world is dominated by politicians. They always go on finding what has to be corrected, and they always go on deluding you that now the correction can be made. But there is only one way: if they are in power then the correction can be made.
First they convince you that the correction is needed; then naturally when you become convinced, the correction is needed. And why do you become convinced? – because you are suffering. You are not suffering because of sleep, not because of immorality, not because of sin, but because you are unconscious. And they come and they say, “This is why you are suffering. A better morality, a better code of conduct, better behavior, a better character, and your suffering will disappear.”
You start correcting yourself, and you cannot do it, you need help, you need a priest, a guide to guide you. You need a leader! First they convince you correction is needed, and then naturally they come by the back door with all the paraphernalia to correct you. You become slaves. That has been the trick down the ages. People have been dominated; people have been reduced into things, they have been condemned, they have been praised, and they have been dominated through this condemnation and praise.
This is the great conspiracy. I would like to tell you once and for all: There is no need for any correction. You are not to be improved upon. Then what is needed? Awakening is needed, not correction. Not more morality, not more ethical conduct, no, just consciousness. With consciousness, morality comes on its own accord.
In deep sleep, unconscious, how can you correct yourself? At the most, you can have better dreams, maybe not in black and white but technicolor dreams, psychedelic dreams. But you can only have better dreams in sleep; you cannot have reality in sleep.
I have heard…

It was a dark, cloudy night and the drunk staggered into the cemetery and fell into a hole which had been dug in preparation for a burial the following day. The drunk hiccupped and fell asleep.
Half an hour later another drunk swayed into the cemetery. He was singing loudly and his raucous voice woke up the drunk in the grave who suddenly started to yell that he was cold.
The singing drunk tottered to the edge of the grave and peered blurrily down at the complaining drunk. “It’s no wonder you are cold,” he shouted down to the drunk, “you have kicked all the soil off yourself!”

This is what has been going on. You are asleep, your leaders are asleep; you are asleep, your priests are asleep. The problem is not that the man has kicked all the soil off himself… And if this other drunk starts helping, what do you think he will do? He will throw the soil on him again: “No wonder he is feeling cold!”
You need only one thing.
And corrections are millions, and still they never suffice. You put one thing right on this corner, and something else goes wrong on another, because your sleep keeps a certain balance. Have you not watched? You stop smoking and then you start chewing gum. You stop one thing and you have to start another, and it is the same old game. You go on changing things; you remain the same.
Corrections are millions. There is no end to them; you can go on correcting and correcting and you will never be correct. You will never be right. You can put all the wrongs right, and you will find yourself still wrong, because deep down you are still unconscious, you don’t know who you are.
The first and the only step is to know who you are, to become aware.

Timothy was on holiday in Ireland and staying at a small country inn. One evening in the bar he was amazed by the following conversation: “That’s a beautiful hat you’ve got there,” said an old man to a young fellow who was standing next to him at the bar; “where did you buy it?”
“At O’Grady’s,” replied the young man.
“Why, I go there myself!” commented the old man. “You must be from around these parts then?”
“Aye. From Murphy Street.”
“Gracious!” exclaimed the old man. “I live there too!” “Quite amazing,” commented Timothy to the barman. “that those two folk over there live in the same street and have only just met.”
“Don’t you believe it!” said the barman. “They’re actually father and son, but they’re always too drunk to recognize each other.”

No correction is needed, just awareness is needed. Become more alert. No character is needed, because all character is false if you are not conscious. And all character is a bondage if you are not conscious. All character is nothing but chains, it doesn’t bring freedom. All morality is hypocrisy if you are not aware, if you are not conscious.
So, to me, religion means only one thing: to be more conscious, to live more consciously.

You ask: “Does anyone or anything need correction? It puzzles me.” It has puzzled everybody down the ages. Forget about correction. Put your total energy into awakening. There are only two ways to be: unconscious or conscious. Choose.

The third question:
Osho,
“Enlightenment is my true nature; there is no need to do anything.”
“Only when effort is completely exhausted and one feels utterly useless does grace come.”
What is all this? I am confused. What should I do? Should I continue with meditation or should I just sit and let things happen?
Please guide me.
If you are confused then you will have to continue meditations. Confusion is the illness, meditation is medicinal. Both the words – meditation and medicine – come from the same root. If you are confused, you will have to go on meditating. When you see the point without any confusion, then there is no need. But meditation will prepare you; meditation will force you to see the point that there is no need to do anything. Only meditation can do that.
Just listening to me… I have told you that to be natural is to be enlightened. Now you think, “So, that is great! I can sit silently and do nothing.” But can you really sit silently and do nothing? If you can really sit silently and do nothing, then this question would not have arisen. You would have sat and known and you would have bowed before me and thanked me. There would have been no question. You would have come dancing to me, not with a question and a confused mind.
If you can sit silently doing nothing, what else is needed? That’s what Buddha was doing under the bodhi tree: sitting silently doing nothing – and then it happened. That’s how it happened to me. That’s how it always happens.
But doing nothing is not so easy. Because you have become so accustomed to doing something or other, even sitting will be a doing to you. You will have to force yourself in a yoga posture and you will sit strained, still, in control, holding, trying to sit silently and not do anything, and boiling within, to do a thousand and one things, and thousands of thoughts will clamor around, will distract you.
Can you just sit and do nothing? That is the ultimate; that’s what nirvana is, samadhi is. It can happen; just listening to me it can happen also, but great intelligence is needed. Then, simply, you have seen the point: that to be natural is all. Then where is the confusion? What is the confusion? Where does it come from? You have seen it, or you have not seen it. If you have seen it, all confusion has disappeared and you will sit silently, you will walk silently, you will eat silently, you will talk silently. You will become a non-doer; you will become a natural being.
But if you have not seen it, then you will need a few more crazy things; you will have to go through them. Those meditations will force you to see the point. Either you see just by listening and sitting by my side, or you will have to see the hard way.
Buddha meditated for six years, and meditated intensely, totally. Then this realization arose in him: “What am I doing? Trees are perfectly happy, birds are perfectly happy – what am I doing? And these trees are not meditating, and these birds have never thought about meditation, and they have not read Patanjali’s Yoga Sutras, and they don’t do yoga asanas and they don’t chant any mantras. And the whole existence is so tremendously ecstatic! What am I doing standing on my head and fasting and all that nonsense?”
He saw it, but it took six years for him to see this. And he was no ordinary man; he was tremendously intelligent. It took six years for him to see the point. But the moment he saw it, he relaxed under the bodhi tree. He fell asleep and the next morning he was awakened. Not only were his eyes opened physically, but his eyes were opened spiritually. Next morning when he opened his eyes, he was totally a different man, the real man had arisen. Just a glimpse of the real man, says Ikkyu, and you are in love. And the moment he saw his real man, he started living a life of compassion and love. There was no other way now, no choice. He became a natural man.
So, if you feel confused, then go on meditating. Meditation is not for enlightenment: meditation is for confused people. Meditation does not lead you to enlightenment; it simply makes you fed up with your confusion. Just see the point: meditation is not a way to enlightenment, it is just a way to get rid of confusion. And when there is no confusion, enlightenment comes of its own accord.
Meditation’s work is negative; it takes things away from you. It does not give you anything; it simply goes on taking things away from you. Anger disappears, greed disappears, desire disappears, and you start losing whatever you had. You become poorer and poorer every day. That’s what Jesus means when he says: Blessed are those who are poor in spirit.
Anger is not there, greed is not there, ambition is not there. Slowly, slowly, chunks of your being are cut from you. And one day suddenly nothing is there, or, only nothing is there. That very moment, light penetrates. All those things – greed, anger, passion, lust, hatred, ambition, ego – were hindering the path. They were not allowing the light to penetrate into you; they were functioning like a rock between you and existence. All those removed and suddenly existence enters into you and you enter into existence.
If you understand me, there is no need for any meditation. But if you don’t understand me, then meditation will be needed. Then go on doing it.
I understand your confusion, your trouble. You can meditate only if it leads to enlightenment. That’s what your problem is. You have not said it so clearly, but that’s exactly where the problem is. You can do it if I emphasize that it will lead you to enlightenment, and I cannot do that, because that is not true. You want me to promise you so that you can go on doing meditation. You want me to hypnotize you, you want me to go on supporting your desires, your goals, that you want to become enlightened, that you want to become natural. Now look at the whole absurdity of becoming natural! How can one become natural? You are natural. All becoming will lead you toward unnatural structures. Becoming cannot bring you to being natural; becoming means becoming unnatural.
Natural you are, but you want me to support you because you cannot sit silently. You cannot sit really; you need something to think about, something to do. You want some goal. And if I take the goal away you ask, “Then why should I do meditation if it is not needed?” It is still needed. It is needed, not for enlightenment but to destroy this constant restlessness in your mind.
It is like this: if you live in a room with closed doors the sun will not penetrate, although by opening the door you are not creating the sun. By opening the door you don’t create the sun, the sun is there, but by opening the door, you become available to the sun. Meditations are just like opening the door.
Right now if you sit, you will be sitting in confusion, and the confusion will grow more and more as you sit. You will gather it; it will become almost impossible to bear it, you will have to go to a movie or listen to the radio or TV or go to a club, or somewhere.
Meditations are cathartic. They throw all the rubbish that you contain inside. They simply cleanse you; they open the doors, they open the eyes, and the sun is there. Once you are available, it starts penetrating you.
Then you will never say, “I became natural.” You will say, “I was natural. The problem was not how to become natural; the problem was how not to go on becoming unnatural.”

The fourth question:
Osho,
Yesterday you said that there is no goal, no path, no one to lead and no one to follow. Is this statement a lie again? Were you kidding us yesterday?
That’s what I am doing every day. That’s the only possible thing to do. All statements are lies; truth remains unstated. Truth cannot be reduced to a statement; it cannot be reduced to a formula. It is vast! How can you reduce it to a statement? The moment you state anything about truth, the very expression becomes a barrier. Words cling around truth like chains.
Truth can only be transferred in silence. Those who really listen to me don’t listen to what I say, they listen to what I am. They listen to the gaps, they listen to the intervals. Words are not important, but there are small gaps between words and the meeting between you and me happens in those gaps.
Those gaps are of meditation. Slowly, slowly, words move on the periphery and my meeting, my communion, with you becomes the central phenomenon. Words are there, just distant, on the periphery. Silence starts happening.
If you fall silent listening to me, then you have listened to me. If listening to me your mind stops and there are moments when there are no thoughts, all is still and quiet, then you have been listening to me.
Hearing me is one thing; listening to me is quite another. Those who come near to me for the first time, they hear. Those who stay with me for a longer time, slowly, slowly the transformation happens and hearing starts changing into listening.
Listening is non-verbal. Then my presence is listened to; then something is bridged between me and you. My heart and your heart start beating together in one rhythm. Then it is a song, a dance of energies.
This is what in the East is called satsang – being in the presence of the master. It is not a verbal communication at all. Then why do I go on speaking? Why can’t I sit silently here? You will not be able to absorb that much silence. You can absorb it only in homeopathic doses, just once in a while.
And my words help. They don’t state the truth, but they help, they indicate; they are fingers pointing to the moon. They are not the moon themselves, just fingers pointing to the moon, arrows. Don’t be obsessed by the fingers, don’t start clinging to the fingers, don’t start worshipping the fingers – because that is how you will miss the moon. Forget the fingers and look at the moon. That moon is silence, utter silence, where not even a single word has ever been uttered.
You have that space inside you. I have become one with it. You are not one with it, but moving with me, flowing with me, hearing my words, listening to my silences, once in a while it happens. And those moments are of grace. In those moments you have the first taste of godliness. Slowly, slowly, you will become more and more capable. That’s why I go on speaking.
And then, new people are always coming; I have to speak for them. The older ones, slowly, slowly will not be bothered by my words. Hearing will disappear completely. They will listen to my words just as they listen to the sound of a waterfall; they will not search for any meaning in them, they will not search for any truth in them. They will not search even for any coherence in them. They will not be constantly looking into consistency, contradiction, logic, illogic – no, all these things by and by disappear. They will listen to my words as they listen to the songs of the birds, or the wind passing through the pine trees. You don’t ask what the meaning is, you simply listen, and in listening you become that sound passing through the pine trees, you become that wind.
Whatsoever I say is a device, so it is a lie. Truth has never been said, cannot be said. Truth is unutterable. But you can listen to it. It is unutterable, it can’t be said, but it can be listened to.
Let me repeat: it cannot be uttered, but it can be listened to. You can catch hold of it – in silence, in love, in communion. I am not able to say it, but you are able to listen to it; hence, this device of talking to you every morning, year in, year out. This is just a waterfall: listen to it, don’t remain just hearing.
I am so contradictory by arrangement. I manage it, because if I am very consistent, you will never be able to listen to me, you will go on hearing me. I am so contradictory that sooner or later you are tired. You say, “What is the point? This man is going to say one thing this morning and tomorrow he is going to contradict it.” Seeing it happening again and again… You will cling to my statement and then tomorrow I contradict it, I have to contradict it. Whenever I see that somebody is clinging somewhere to any of my statements, I have to contradict it immediately to relieve him of the burden, to relieve him of his clinging, to relieve him of the words that he has accumulated inside himself.
So I will go on, zigzag, contradicting myself a thousand and one times. Slowly, slowly, the understanding dawns on you that there is no point in clinging to any words of this man, there is no need to bother about what he says. But by that time, you have fallen in love with me. By that time you are in a totally different kind of relationship with me than you have ever been with anybody else. By that time, you have started enjoying my presence. By that time, you have started imbibing me. By that time you have started feeling the nourishment. Now you don’t care what I say: now you care more that I am. Then listening has started.
And you will understand me only by listening. You will understand me only when you have forgotten all about understanding what I am saying. All statements are lies. What Lao Tzu says is true. He says: Tao cannot be said, and the moment you say it you have betrayed it. He is absolutely true.
Truth is so infinite and words are so finite. Only when you have something infinite in you… Silence is infinite, unbounded, it can contain truth. Love is infinite, unbounded, it can contain truth. Trust is infinite, unbounded, it can contain truth.
Be natural, spontaneous, here with me. Be in the moment, as if all time and space has disappeared, as if the whole world has stopped. The mind has stopped, and suddenly there is truth in all its radiance, grandeur, splendor.
It is here, right this moment. If you have ears, hear it. If you have eyes, see it. And if you cannot see it, and if you cannot hear it, then don’t go on clinging here unnecessarily. I am in a hurry – I don’t want any weeds here. I will find every possible means and ways to drop people who are just sitting here like rocks.
Either throb with me, or get lost. Either be with me, or don’t be here – because I mean to do business!

The last question:
Osho,
I see I don't trust life one hundred percent. Nothing feels possible unless I do. There are moments when trust happens, but what am I supposed to do at other times when I don't feel it? Pretending trust seems even worse. Living in fear feels no good either.
Rupa, that’s how we go on creating new goals. I go on taking goals from you and you go on creating new goals. Now one hundred percent trust becomes the goal; ninety-nine percent and you are worried.
Can’t you simply be as you are? Why bother about one hundred percent trust? Trying to be one hundred percent when you are not is bound to create hypocrisy. You will become artificial, you will become unnatural.
Do you know what one hundred percent trust means? One hundred percent trust means trusting even in your mistrust – that’s what one hundred percent trust means. If there is a moment of distrust, you trust that moment, too! What can you do? One moment you trust me, good; another moment you don’t trust me, good. This is one hundred percent trust. When all is good, it is one hundred percent trust.
Now you are again trying to create trouble and anxiety for yourself. One moment you trust me – good, you feel very good. Then another moment comes distrust – now you are worried, now somehow you have to change this distrust into trust. Now you are again starting a new ladder.
Now you will compare: “Somebody has one hundred percent trust, this moment never comes to him. And somebody has even less trust than me.” You are becoming part of a hierarchy, you have started comparing, you are creating ambition and fever. And when it does not happen, what are you going to do? And anything done by you will be unnatural. So you will become artificial: when it is not there you will pretend. You will believe at least on the surface that it is there; you will become afraid of going deep into yourself, because if you go deep into yourself you will know it is not there.
One hundred percent trust means: Accept life whatsoever it brings – trust, mistrust, love, hate, godliness, evil, good, bad. You don’t try to change anything, don’t try to correct anything. Be in a let-go – that is one hundred percent trust.
Let me remind you again, otherwise tomorrow Rupa will be here saying, “I can allow let-go sometimes, but sometimes it doesn’t happen. The let-go is not one hundred percent.” Let-go again means the same: when it happens, it happens; when it doesn’t happen, it doesn’t happen. You are not supposed to do a thing.
Do anything and you become artificial – and people have become so artificial. It is very rare, very rare, to see even a small part in a person which is not artificial. And it has all happened, this calamity has happened, because you are such a great improver, continually improving upon yourself, correcting and correcting. From your very childhood your parents were correcting you, then your teachers were correcting you, then your professors were correcting you, your priests were correcting you, the whole society has just been correcting you. And, naturally, after twenty-five years of correction by everybody, you yourself become a great corrector. Then you start correcting yourself.
In fact, you are allowed to leave the university only when you start doing the work of the parents and the teachers and the professors and the priest on your own. Then they will allow; then they will say, “Right, now there is no danger. This man will do whatsoever we were doing, and will do it far better because he will know from the inside, he will know the inside story.”
Have you not observed it? Sometimes doing something, suddenly you hear your mother’s voice: “Don’t do it!” If you have not heard it, try to hear, and you will find your mother still saying, “Don’t do it!” actually your mother’s voice you can hear, or your father’s, saying, “This is wrong. This is not the way to do the thing. Correct it!” Or your teachers correcting. They have created such a rift in you that you have become two.
This whole society exists in a kind of schizophrenia. Every person is split. This society has tried the trick of “divide and rule”; it has divided every person into two: the corrector and the one who has to be corrected. So everybody has become like a small student and the headmaster – both are there! And the headmaster with the cane shouting and threatening, and the small child always being corrected. And, of course, the small child also takes revenge. Whenever the headmaster is not looking at the child, he does something – at least he can show his tongue or laugh or joke. Or there are moments when the small child will take possession of you and will force you to do something that you never wanted to do, and will make you repent. It always says, “Yes, sir,” but it never means it. It says, “Because I am afraid I am saying yes, but I will show you!” This constant conflict goes on within you, and then everything becomes false, pseudo, phony.
I have heard…

Groom: “Would you be very annoyed with me if I confess that all my upper teeth are false?”
Bride: “Not at all, darling. At least I can now relax and take off my wig, inflatable bra, glass eye and artificial leg.”

Now what is left? Just watch what you are carrying around yourself, what you think is your personality. What is it?

An American tourist, visiting England, had just enjoyed a delicious dinner in a Winchester restaurant.
“Would you like coffee, sir?” inquired a waiter.
“Certainly,” replied the American.
“Cream or milk?”
“Neither,” said the American firmly. “Just give me what I’m used to back home: a pasteurized blend of water, corn syrup solids, vegetable oil, sodium caseinate, carrageenan, guargum, disodium phosphate, polysorbate 60, sorbitan monostearate, potassium sorbate, and artificial color.”

Now what is left? Slowly, slowly, everything becomes false, artificial, synthetic, plastic. Then you lose the taste of life. And when you lose the taste of life, you lose contact with existence. When you become inauthentic, you become uprooted.
Please don’t try anything upon yourself. Stop trying; let things be. Let things be as they are. They are utterly beautiful; all ugliness is created by you. Yes, sometimes mistrust is perfectly beautiful. Sometimes doubt is good: it protects you from many foolishnesses, it protects you from gullibility. Sometimes trust is good, sometimes no trust is good. But whatsoever the case, I call this one hundred percent trust – that you always say, “Good, so this is the thing in this moment. So this moment existence wants me to be trustful and this moment existence wants me to be doubtful.” Leave it to existence, and you simply be at the receptive end, a receptacle, and you will be surprised. Life will start happening to you and existence will start happening to you. But we are trained very deep down from childhood to be false, to be untrue, to be formal.

An Englishwoman and her young son were traveling in a taxi in New York. As the taxi passed a particularly seedy part of the city, the small boy was fascinated by the garishly made-up ladies who were walking along the streets, accosting some of the male passers-by.
“What are those ladies doing?” asked the boy.
His mother blushed and said, somewhat embarrassed, “I expect they are lost and are asking people for directions.”
The taxi driver overheard this, and said in a loud voice, “Why don’tcha tell the boy the truth – in other words they’re prostitutes.”
The woman blushed even deeper red, and her son asked, “What are p…p…pros…what the driver said? Are they like other women? Do they have children?”
“Of course,” replied the mother. “That’s where New York taxi drivers come from.”

Truth is not accepted anywhere; people are annoyed with truth. False pretensions are very, very acceptable. We have lived in lies for so long that truth simply annoys. It is not just an accident that Socrates was poisoned – his only sin was that he was trying to make people aware of the truth. His sin was nothing else. He was a simple, innocent man, harmless, utterly harmless. He had not harmed anybody in any way, but still Athens was angry. Why were they angry? He was trying to make people feel uneasy about their lies; he was trying to force them to see the truth. Whosoever tries to make you aware of the truth is going to be thought an enemy by the society. The society lives in lies, it depends on lies.
I am not here to help in your lies. I can’t say to you to be one hundred percent in trust, or at least the way you mean by one hundred percent. Then what will happen to those moments when you can’t trust? What will you do? You will simply cover them up. You will pretend that they are not there. You will throw them into the unconscious, in the basement of your being, and will never look there. And they will accumulate there and one day they will explode. No, that is not to be done. When distrust comes, allow it to come, and know that it is there. Accept it. It must have some meaning. If it is there, it must have some meaning.
It is like a thorn in the rosebush – it is not all roses, there are thorns, too. They protect the roses. There must be some deep harmony between the thorn and the rose; so there is between trust and untrust. Accept the harmony of polarities. This I call one hundred percent trust – from my side. Trust everything that happens. Mistrust is included, doubt is included; nothing is excluded.
I teach you totality in life. And sometimes when you are not total, that too, is included in totality. Accept that too, and this will be a liberation. Then there will be no more creation of chains, no more creation of lies, no more repressions. And a man who is not repressed is bound to have a glimpse of the real man.
One glimpse of the real man, and Ikkyu is right, you are in love.
Enough for today.

============================================================

If it rain, let it rain;
If it rain not, let it not rain;
But even should it not rain,
You must travel
With wet sleeves.

Look at the cherry blossoms!
Their color and scent fall with them,
Are gone for ever,
Yet mindless
The spring comes again.

Buddhism
Is the shaved part of the saucepan,
The whiskers of the pebble,
The sound that accompanies
The bamboos in the picture.

The puppet-player hangs them
Round his neck, not his heart;
He can take out a devil,
He can take out a buddha.

If he says,
“There is nothing special about it,”
Already he has transgressed,
And can say nothing else,
This Daruma Ikkyu.
What is religion? It is not the howling of the wolves at the moon, but that is what it has become to the masses. If the masses are right, then animals have a great religious sense: wolves howling, dogs barking at the moon, at the distant, at the faraway.
Paul Tillich has defined religion as the ultimate concern. It is exactly the opposite. It is the immediate concern, not the ultimate concern. In fact, the immediate is the only ultimate there is. Religion is not a desire for the distant, a curiosity for the faraway – it is an inquiry into one’s own being.
That’s why Buddhism is not concerned with God at all; it is concerned with you, with your reality. Its whole process is like peeling an onion. Buddhism continues to peel your reality, layer upon layer, destroying the illusions, the dreams. And just as it happens when you peel an onion, ultimately nothing is left in your hands.
That nothing is the source of all. Out of that nothing all arises and slowly, slowly disappears back into that nothing. Now physicists are coming very close: they call that nothing “the black hole” – where matter disappears into black holes, is utterly annihilated, becomes nothing. Now, after black holes, there is talk in scientific circles about white holes, too. Out of white holes, matter arises. It seems black holes and white holes are just two aspects of the same reality. They are like a door: on one side of the door is written “Entrance”; on the other side of the same door is written “Exit.”
When things appear out of the womb of nothingness, the door is called a white hole – white because it gives birth, white because life comes out of it. By calling it white we are appreciating it, we are valuing it. One day everything disappears back into the same door, and then we call it black. We have always called death black; man has always been afraid of blackness, of the dark, of death. But it is the same reality: from one side it is a black hole, from the other side it is a white hole. Buddha calls it shunyata.
There is every possibility that modern physics will come closer and closer to Buddha. It has to; it has to recognize Buddha’s insight into reality, because nobody else ever dared to call nothingness the source of all. How did Buddha stumble upon the fact? He was not a physicist, he was not working into the deepest reality of matter, but he was working into the deepest reality of his own psychology.
Let me remind you that Buddhism is not metaphysics. Metaphysics is always a concern with the ultimate. Meta means beyond – beyond physics, beyond that which can be seen, beyond the earth, beyond the visible, the tangible, the sensuous. Metaphysics means always the faraway, the distant reality, God.
Buddhism is basically purely a psychology; it is not concerned with metaphysics. Its concern is with the reality of the mind: how it functions, what constitutes the mind. It goes on penetrating deeper into the layers of the mind, and finally comes to the realization that at the deepest, the bottom core, there is nothingness.
Buddha was not believed by people – because who can believe in nothingness, who wants nothingness in the first place? Modern physics is also puzzling people, driving them crazy. But reality is as it is; whether you like it or not is not the question. Your liking or not liking is not going to change it; your liking and disliking can only keep you in illusions. Reality has to be seen as it is, and to be capable of seeing that is all that is needed to become religious: the courage to see reality in its utter truth, in its nakedness, undisguised, uncovered, undressed.
Once you have seen reality as it is, once you have had a glimpse of the real man, a great transformation happens of its own accord. That very insight transforms you, transmutes you; you are never the same again. All illusions disappear, and seeing the reality, how can you continue to delude yourself? How can you continue to dream? How can you continue in your prejudices? How can you go on keeping false opinions? How can you carry on with doctrines and philosophies and scriptures? Seeing the reality, all simply disappears, only reality is there, and to be with that reality is liberation.
Jesus is right when he says truth liberates. Truth is liberation. There is every possibility that Jesus learned the secrets of truth from Buddhist masters. There is every possibility that before he started his work in Israel, he was in India, in Nalanda, with Buddhist masters. Nalanda was one of the most ancient buddhafields, a great university of monks. Never before and never after has anything like that existed.
I am hoping to create something like that again, on a wider scale, a bigger scale. Nalanda was a great experiment, an experiment with truth, an experiment to see truth as it is. Ten thousand monks continuously meditated, worked, penetrated, with no prejudices, with no a priori ideas. They were not bent upon proving anything; they were real seekers.
The unreal seeker is one who is bent upon proving something from the very beginning. The unreal seeker is one who says, “I am in search of God.” He has already accepted that God exists. Without knowing? If he knows, then why search? If you don’t know, then how can you search for God? Who knows? – God may exist, may not exist. The search is already based on an a priori belief.
In Nalanda, those ten thousand monks were not searching for God; they were not searching for any heaven. They were not searching in reality for something a priori. They were simply searching into their own being with no idea what they were searching for. Their search was pure; they were just looking into reality to see what is there. And because they were not preoccupied by any idea, they stumbled into nothingness, they came to know nothingness.
If you are preoccupied by some idea, then you are bound to create the illusion of your own idea in that nothingness, and that nothingness is capable of supporting any idea. Any dream that you are carrying in you can be projected on the screen of nothingness. If you are searching for Krishna, you will find him, and it will be just a projection. If you are searching for a Jewish God, you will find him. If you are searching for a Hindu God, you will find him. Whatsoever you search for you will find, but it will not be truth, and it will not liberate you; it will just be your imagination.
Remember, one of the most important things in life is that if you start a search with a fixed idea, a fixed attitude, you are bound to find it. Then there is a vicious circle: When you find it you think, “Of course, it is, because I have found it,” and this enhances your belief even more. Then you start finding it more often – the more you believe, the more you find it; the more you find it, the more you believe. You go on pouring reality into a dream, and you can go on wasting lives together.
Buddha’s message is: Search without any idea. Look, just clean your eyes and look. Don’t look for something in particular, just look, a pure look into things, into the suchness of things. The eyes have to be clean and pure, otherwise they can project: even a small particle of dust and it will show on the screen of nothingness. Just a little liking, disliking, a little choice, and you will create reality. Buddha’s approach is such an absolute experiment – simple once you understand it, not complicated. But if you don’t understand you can go on deluding yourself.
There is every possibility Jesus lived in Nalanda. That’s why in the New Testament his whole life is not accounted for. You see him when he was about twelve, once he is mentioned, and then you see him when he is thirty. Eighteen years are missing in the New Testament story of Jesus. Where was he for those eighteen years? What was he doing? Why are those days not accounted for? It seems to be a big gap in that small life. He only lived thirty-three years and more than half his life is missing.
The story is fragmentary; something consciously, deliberately has been dropped. It is impossible that those who were writing the story would not have been aware of the fact that eighteen years are simply missing. And they are the most important years, because up to twelve a child is a child. When at thirty he suddenly appears with John the Baptist, he is already a mature man, enlightened, arrived, a siddha – one who has known, one who has seen, accomplished, attained. The painting is complete.
The three years that are related in the Bible story are just about his work on others. What about his work upon himself? Where did he meditate? With whom? What was he doing? How did he become what he became? The most important years are missing. And by the thirty-third year he is crucified, so really only three years’ story is available. First his birth story; then he is seen arguing with the rabbis in the temple of Jerusalem when he is twelve; and then these last three years. The most important part – his preparation, his work upon himself – seems to be deliberately dropped. Yet his teaching in those three years is ample proof that he must have come in contact with Buddhist groups.
There are ample proofs that he had traveled to India, and ample proofs that he had lived in India. And whatever he is saying in those three years’ time of his ministry is absolutely in tune with Buddha. Of course, he is translating it into Jewish terms: he talks about love, about compassion. The Jewish God was not a God of love at all. He was a very jealous God, a very angry God; ready to punish, ready to destroy. He was not at all a God of love! From where did this idea of a God of love arise in Jesus? He must have come in contact with people who had worked hard and had come to know that when one becomes enlightened, one’s whole energy becomes love energy. And if this happens to man, then this must be so about the ultimate reality, too. Godliness can only be love.
And then Jesus says if somebody slaps you on one cheek, give him the other cheek too. That is an utterly Buddhist approach: Forgive! That too, was not at all a Jewish concept. The Jewish approach was if someone throws a brick at you, you have to throw a rock at him – tit for tat. If someone has destroyed one eye of another then both of his own eyes have to be destroyed – justice, not compassion. Jesus brings compassion. Instead of justice he brings the value of love.
Jewish ideas were much too moralistic. Those Ten Commandments have been haunting the Jewish mind ever since; thirty-five centuries have passed. Jesus brings a new commandment. He says, “I give you a new commandment: just as I have loved you, you love everybody else. Love is a new commandment.” But that is the flavor of Buddha.
Remember again, Ikkyu says: One glimpse of the real man, and you are in love. You are love.
The Buddhist approach has been to look without any idea so that reality can reveal itself. Allow reality to reveal itself; don’t enforce anything upon it. All other religions have been enforcing something or other, hence they go on missing. Their work becomes metaphysical; in fact, their work becomes a kind of autohypnosis. Buddhism dehypnotizes, dehypnotizes man. Buddha’s work is dehypnosis: how to drop all kinds of hypnosis, all kinds of suggestions given by society, by the people. And when you are utterly silent, with no conditioning, truth becomes known. That truth liberates.
Now the sutras:
If it rain, let it rain;
If it rain not, let it not rain;
But even should it not rain,
You must travel
With wet sleeves.
One very precious word in Buddha’s approach toward life is samata. Samata means equanimity, equilibrium, balance, choicelessness. Don’t move to the extremes, avoid extremes. Pain and pleasure are two extremes – don’t choose. Don’t avoid either and don’t cling to either; just remain in the middle, watching, looking at it, unattached.
Pain comes, let it come – just be a watchful consciousness; just be awareness. There is a headache, just watch it. Don’t say no to it, don’t start fighting with it; don’t deny it, don’t avoid it. Don’t try to engage yourself somewhere else so you are distracted from it. Let it be there: simply watch. And in watching it, a great revolution happens.
If you can watch it without like and dislike, suddenly it is there but you are out of it, you are no longer in it; you are standing there unbridged to it. Choicelessness unbridges you from all kinds of moods, from all kinds of minds. That is samata.
Pleasure comes, let it come. Don’t cling to it. Don’t say, “I would like to have you for ever and ever.” If you cling to pleasure, then you will avoid pain. And don’t go to the other extreme: don’t start denying pleasure, don’t start escaping from pleasure, because that is the same. If you start escaping from pleasure, you will start clinging to pain. That’s what ascetics do.
The indulgent person clings to pleasure, avoids pain. And the ascetic person avoids pleasure and clings to pain. Both approaches are wrong; in both you lose balance. Buddhism is neither indulgence nor asceticism. It does not teach anything, it simply says: Watch!
And that’s what Jesus repeats again and again: Watch! Be watchful. Keep alert, keep awake.

You try it! This is an experiment in psychology – nothing to do with God. You will be surprised and immensely benefited. The day you can see that you are neither pain nor pleasure is a great day, the greatest day, because from then onward things will be different.
If it rain, let it rain… If there is pain, let it be so. If it rain not, let it rain not… If there is no pain, let it be so. If there is pleasure, let it be so. But you don’t get identified with anything.
But even should it not rain, you must travel with wet sleeves. But remember one thing: even if your life has been of convenience, comfort, pleasure, and there have not been great pains, great miseries, then too you must travel with wet sleeves. Why? Because you will still become old, you will still have to die one day. One can live a very pleasant life, but old age is coming, and death is coming. Death cannot be avoided; there is no way to escape from it, it is inevitable. So whether you lived a painful life or you lived a pleasant life will not make much difference when death comes. And death is coming; death has come the day you were born. In the very idea of birth, death has entered in you.
I have heard a very beautiful anecdote about one of the most famous Zen masters, Bankei:

Bankei had a terrible fear of death from his earliest age. When he was a small child, his mother created the fear of death in him. He says that at the age of three, his mother, as a punishment, constantly frightened him with death. Not only that: sometimes if Bankei had done something which was not right, she would pretend that she had died. She would lie down with closed eyes and stop her breath, and, of course, the small child would cry and weep around her, and call, “Come back! I will never do such a thing again.” Only then would she start breathing.
So from the very childhood the fear of death had entered into him; he was constantly afraid. Perhaps that is why when he was young he became interested in Zen – Zen people say there is no death. He entered a monastery and way overdid the austerities. Whatsoever was said, he overdid it, out of the fear of death. He wanted to see that there is no death; he wanted to overcome death, he wanted to conquer it. He practiced zazen sitting for such long periods at a time that the places on his body where he sat became covered with sores and boils. He became so ill he nearly lost his life; he withdrew for a few months to recuperate.
It was during a feverish period of his convalescence that he had his first satori. This consisted of an instantaneous realization that he could not die for the simple reason that he had never been born. The crux of the matter was that he had never been born. Now, Bankei knew as well as you know and everybody knows that his body emerged from his mother’s womb, that his body had been born. Yet he realized that he had never been born.

With the idea of birth, the idea of death arises. They go together, aspects of the same coin. Unless you get rid of the idea of birth, you will not get rid of the idea of death. That’s why Zen people insist: Go deep into your being and see your face that you had before birth. If you can have one small glimpse of that original face which you had before birth, then death has disappeared. If you are attached to birth you are going to die, if you are not attached to birth you need not be afraid of death. Watch birth and you will be able to watch death too.
The greatest experience of life is to die watching death. But you have to prepare for it. If you cannot even watch a headache, if you cannot even watch a small pain in the stomach, if you cannot watch these small things, you will not be able to watch death.
Buddhism says “Watch! Let every moment of life become an experience in watchfulness – pain, pleasure, everything; love, hate, everything; good, bad, everything. Go on watching. Let one taste spread on your being – the taste of watchfulness – and samata arises out of it. One becomes utterly balanced in the middle of the polarities.
That balancing is just like a tightrope walker walking balanced on a tightrope. He remains in the middle, does not lean to the left or to the right; or whenever he finds himself leaning to one side, he immediately balances himself. Between pain and pleasure, day and night, birth and death, go on balancing, and that very balancing will give you an insight of the reality you are. That reality has never been born. This body has been born; this body is going to die.

Another Zen master, Bokuju, was asked by a man… Bokuju was ill, old, just on the verge of death, and this stranger came and asked, “Master, where will you be when you are dead?”
And Bokuju opened his eyes and said, “I will be in the grave, all my four limbs raised toward the sky.”

A strange answer. And you will miss the point if I don’t remind you. When Bokuju is saying, “I will be lying in my grave with all my four limbs raised to the sky,” what is he actually saying? He is saying, “The body will be in the grave and I will be watching it lying in the grave with four limbs raised to the sky. I will still be watching, I will still be a watcher. I have always been a watcher. The body was born and I was watching; the body became a youth and I was watching, the body became old and I was watching. And one day the body will die and I will be watching. I am my watchfulness.”
This Buddha calls sammasati – right awareness.
If it rain, let it rain; if it rain not, let it not rain; but even should it not rain, you must travel with wet sleeves. So don’t be deceived by your comfortable, convenient life – because death is coming to disrupt all, to destroy all. Prepare yourself!
And the only preparation is balance.
Look at the cherry blossoms!
Their color and scent fall with them,
Are gone for ever,
Yet mindless
The spring comes again.
Life repeats itself mindlessly; unless you become mindful, it will go on repeating like a wheel. That’s why Buddhists call it the wheel of life and death, the wheel of time. It moves like a wheel: birth is followed by death, death is followed by birth; love is followed by hate, hate is followed by love; success is followed by failure, failure is followed by success. Just see!
If you can watch, even for a few days, you will see a pattern emerging, a wheel pattern. One fine morning you are feeling so good and so happy, and another day you are so dull, so dead that you start thinking of committing suicide. And just the other day you were so full of life, so blissful that you were feeling thankful to existence that you were in a mood of deep gratefulness, and today there is great complaint and you don’t see the point of going on living. And tomorrow again that blissful moment will come; the cherry blossoms will come again, there will be fragrance and the singing of birds, and the sunlit days, and then again the cloudy days, and the dark nights of the soul. And it goes on and on, but you don’t see the pattern.
Once you see the pattern, you can get out of it – once you see that it goes on and on mindlessly, not needing you. People ordinarily think that when they are angry, somebody has caused the anger in them. That is utterly wrong. Even if you were alone, nobody was with you, you would have been angry in that moment. That has something to do with your inner wheel, with your inner periodicity, inner rhythm – it has nothing to do with somebody outside.
The outside is just an excuse, because it is so ugly to think, “I am creating my anger myself.” The excuse feels good, it relieves you of a burden. Then some day, meeting a friend, you feel so happy and you think, “The coming of the friend has made me so happy,” and that too is false. Even if you were sitting alone in that moment, you would have been happy.
That is one of the great realizations that comes to people who move into isolation for a few days. Moving into isolation, being alone for a few weeks, is a good meditation. You will be surprised to find that out of nowhere one day you are feeling good and there is nobody there, nobody has done anything to you, and one day you are feeling so bad. One day you are dancing, another day you are crying. And then you can see that you create your own states.
Once this is seen, you stop throwing responsibilities on others and life becomes a different life. Otherwise, we are all throwing our responsibilities on others. We are making others feel guilty: “It is because of you that I am angry or sad.” Naturally the others have to accept it because they are doing the same thing. And they have to accept it also because sometimes they are praised for making people happy.
Once you know that you can’t make anybody happy, you have never made anybody happy, and nobody can make you happy and nobody can make you unhappy, once this insight has become settled in your heart, you will never throw responsibility on anybody. All struggle, futile struggle, disappears. Then you know that you have an inner wheel that goes on moving. Sometimes one spoke is on top, sometimes another spoke comes on top.
And remember, it moves mindlessly; the only way to get out of it is mindfulness. It is a robot; it is a mechanical thing; it is an automaton. All meditations are nothing but de-automatization. All the processes that have become automatic in you have to be de-automatized; anything that de-automatizes helps immensely.
For example, you walk at a certain pace. Buddha told his disciples: Walk slowly; change the pace, just walk very slowly. And you will be surprised: if you walk slowly, you suddenly become aware of your walking. In fact, you can walk slowly only if you remain aware. The moment you lose awareness, you will gather speed; then you will become again an automaton.
Buddha’s meditations are to make you aware about life’s activities. Eating, eat with full awareness; chew with awareness of what you are doing. When walking, take each single step with full awareness of what is happening, what you are doing. Not verbally, but with a consciousness behind: “I am raising my left foot.” Not that you have to repeat, “I am raising my left foot”; that is stupid, there is no need to repeat it. But you can watch it: “I am chewing. I am standing under the shower. The water is cool. It is too hot and the body is perspiring.” Not that you have to repeat these words: you have just to be watchful. Then slowly, slowly a new integration happens in you, a mindfulness arises. That mindfulness can take you out of the wheel: nothing else can.
Look at the cherry blossoms! Their color and scent fall with them, are gone for ever, yet mindless the spring comes again. How many times has it happened to you? You had fallen in love with a woman or a man, and then came great frustration and great misery, and you suffered and there was anguish, and you decided you were finished forever. Never again! And after just a few days, the spring came again, and again you felt love blossoming in you, again you fell into the same rut, the same routine. Again you were saying the same stupid things to another woman; again you were whispering those sweet nothings, and hearing those sweet nothings. You were back in a dream world, and you had completely forgotten the old experience.
This will happen again and again; the spring goes on coming. Don’t think you are very different from a cherry tree! You are angry – and this is so about all your moods – you are angry and you feel the fire of it and the poison of it and the destructiveness of it, and you suffer. And you decide, “No more. It is ugly and it is foolish and it is a sheer wastage of energy. So why should I be in anger again?” And you decide, and you decide very strongly, “This is the last time. Now I am going to avoid it.” Then one day, mindlessly, it comes again. Just a small thing triggers it, and you are again on fire, again red, doing destructive things. Later on you will remember, you will become mindful, but always later on. Then it is of no sense, no meaning, it is impotent.
Mindfulness means in the moment. Everybody is wise when the moment has passed, remember this. The really wise are those who are wise in the moment. When something is happening – you are sad – this is the moment to become so watchful that you are unbridged from sadness, that you are disconnected from sadness; that sadness is there, you are here, and there is no connection. You are no longer identified; you are simply seeing it. You are not sad, you are the seer. Then you are wise.
When sadness has gone, then you think, “It was not good to become sad. It was so trivial, so foolish; there was no meaning in it. Next time I am not going to become so sad. There is no point.” But you will become sad again because awareness can be practiced only in the moment. This repentance is not on the right track.
Everybody repents, and things go on happening the same way they have always been happening. There is such a vicious circle that sometimes you think you are doing the opposite and you are not really doing the opposite but the same thing.
An angry person can decide, “I will never be angry,” and can go on repressing anger. Then by repressing anger, one day he has so much anger that it is uncontrollable, it explodes. If he had not repressed, he may not have been so angry. Now he is angrier because he tried not to be angry.
And man moves in such a mindless way that you cannot imagine. Just the other day I was reading a story by Raymond M. Smullyan:

Once upon a time there was a hippie. His philosophy of life was that one should not amount to something. More specifically, he believed that the three greatest evils which can befall a man are acquisition of fame, acquisition of wealth, and acquisition of prestige.
His parents always insisted that he should amount to something. For years and years they pleaded, cajoled, threatened, argued, and did everything in their power to rid him of this “childish” notion that one should not amount to something. But the hippie was as adamant and stubborn as his parents – he simply refused to amount to something.
He was not content that just he should not amount to something – others also needed salvation. And because he knew the secret of salvation he became a great missionary. His mission was to save the whole world from amounting to something. He became a passionate preacher of his gospel, and soon he was considered to be a great prophet by other hippies. He traveled much and delivered speeches on why people should not amount to something, and his speeches were utter masterpieces of eloquence. His ideas spread farther and farther from home, and finally a great book publisher knocked on his door and he said, “Your ideas are so unique, why don’t you write a book?” The idea appealed to him and then he wrote a book: Why You Should Not Amount to Something.
The book spread like wildfire throughout the entire world. Not only were copies bought by all the world’s hippies, but also by all parents who were afraid their children might become hippies. After all, the arguments in the book were so ingeniously clever and persuasive that the parents had to master them thoroughly so they could provide counter-arguments for their children.
At any rate, in a matter of weeks the boy became a multi-multi-millionaire. Then one day the entire horror of the situation stabbed him like a knife. He exclaimed, “My God! My God! What has happened? Of all people, I, I have suddenly amounted to something? More specifically, I have acquired enormous fame, enormous wealth, enormous prestige. I have betrayed my entire life! Oh, dear God, what can I do? What can I do?”

This happens. You can go on thinking that you are doing something else, something contrary. But if you are mindless, something else is going to happen. Your life is not lived by you – it is lived by a very mindless process. You are not really living it: you are being lived by a mindless existence. You are born, you are young, you become old; you have emotions, ideas – and they all are happening in you just like the cherry blossoms. You go on repeating the same thing, year in, year out; you go on moving in a wheel. To see it, to see it totally, to see it as it is, is Buddha’s way of becoming aware.
The vicious circle of birth and death has to be broken, but it can be broken only if you start looking into things which happen to you in a detached way, in a non-passionate way. What scientists call “a detached observation” is really a Buddhist discovery. Scientists have been trying this for only three hundred years. In their labs they simply watch, without any prejudice, neither for nor against. They simply note down the facticity of it. But this is an ancient Buddhist meditation: the same way one has to watch one’s own mind, one’s own mind’s functionings, structures, and slowly, slowly you start becoming aware of a wheel that goes on moving inside you. And you are not moving the wheel; it moves on its own. The spell can be broken only if in this mechanical process of life something of awareness penetrates.
De-automatize yourself.
Buddhism
Is the shaved part of the saucepan,
The whiskers of the pebble,
The sound that accompanies
The bamboos in the picture.
Still Buddhism is not an “ism,” it is not a philosophy. It does not give you any idea of what reality is – because once the idea is given to you of what reality is like, you immediately jump upon it, you start clinging to it. You will make reality like your idea, you will create it.
Buddhism simply takes all ideas away from you, it is negative. It does not give you any positive notion. It does not say what truth is: it only says what truth is not. It eliminates, it goes on eliminating. It is very severe; It does not allow you any nook and corner to cling to. It takes all, everything that you possess away from you. Only one thing is left, which cannot be taken away and that is your awareness. Then uncontaminated awareness is left; you become a mirror. In that mirror the reality is reflected. So Ikkyu says: Buddhism is the shaved part of the saucepan, the whiskers of the pebble, the sound that accompanies the bamboos in the picture.
So Buddhism as an “ism” is as false as …the sound that accompanies the bamboos in the picture, or as false as …the whiskers of the pebble. As an “ism” Buddhism is false. Then what is it? If it is not a philosophy, then what is it?
It is just an approach toward reality, an opening. It is not a belief system. It is utterly devoid of beliefs; it negates beliefs. It is not a positive philosophy. And that is the beauty of it – because all positive philosophies are nothing but creations of the mind.
People are very much interested in positive philosophies. They appeal to people because they enhance the mind, they nourish the mind. They give you great ideas on how to live your life, how to achieve more, how to become more, how to be enlightened, and all that.
Buddhism simply says: Just drop your ideas and you are enlightened. Just drop your mind and you are divine.
But Buddha was very, very careful even about saying that, because people are hankering so much to cling to something. He was very careful about making even a single statement positively. If you ask him, “What will happen when all has disappeared and one has become a mirror?” he says, “There will be no pain”; but he never says, “There will be bliss.” Never for a single moment, for a single time, does he become positive.
People used to insist to him, because they had heard it down the ages that when the ultimate happens you will be blissful. And Buddha would say, “You will not be miserable” – that’s all. People would ask him, “Why don’t you say that we will be happy and blissful?” And he would say, “If I say that you will be happy, then it is never going to happen – then you will search for happiness. You will fall into new dreams and new imaginations, heaven and paradise and so on and so forth; you will create your own ideas of what happiness is. And all that you know is misery. So I only say there will be no misery – and let me keep absolutely quiet about what there will be. You just drop misery and see what is.”
It didn’t appeal to ordinary, mediocre minds. The mediocre mind wants something to possess; he wants some keys which can open new doors to new treasures. Buddha simply takes all the keys out of your hands. He leaves you utterly alone, but in that utter aloneness, something immense happens, something infinite happens, something unimaginable happens, something inexpressible happens. And the first condition for it to happen is that you should not think about it, that no idea should be given to you about it – otherwise it will never happen because the idea will prevent it.
Buddhism is the shaved part of the saucepan, the whiskers of the pebble, the sound that accompanies the bamboos in the picture. Then what is Buddhism? It is just a gesture, just a painted picture. There is no sound in it, no wind is blowing. There is just India ink, and nothing else – no sound, no wind. You just imagine sound and wind, you imagine movement. Nothing is moving. So people have created Buddhism out of their own imagination.
The religion that exists in the name of Buddhism is just a painted religion. Buddha never delivered this thing to the world. It is a creation of the people; because people cannot live with nothingness, they created something.
What I say to you, you may not hear, it may be too much for you. You may hear something which I have not said at all, because you can manage that. You may hear a few fragments. You may delete something, you may add something; you may create something out of what I am saying; you may create something out of it which is absolutely yours.
That’s how Buddhism has happened, that’s how Christianity has happened, that’s how all the religions have happened. The original expression has been lost in interpretations. What exists in the name of Buddhism is not what Buddha has said. What Buddha has said can only be experienced if you become a buddha – there is no other way.
What I am saying to you can be experienced only in the same state of mind, in the same state of awareness. It is impossible to convey it. Once it leaves one state of consciousness and enters into another kind of state, it is transformed, it is translated, it becomes polluted, it is never the same again. If you can also become silent, quiet, unprejudiced, with no opinion in your mind, then things can happen. But people carry opinions in their minds – such opinions, amazing opinions!
Just the other day I was reading an article by Ashoka. Now he feels doubtful about my enlightenment because sometimes I look at the clock. “How can an enlightened person look at a clock? Can’t he know what time it is? And if he can’t even know what time it is, what can he know?” And this type of thing continues. It is not only in Ashoka’s mind, it is also in many people’s minds, because minds are minds.
But you have not looked at it without prejudice. You have some idea of how an enlightened person should be. You have some idea that he should know without looking at the clock what time it is. The reality is just the contrary.
You may be able to know what time it is without looking at the clock, but an enlightened person cannot – because for him time has disappeared. For him there is no more time; for him there is only the eternal now, nothing moves, all has stopped. His clock has stopped! Now no calendar exists in him. He has to look to know what time it is. You can feel the time because your clock, your clock inside, is working; you can have a certain inference about what time it must be. And within minutes you will be right; at the most, within ten minutes you will be right. Your mind can calculate. You know what time is; you know how much it feels when one hour passes by.
But to the enlightened consciousness, nothing passes. All simply is, and always is. There is no way to infer what time it is; hence, I have to look at the clock again and again. Sometimes Vivek becomes very puzzled, because just five minutes before I had looked at the clock and I look again. And she says, “You just looked five minutes ago, and you are looking again.” And I can understand her puzzlement: anybody can infer, any child can infer that only five minutes have passed. But nothing is passing for me; I even have to inquire what day today is, what date today is.
But you have your mind, your idea, and naturally you can look only from your mind and from your idea. You will go on missing that way. You have to drop your prejudices; you have to drop all ideas. Why bother how an enlightened person should be when an enlightened person is with you? Why not look directly? Rather than having an idea, why not look directly?
You have a certain idea how a rose should be. Maybe you have never seen a black rose, and you think that a rose has to be only red. And there is a black rose, and you will say, “This is not a rose because a rose has to be red, has to be rosy. This is not a rose! It is not rosy, it is black, how can it be a rose?”
Drop the idea. Come close, smell the flower, sit silently with the flower. Let its fragrance give you the message, let it have a communion with you, and you will know. That will be far better, far truer. Otherwise, this goes on happening.
Buddha was there, and people were not listening to what he was saying. They were listening to something else; they were translating. Please, don’t translate me; otherwise, sooner or later I will be just …the whiskers of the pebble, the shaved part of the saucepan, the sound that accompanies the bamboos in the picture.
Don’t create a picture. While the reality is here, why can’t you have a contact with the reality? Why can’t you bridge yourself? What is preventing you? – a priori prejudices, opinions that you have gathered.
A Christian comes, and he looks at me and he wants to find Christ in me. And if he can’t find Christ he says, “This man can’t be enlightened!” A Buddhist comes, he looks for Buddha in me; a Jaina comes, he looks for Mahavira in me. And when they do not find… They cannot find, because I am myself.
This roseflower is black, that roseflower is yellow, another roseflower is red. There are thousands of roseflowers. Don’t be too concerned with the color, with the shape, with the form. But the rose-ness is the same, the flowering is the same.
There were people in Buddha’s time who followed Jaina philosophy. They would look at him, and because he was not naked they would think he was not yet enlightened, because Jainas have the idea that when a person becomes enlightened he drops all his clothes. It is a beautiful idea, but clothes don’t mean clothes literally. He drops all his clothes, he becomes nude, utterly nude, but not literally. But who is going to prevent people from being literal? And Buddha was not nude, so he was not an enlightened person.
Buddha was one kind of roseflower. Jesus was another kind. Bodhidharma, Buddha’s disciple, was a third kind. Buddha was silent and Bodhidharma was laughing, but I say to you: the taste of Bodhidharma’s laughter was the same as Buddha’s silence.
But if you have seen Buddha sitting silently under his bodhi tree, you will not believe in Bodhidharma because he will be rolling on the floor. Such mad laughter! And you will say, “What is happening? This man must be mad, how can he be enlightened? An enlightened person always sits under a bodhi tree and never looks at a clock!”
Your ideas continuously interfere. You can miss this opportunity, It all depends on you. You can use this opportunity. You can be transformed by this opportunity.
The puppet-player hangs them
Round his neck, not his heart;
He can take out a devil,
He can take out a buddha.
Buddha has said that mind is a magician; all that it creates is magic work. You must have seen our sannyasin magician, Avinash. He can produce things out of empty boxes! Mind is a conjurer: once you have a certain idea in the mind, it becomes a seed and the seed starts growing, and soon it will become a reality for you.
Just the other night, Nirgrantha had a heart attack. Now, he says that for six months he was feeling that this heart attack was coming. The situation is just vice versa: it has come because for six months he was thinking that it was coming. Not that he had some knowing it was going to come; it was not an insight into the future. He has created the future. Six months continuously thinking that it is coming, it has to come. Mind is a conjurer. It creates, it can create anything!
Now much research is going into this phenomenon. A new kind of therapy is arising called placebo therapy. A placebo is a false, pseudo medicine, with no medicinal qualities in it, but it is given in such a way that the patient believes it is medicine. And not only the patient believes it is medicine, the doctor also believes it, otherwise his gestures may show, may reveal the truth. The doctor is kept in ignorance; he is given just water to inject, or given just sugar pills with all the marks and names and labels of the true medicine. He knows that this is medicine; the patient knows this is medicine. And the miracle is that it works – and there is no medicine in it. The patient is healed because the very belief of the doctor that it is medicine, and the paraphernalia of the hospital create an atmosphere, a psychology, a hypnosis. And the patient wants to get rid of his illness. When a famous doctor gives the medicine it is bound to help; whether it is medicine or not doesn’t matter very much.
It has been found that medicine or no medicine functions almost in the same proportion. If seventy percent of patients are cured by medicine, real medicine, then seventy percent of patients are cured by unreal medicine, placebo medicine. It is creating a great stir in the medical world. What is happening?
What is really happening is that in the first place the illness has been created, it is a mind phenomenon. And in the second place, if the mind is convinced that it is going to be cured, then it is going to be cured. That’s why if the doctor’s fee is not really big, medicine is not going to affect you much. The bigger the fee, the better the medicine! If the therapist has a big fee and you are paying fortunes, then it is going to affect you more, because then you want to be affected. When it is free, who bothers whether it works or not? “If it works, good; if it doesn’t work, okay, because we have not paid for it.” When you pay for it and you are intent that it should work, then it works.
Buddha says mind is a conjurer; it creates illnesses, it can create cures. Mind creates all kinds of illusions – beauty and ugliness, success and failure, richness and poverty. Mind goes on creating, and once an idea settles in you, your whole life energy functions to create it, to make it a reality. Every thought becomes a thing, and every thing in the beginning was only a thought and nothing else. You live in a kind of hypnosis.
Buddha says this hypnosis has to be broken, and no other religion has tried so hard to break this hypnosis. Man has to be dehypnotized. Man has to be made aware that all is mind: pain and pleasure both, birth and death both. All is mind.
And once this has been seen absolutely, the conjurer disappears, and then what is left is truth. And that truth liberates.
The puppet-player hangs them round his neck, not his heart; he can take out a devil, he can take out a buddha. This is a tremendously important statement. You can become a devil, you can become a buddha – it is all mind game. You can become a sinner, you can become a saint; you can become a criminal, an Adolf Hitler, or you can become a great mahatma – and it is all mind game. In both ways it is mind playing.
Then who is a real buddha? If the devil is a mind thing and a buddha is a mind thing, then who is a real buddha? The real buddha is one who is no more the mind, who has come to see all the games of the mind and has retired from all the games of the mind. That is renunciation; that is sannyas: retiring from all games of the mind, playing no more new games.
Zen people say Buddha was never born, never lived, never uttered a word, never died, never attained enlightenment – and they are right. And obviously wrong too, because Buddha was born, he lived for eighty-two years, he is a historical person, he is not only a myth. He has left immense marks on the sense of time. He was born, he became enlightened, and he uttered millions of words; for forty-two years continuously he was teaching. These are obvious facts.
When Zen people say Buddha was never born, never lived, never uttered a word, never died, never attained enlightenment, they are not denying these historical facts. Remember it. They are uttering something of more value. They are saying: Yes, he said many things but he never uttered a word – his real reality remained silent. Yes, he was born to a certain mother, to a certain father, in a certain place, but that birth was only a mind phenomenon, a dream that he lived through. In his reality he was never born.
In reality, you are not born either. And in reality Buddha never died, because how can you die if you are not born? Who can die? Who is there to die? And, of course, when you are not born and you cannot die, how can you become enlightened? Who is there to become enlightened? There is no one; there is nobody to become a buddha.
This is buddhahood, this is enlightenment: seeing the fact that there is nobody, that the house is utterly empty, that nobody has ever lived, that we were only playing games of the mind, that we were creating shadows, that we were fast asleep and dreaming things, then all disappears.
When in the morning you wake up, it is not only that the bad dreams were wrong or false, the good dreams were also false. Whether you dream in the night that you were a thief, or you dreamed that you were a yogi doesn’t matter in the morning because both are false. Whether you dreamed that you were Adolf Hitler or you dreamed that you were a Gautam Buddha doesn’t matter in the morning. When you are awake, all is finished. Adolf Hitler is gone, Gautam Buddha is gone, all is gone. And what is left has always been there as the substratum. That eternal, that formless, that attributeless, that nirgun, that conditionless, is your reality. On that conditionless all kinds of conditions have been imposed; on that unconditional a thousand and one conditions have been put together. Those conditionings together are called the mind. And the only way to get out of the mind is to see the mind, to be aware of it.
Slowly, slowly, the more you become aware of the dream, the dream starts dissipating, the dream starts receding. When awareness is perfect, the dream has disappeared. Then you are neither a buddha nor a man nor a woman, neither this nor that. Who are you then? – nothing can be said about it. Only one thing can be said about it: A glimpse of the real man, and you are in love, and you are love.
If he says,
“There is nothing special about it,”
Already he has transgressed,
And can say nothing else,
This Daruma Ikkyu.
And Ikkyu says: I have said that Buddhism is nothing but the sound that accompanies the bamboos in the picture. I have said that Buddhism is nothing but a dream. I have said that there is nothing special about it, that it is utter ordinariness, that it is nature. But he feels, “Even to say that, I have transgressed – because even that must not be said.”
Nothing can be said about it. Say it, and you have done something wrong. Say it, and you have betrayed.
If he says, “There is nothing special about it,” already he has transgressed… It cannot be said that Buddhism is a special religion, a great religion. It can’t be said that there is nothing special in it. There are two schools of Buddhists. One school says that Buddhism is the greatest religion, the most profound, the highest that has ever happened. Just as Christians say, and Hindus say, and Jainas say – everybody claims his religion, really claims his ego through the religion. So there is the greater mass of Buddhists who say Buddhism is the greatest religion, and Buddha is the greatest man.
Then there are Zen people who say there is nothing special about it, it is very ordinary; nothing to brag about, nothing to claim. But Ikkyu says: Even to say there is nothing special about it, you have said something special about it. This is making it special.
Christians say Christianity is special, Hindus say Hinduism is special, Mohammedans say Mohammedanism is special. And Zen people say: “There is nothing special about it, you are making it too special.” When all others claim that they are special and you say, ‘We are not special,” you become special. That is a way of claiming specialness. When everybody is claiming “I am extraordinary,” the man who says “I am ordinary” is really claiming extraordinariness.
Just think: ten thousand people claiming, everybody claiming, “I am extraordinary,” and then you are standing there, a humble person, and you say, “Sir, I am very ordinary.” What are you doing? – you have claimed real extraordinariness. You are saying, “You fools, ten thousand fools! You are all claiming you are extraordinary, this is all ego. Look at me, this humble person, this nobody – only I can say that I am just ordinary.” But only this man is extraordinary. All the others are ordinary because they are claiming the same thing. Everybody is claiming it.
Ikkyu is right: If he says, “There is nothing special about it,” already he has transgressed, and can say nothing else, this Daruma Ikkyu. Daruma is the first founder of Zen Buddhism in China from India, the first who traveled from India to China to deliver this message beyond words, this religion which is religionless. So all the Zen masters feel greatly indebted to Daruma – Bodhidharma’s Japanese name is Daruma.
Ikkyu says, “This Daruma Ikkyu – this follower of Daruma, this disciple of Daruma – can’t say a thing. I can’t say Buddhism is special; I can’t say there is nothing special about it. I simply can’t say anything.”
In that silence he is saying something immensely beautiful. When you cannot say anything, it means something of such enormous gravity is there that no word can be adequate to express it. And Buddha has a vastness that cannot be contained in any word.
No disciple can ever say anything about his master. If he can say something about his master, and feels that he is able to say it correctly, and feels that he has expressed it adequately, then he is not a disciple and he has not understood the master at all. To understand the master is to lose all language and all capacity of expression; you face such a huge reality you simply become dumb.
The disciple is always dumb before the master, and only he knows who is dumb. One who can say, has not known, and one who cannot say, knows.
Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
When I was younger I used to feel a certain pull near open windows, high up in buildings. Many of the people with whom I work now also do. The feeling is if I go any closer, I may have to jump.
My experience is that it is not suicidal. What is it? Can you say more about it?
Yes, I can say more about it because I have felt that same fear in you when you come close to me. You keep a certain distance; you are afraid. The fear is not suicidal, or is suicidal in a very different sense, in a spiritual sense.
You are not afraid of the ordinary death; you are afraid of what Zen people call “the great death.” You are afraid of disappearing; you are afraid of melting. You are afraid of losing your hold upon yourself, and everybody is afraid of that in one way or other.
That’s why we live always in control. Control is not only imposed by the society; even if the society removes all control, people will continue to live in control. They will create their own control, their own discipline. Even if society decides to make everybody absolutely free, people will not be free, people will not accept freedom. They will create their own bondage, they will create their own imprisonments, they will create their own chains; they will become their own jailers.
Freedom is frightening, because freedom simply means you will not be there. It is not that you are going to be free: you are going to be free from yourself. You are the bondage – when the bondage disappears, you disappear.
Sometimes that fear can come to you when you are close to a window on a high building, or close to an abyss in the mountains. That feeling can take possession of you, that physical situation can become a triggering inside your psyche. It can give you the idea that it is possible to disappear.
And remember, there is always both fear and attraction: whenever you are attracted by something, you are also afraid of it. That’s why man is attracted toward women and is at the same time afraid of them.
That’s why I say your so-called saints who are still afraid of women, are still in love with women. Certainly they are – they are obsessed, because fear and love go together. They may have moved to the Himalayan caves; sitting in their caves they may not be thinking at all that they are in any way interested in women, but they are frightened. If the rumor comes that a beautiful woman is coming to the mountains to visit, something will stir inside them. It will be fear, but fear shows attraction; fear shows that you are still involved.
Scriptures that say anything against women are scriptures written by people who were obsessed with women. They may have renounced but they have not changed; they are the same people. One day they were rushing toward women, another day they start rushing away from women, but it is the same game played in a different way. The woman remains their attraction, and remains their fear.
This is also the case when you are attracted to a man. When a woman is attracted toward a man, there is fear. All love creates fear, immediately brings fear. So these two things go together. You are attracted to the open windows, because there is great attraction in being free from this cage that has become your life. But this is the only life you know; fear comes because who knows if there another life or not. You may simply disappear as you are and you may not appear on another plane, in another existence – and then what?
Making love to a woman or man, the same fear grips you. That’s why orgasm is so impossible, so difficult. And don’t think that only women find it difficult to have orgasm; it is just as difficult for men as it is for women. With man one simple thing helps him to pretend: his ejaculation helps him to think he has attained orgasm because he can see something visible happening. The woman has no visible ejaculation, so she is puzzled, worried whether she had an orgasm or not. Ejaculation is not orgasm.
Orgasm means you use the other’s being as a window and you leap into the unknown; the other uses your window and leaps into the unknown. When you disappear, orgasm happens. Orgasm is a state of immense expansion of consciousness; it is a state of unboundedness. You become one with the sky; you are no longer tiny, you are no longer in limitations.
You are no more. As long as you are, there are limitations, boundaries, definitions. When all definitions have been broken and you are simply there, indefinable, inexpressible, something of the grandeur of godliness has happened to you; for a moment you have melted and you have known, you have tasted.
The same fear happens to a disciple coming to a master; hence, down the ages, so much has been talked about trust. What is trust? Trust simply means the courage to take the jump. It is risky, it is a gamble, because there can be no security. What security is there to be with me? What security is there to surrender to me? I don’t guarantee you anything. I can’t say what is going to happen because it can’t be said. You have to move in darkness, you have to move in great trust and only then can you move.
You would like some objective proof of God. That’s why people ask about proofs of God. You would like some objective proof of samadhi, of buddhahood. You would like something tangible that you can touch and see and hold in your hands, that you can feel and you can judge. Then trust would be easy, but then trust would not be needed.
You don’t trust in the sun, you don’t trust in the moon, they are simply there. Nobody asks any proof for the sun or for the moon; they are simply there, they are facts, no trust is needed. That is why in science trust is not needed, because science searches for the facts.
In religion trust is needed because trust makes you available toward the ultimate and makes truth available to you. Trust is the door, a window to truth, but courage will be needed.
That fear, that attraction to the windows that pulled you, was showing one thing: that from your very childhood you have been in a search. Maybe the search has been carried down the ages through other lives. This is my feeling about you: you have been groping and searching. You have been continuously searching; hence the fear and the attraction. Attraction because the search is there, and fear because who knows? – if you go too close to the window, in a sudden mad moment you may be so thrilled, you may be so possessed by the idea, you may take the jump. Then what? So it is better not to go very close.
I have been watching that in you since you have come to me. Even in Germany you were not wearing orange and the mala, which is part of that fear. You don’t want to get too involved with me; you want to keep a safe distance. When you come here you allow a little bit of closeness, but when you go away you start avoiding me. I have been trying to contact you, but you were not available. I can contact you only if you remain involved with me; I wanted to help you, but you were disconnected.
If somebody is trying to cheat me, he is really cheating himself. I go on trying to contact my people, and I can contact only those who are really with me, through thick and thin, in joy and in misery, in ecstasy and agony, in life and death. I can contact only those people.
Now become a little more alert. Much is possible. I am also a window. There is no need to be afraid – fear is natural, still there is no need to be afraid. In spite of the fear, come close to me. One kind of suicide will happen: the ego will commit suicide. That’s what sannyas is all about.
Attraction is there, so you have become a sannyasin; and fear is there, so you are still trying to avoid. Hesitantly, you take one step toward me and one step away from me. This hesitation can destroy this opportunity. Jumping from the window of a high building is not going to help. But now the window is available for which you have been hankering, and you can jump, and you can die and be reborn.

The second question:
Osho,
I don't understand what you say, but while sitting alone or in discourse something happens to me and tears start coming out of my eyes. What is this all, Oh my master?
So you have started listening to me. That is the way to listen to me: through tears. That is the way to listen to me: through love, through the heart. Pulsate with me, let my words be drowned in your tears. You will not be at a loss, because what I am saying is not important. Far more important is some other energy surrounding those words that reach you.
Don’t pay too much attention to the words. If your heart is open, the energy will be released into the heart. My words are just carriers, they are containers. The content is utterly different; the content is diametrically opposite. The container is the word, but the content is a wordless silence. It is my love. The word is just a capsule. The capsule is not the medicine; the medicine is inside it. Forget about the capsule, drink me. And the best way to drink is to be with tears, because then you participate, then you come very, very close.
Those tears are indicative that your heart starts pulsating with me, that there are moments when you start breathing just in tune with me – then suddenly those tears will arise. Those tears are symbolic; they are like flowers. Rejoice!

The third question:
Osho,
Why are your teachings not accepted as religion or religious by the society?
They are not religious or religion in the ordinary sense of the term. They are far more: they are far deeper and higher. The so-called society has no vision; it consists of blind people. It has been happening, always.
When Buddha appeared, they didn’t believe that his teachings were religious. When Jesus appeared, they crucified him. When Mansoor declared, “I am God,” they killed him. Mohammedans thought Mansoor was one of the most irreligious persons who has ever been on the earth. To declare oneself God? This is kufr; this is irreligion, this is anti-religion.
Whenever it happens that something of the pure truth is expressed, is sung, society starts becoming uneasy about it. It is natural, because society has a very pseudo kind of religion: comfortable, convenient, consolatory. It has false temples to worship in, false gods to worship, false priests to follow. And it is very convenient because it doesn’t disturb your life; you can remain a Christian. In fact, it never disturbs your life – on the contrary, it helps your life. You fit better into the so-called society, the so-called society’s rules, moralities if you are a Christian. But to follow Christ is dangerous.
No Christian ever follows Christ, cannot follow him. In fact, being a Christian is a way of avoiding Christ. To be a Buddhist is a way of avoiding Buddha. If you really love Buddha, then you would like to become a buddha, you would not like to become a Buddhist. Why should one want to become a Christian? Either be a christ or forget all about it. But Christ is dangerous. He was not killed by immoral people, bad people; he was killed by good people, respectable people. Remember it always.
Buddha was not attacked by the criminals; he was attacked by those whom you can never consider criminals, good people, moral people, puritans. Why does it happen? Jesus is killed by rabbis, religious people, scholars, priests, good in every way. Their lives are completely clean, people who have character. And he was loved by people who have no character, a Magdalene.
Just a few days ago, a young woman came from Switzerland whose name is Magdalena. I didn’t change her name when she took sannyas. I love that name, Magdalena. A prostitute followed Jesus, and rabbis killed him. Thieves and drunkards and gamblers followed Jesus, and rabbis killed him. All the so-called saints were against him and the so-called sinners were for him – what kind of world is this? What paradox? Why has this always been happening? There is a certain reason in it.
Whenever a new religion, a new dispensation arrives on the earth, whenever a new glimpse of godliness arrives on the earth, whenever a new window or door opens to godliness, it is first accepted by those who are not very respectable. Why? Because they have nothing to lose; they can accept it. They can even accept truth, they have nothing to lose. What did Magdalene have to lose?
But the chief rabbi had much to lose; he had an investment in the old, rotten religion, which was dead and had been dead for a long time. It was stinking, it was just a corpse, but he had an investment in it: he was the chief priest of it. If he follows Jesus, he will no longer be the chief priest, and all the prerogatives that he has by being the chief priest will be lost. He has the most beautiful house, the best salary, is the most respected person. Why should he follow this vagabond, Jesus? It would have been just a loss for him.
Magdalene could follow Jesus. She had nothing to lose, and much to gain. A gambler or a drunkard, has nothing to lose but something to gain. All great religions start with rebellious people; all great religions start with young people because old people have investments. They have been praying, worshipping, their whole lives, now they can’t just suddenly stop; stopping would mean their whole lives had been wrong. To accept that goes against the grain, against the ego. Only a few rarely courageous old people can follow a Jesus, a Buddha, only those who are so courageous that they can see the point and they can say, “Okay, so it was wrong and I will drop it. My whole life was wrong and I will start anew.” To start anew in old age is very, very difficult, because ahead there is only death, no time is left, and you are starting something new? Great trust is needed: great trust in life, great trust in existence, and adventurousness.
All great religions start with adventurous people, young people, the downtrodden, oppressed, criminals, sinners; all religions die when they become respectable and saints arrive and churches evolve.
A new flower is opening up here. All the so-called religious people will be against it, they are against it. They have to be against it. How can they risk all their investments, all their privileges, all their consolations? They will cling, they will fight with me. They are fighting with me, they are creating all kinds of trouble for me. You may not be aware of it, because I never talk about it, what is the point? I never say anything about it and you may not be at all aware of what trouble is continuously being created.
For one year, I have continually been trying to find a place to move to, but they go on creating trouble: legal trouble, other trouble. And the politicians are with them, and the priests, and all the respectable people are with them. They have power; they can create a thousand and one troubles. They don’t want the commune to be established because they are very much afraid: once there is a commune and the work really starts – this is just an introduction – when the real work starts, then all those who are courageous anywhere in the world are going to come. Thousands and thousands of people are going to come and be transformed. I just need a right situation, a buddhafield. So they are creating every kind of trouble in every way,. And the more my work spreads, the more trouble will be coming, because they will become more apprehensive, more afraid.
You ask me: “Why are your teachings not accepted as religion or religious?” How can they be accepted as religion and religious? It is pure religion, that’s why it cannot be accepted as religious. I am not Hindu, otherwise they would have been very happy. They would have loved you all if I had been Hindu. They would have said, “Look! Our religion is so great, so many people from all over the world, from all races, are being converted to Hinduism.” They would have worshipped you, they would have invited you to stay in their houses; they would have bragged about it in their papers, magazines, books, radio stations, TV. They would have bragged, “Look! See the beauty and the grandeur of Hinduism, so many people are being converted to Hinduism!” But I am not a Hindu.
They have to repress everything that is happening here so that it cannot reach people. They don’t want anybody to hear about what is happening here, or they want such wrong information to be given out that nobody becomes attracted here.
I am not a Mohammedan, I am not a Jaina, I am not a Christian, I am not a Buddhist, so naturally all those people are against me. They are all united in at least one thing: they are all against me. About that they have no differences. The Hindu and Mohammedan, the Christian and the Jaina, are all together about one thing, at least about one thing they agree, I have given them one thing to agree about: that this man is wrong.
What I am saying is rebellion. It is going to destroy their very foundation; hence, they cannot accept it as religion. They will deny, they will fight, they will try to crush this opening bud. They will be against you; you will have to face a thousand and one difficulties. That’s the risk you take by being with me, and that is the challenge too. And that challenge is going to become a blessing to you.
Those who will be able to accept the challenge and be with me, and those who will be so much in love with me that they can suffer for me, will grow. They will grow to infinite heights; they will know something which is not ordinarily known by human beings. It is not available in churches, it is not available in temples; it becomes available only when a master lives and when a disciple allows himself to be so open to the master that the master starts living in the disciple too. When this transfer of energy happens…
They think they know what religion is; they have certain definitions. I don’t fit in any of their definitions. Naturally, how can they call it religion? And just see, then it will be clear to you: Christianity cannot believe that Buddhism is a religion, because they have a definition and Buddhism does not fit in it. How can there be a religion without God? So Christians cannot call Buddhism a religion. At the most, they can accept it as a morality, but not as a religion. How can there be a religion without God?
Ask the Buddhists, “Is Christianity a religion?” and they say, “No, how can it be a religion when people are so stupid that they believe in God? They have not known anything. How can a religious person believe in God?” Buddhism has its definition: To believe in God means a deluded person, a person in hallucination, a person who is pathological, who needs psychiatric treatment.
Ask the Jainas and they will not agree that Christianity is a religion or Buddhism is a religion. And ask the Mohammedans… Nobody will agree that the other religion is a religion. What is the problem? – they have a certain definition, a fixed idea. If something fits with that idea, it is religion; if it doesn’t fit, it is not religion.
So whenever a new insight arises, and new insights continuously arise, then it cannot be called religion. And new insights have to arise because old insights slowly, slowly become so rusty, so dusty, become covered with so many interpretations, jargon, that they lose aliveness. New insights have to go on coming. When a new insight comes, it certainly will not fit with any definition available, it cannot be called religion.
Each new religion has to create itself and its definition. Remember it. When my orange people have spread all over the world, and we have millions of orange people, then it will be a religion because we will have created our definition of what religion is.
Definition comes later on. First the religion has to come; first the religion has to penetrate people’s hearts, then slowly, slowly definition arises. Definition is not there ready-made beforehand. Each buddha has to create his religion, the definition, the following, the field, and it always has to be started from ABC, from scratch. No old temple can be used for it, a new temple has to be raised. And not only that, but the old temple has to be erased, destroyed, because only when the old temple is no longer a temple in people’s eyes do they start searching again, do they start groping for the new.
It is very natural that my approach will not be thought of as religion, as religious. It depends on you: if you start living what I am saying, you will be creating the definition. It depends on you; it solely depends on you. If you become one with what I am saying and you start living it in its totality, sooner or later the definition will follow. But who cares about it? Live what I am saying. Don’t be worried about what people think.

The fourth question:
Osho,
Why do your statements seem to me to be arrogant?
It has always been so; it will always be so. When Jesus said, “I and my father are one,” do you think people thought he was a very humble man? When Jesus said, “I am the truth, the way, and the light,” do you think the rabbis came rushing and fell at his feet and said, “Such a humble man has never been seen before!” They said, “This man is arrogant. This man is egoistic.”
Logically, they look right, this does look like arrogance! When Krishna said to Arjuna, “Sarva dharma parityajya mamekam sharanam vraja – leave all the religions aside and come and fall unto my feet,” do you think people thought this was a humble statement? “Leave all religions aside and fall unto my feet!” This is pure arrogance.
You will be surprised to know that according to legend when Buddha was born he exclaimed, “Above the heavens and below the heavens, I alone am the honored one, I alone am the honored one.” When he was born, just a child, the first assertion, not that he became Buddha and then declared this. The legend is beautiful. The day-old child, the first moment’s assertion, expression: he declared to the world, “Above the heavens and below the heavens, I alone am the honored one.”
What do you think about it? That it is sheer arrogance? Truth is truth. It is neither arrogant nor humble; it has to be declared as it is. It can appear humble to you if you understand; it will appear arrogant to you if you don’t understand. And if you don’t understand, then there is no need to go to these statements which look apparently arrogant. People who don’t understand or don’t want to understand can find arrogance anywhere.
Once it happened…

I read these words of Lao Tzu to a professor: “When the superior man hears of the Tao, he practices it, when the ordinary man hears of the Tao, he ignores it, when the inferior man hears of the Tao, he laughs at it. If it were not laughed at it would not be the true Tao.”
And do you know what the professor said? He said, “How arrogant of Lao Tzu – who does he think he is to know? He thinks himself the superior man, the sage? That he knows? How arrogant of him to claim that he knows Tao.” He said, “So Lao Tzu thinks he is one of the superior ones who really understands the Tao, while lesser people ignore or laugh at it? How arrogant!”
Now it is not very apparent. You could not have thought this way, but it can be interpreted this way.
Just to see the resistance of the professor, I quoted Jesus to him. Jesus said: “Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do.”
And what did he say? He said, “These words are also arrogant. Who does this guy, Jesus, think he is, taking such a superior, condescending, arrogant, forgiving attitude?”

Now, it is not apparent, but it can be found. If you search, you can say this man is arrogant – who does he think he is? “Father, forgive them…” Who are you to forgive?
That’s exactly what Friedrich Nietzsche used to say against Jesus, “He was the most arrogant man. He is saying to God, ‘Forgive these foolish people because they know not what they do – they are all foolish, forgive them.’ He is insulting them. He does not even allow them the dignity of knowing what they are doing; he does not think of them as human beings. He is treating them as if they are worms – ‘Forgive them!’ This holier-than-thou attitude!”
Friedrich Nietzsche used to say that Jesus has said that when somebody hits you on one cheek, give him the other. And Nietzsche said this is very inhuman, because that makes you look very superior. From Nietzsche’s viewpoint, when somebody hits you in the face and you give him the other cheek, it is inhuman. The human way is hit him back! At least give him that much respect: “You are also a human being, as much as I am; we are equals.” Giving him the other cheek means you have reduced the man to a worm. This is really insulting. It can be interpreted this way.
My statements are neither arrogant nor humble, because they can’t be arrogant and they can’t be humble. Ordinarily you think humbleness is the opposite of arrogance. It is not. Humbleness and arrogance are both the same. They are like hot and cold – degrees of the same energy.
The humble person has as much ego as the arrogant person. The arrogant person claims the ego; the humble person denies the ego, but the ego is there. The arrogant person says, “I am special,” and the humble person says, “I am nobody, sir – just the dust underneath your feet.” One is claiming, the other is also claiming in a different way.
When you really see your nature, ego disappears, and with ego, arrogance and humbleness both disappear. Jesus is neither humble nor arrogant; Buddha is neither humble nor arrogant. They simply state the fact. Now it depends on you to interpret it.
You say: “Why do your statements seem to me to be arrogant?” There must be something in you that is creating the trouble, something in you that is resisting, fighting. Look deep inside yourself. Once you have seen what is creating this idea in you, you will be free of it; then things will be very simple.

There is another, similar question:
Osho,
Why did you attack Shivananda? How do you know his method does not work? What right have you to judge him?
To call a spade a spade is not to attack it. I have not attacked Shivananda; I have simply stated the case. But you must have some attachment with Shivananda; your attachment is feeling hurt. It has nothing to do with Shivananda! Something inside you is feeling hurt, look into your own wound.
You ask: “How do you know his method does not work?” No method ever works; it is not a question of his method. No method ever works, even my methods. And because he believed that methods work, I say he was a stupid person. We use methods because there are people just like you who need methods, who cannot go easily, simply into reality, who can only go the hard way. If you tell them to sit silently, they can’t understand it. They say, “Then, just by sitting silently? Is something going to happen just by sitting silently?” They cannot sit silently, and all happens only when you sit silently.
Sitting silently, doing nothing,
The spring comes
And the grass grows by itself;
This is the ultimate truth. But you cannot let it grow. You say, “I cannot just sit and let the grass grow, I have to pull the grass upward!” So I say, “Okay, then follow Shivananda, then do something. Then jump, do Kundalini. Or if that does not feel enough, then do Dynamic, Chaotic. Or if you have some other karmas to suffer, then go to Encounter.”
These methods are used here just because of your stupidities. Their whole function is to make you so tired of doing that one day you come to me and say, “Osho, can’t I sit silently?” That’s all. I send you into groups and meditations and tortures and wait for the day when you will come crying and weeping and crawling and will say, “Enough is enough! Can’t I sit silently?” And I will say, “I have been waiting for this moment.”
Sitting silently, doing nothing,
The spring comes
And the grass grows by itself;
No method ever helps. How can a method help? A method can help to create something unnatural. Nature does not need to be created, it is already there. It has to be lived, enjoyed, danced, sung. It is already there, you need not do anything. The grass is already growing, the spring has come. But you cannot sit silently; you have so much restlessness, and that restlessness needs methods. I give you methods, not because through methods you will become enlightened, but through methods you will come to know how stupid you are – and that is great enlightenment!

I have heard about a politician. He went to a master, a Sufi master, and asked, “You had told me to meditate, to pray, this and that, and I do, but no revelation ever happens.”
The master looked at him and said, “Go outside and stand in the street for ten minutes.” It was raining hard.
The politician said, “Stand in the street when it is raining so much?”
The master said, “Just go, and a revelation is going to come.”
And the politician thought, “When the revelation is going to come then it is worth trying. Ten minutes just standing in the falling rain is not such a big problem.”
He stood there. He looked stupid, because people were passing and they thought, “What is our Prime Minister doing?” But he kept his eyes closed, and he looked again and again at his watch – ten minutes was a long time because a crowd gathered and people started laughing. They were puzzled, “What has happened to the Prime Minister?”
And then he rushed into the house and told the master, “Nothing happened! You deceived me.”
The master said, “But just tell me how you felt?”
He said, “I felt like a very stupid person standing there, absolutely stupid!”
He said, “This is a great revelation! What do you think? In just ten minutes’ time to come to know that you are a very stupid person. Don’t you think it a great revelation?”

This is what happens in meditations, in yoga, in therapy groups. Slowly, slowly understanding penetrates your heart: “What am I doing, shouting, screaming, fighting? What am I doing?” Just that very revelation and you can see the point, then you can sit silently. All that you need is already available. That’s why I said that his methods don’t work – not that somebody else’s methods work. No method ever works.
You ask: “And what right have you to judge him?” I have not judged him. I have simply said what he is. What judgment are you talking about? I have not condemned him. To call a spade a spade is not to condemn it. I am simply factual.
But the question is from Mark who must be a new person here. He can’t understand me; he has no participation with me yet. He must have felt offended. He may be following things like Shivananda’s, something like that. His ego is hurt, but rather than saying, “My ego is hurt,” he has changed the question. That is a camouflage; it is utterly meaningless. If something is going to happen between me and Shivananda, that is my business, don’t you be worried. If we meet some time, then it is for us to decide whether I should have judged him or not, or why I called him stupid. He can ask me, but why should you be worried?
You must have something else inside; this is just a rationalization. You may be doing those kinds of methods. But ego is so subtle, it protects itself. You have made a question in such a way that you can hide, but you cannot hide from me. Mark, mark it! You cannot hide from me. And remember, I never miss the mark. You are going to be caught. Now you cannot escape, because if you have been doing these things, then how long will it take for you to realize, how long will it take for you to allow the revelation to happen? And I have made all kinds of methods available here, all kinds of nonsense that you can get anywhere in the world. People are even coming from Californialand – here!

The sixth question:
Osho,
What is the difference between being totally surrendered and being a brainless robot?
A brainless robot cannot surrender; and those who find difficulty in surrendering are brainless robots. To surrender, great understanding is needed, great intelligence. You will be surprised to know that the more stupid a person is, the less possibility of surrender. Idiots can’t surrender, although those who can’t surrender think they are very intelligent and that’s why they are not surrendering. But have you ever heard of any idiot surrendering? Imbeciles cannot surrender, retarded people cannot surrender.
The highest intelligence is needed to surrender, to see the point that “I have been running in circles. If I go on depending on myself, I will go on running in the same circles again and again.” The only possibility to get out of the wheel is to take somebody else’s hand, somebody who is outside the vicious circle. To take that support is what surrender is.
Down the ages it has been thought that the intelligent person can’t surrender, that it is the gullible person who surrenders. That is not so. Modern research says something else: it is only the very, very intelligent who can surrender. The gullible believes, but does not surrender. The intelligent surrenders, does not believe. And the difference is great.
You can believe without surrendering; then the belief is just a lip-service. You say yes on the surface, and deep down you go on doing whatsoever you are doing. To be surrendered means you have said yes from the circumference to the very core. You have become a yes from the center to the circumference. There is only one quality of consciousness: yes. And immediately, in this yes, you come out of the ego – because ego exists on no, ego feeds on no. The more you say no, the more ego is strengthened. No is the food for the ego; yes is the food for egolessness.
It is a simple phenomenon, but only very, very intelligent people can understand it.
Have you observed? Whenever you say no, you feel very clearly that you are. That’s why people enjoy saying no. Even when there is no need, they will say no. The child asks the mother, “Can I go out to play?” and she says, “No!” Now there is no need to say no, and she knows perfectly well that the child is not going to listen. And the child also knows perfectly well that if he creates some kind of tantrum that she is going to say yes, so he creates a tantrum. The mother says no because she feels good by saying no. Then the child starts saying no to the mother; that is how he creates his ego.
That’s why parents and children are always in conflict; teachers and students are always in conflict. Universities are not just accidentally burning all over the world: the conflict is that the teacher says no and the student says no. Two no’s fighting! Husbands and wives are fighting continuously; each has to say no, and the ego feels very hurt. Watch: whenever you have to say yes, it feels that you are defeated, the other is a winner. Then you try to find a situation where you can again say no and remain with your no and force yes on the other.
This is how the ego exists. The day the child learns to say no is the beginning of the ego. Before that there was primal innocence; before that the child was in trust; he had no idea of who he was. There was utter silence and peace and joy and celebration. The day he says no, something closes up; he becomes defensive, he creates an armor, and he starts saying as many no’s as possible. If the parents say, “Don’t smoke,” he will smoke. If the parents say, “Don’t do this,” he will have to do it. The rebellion has started. He has to become an ego.
Surrender means you have lived through the ego and you have seen the futility of it, you have seen the utter misery of it. You have lived through the ego and you know that you have not been able to really live through it. It does not allow you to live, because it does not allow you any expansion. It makes you smaller and smaller and smaller; it encages you deeper and deeper. It puts you into a windowless state, all openings disappear. You start living in a kind of grave. To surrender means to see this, and then to find a person with whom it will be easier to say yes, a person who has had a glimpse of the real man and to whom love has happened, who has become love.
If you can find a man with whom you can say yes easily, you have found your master. This is the criterion for how to decide if you have come across a master: if you can say yes easily, simply, innocently. The presence of the man makes you feel to say yes. No becomes difficult; even if you want to say no out of old habit and structure, you hesitate, you find it hard to say. Yes comes easily, like a flood. Whenever you say yes, great joy arises; whenever you say no, you feel great misery, as if you have harmed yourself.
Whenever you have found a person with whom this starts happening, you have found the master. Then forget about the whole world and what they say about the master. You have found the master. He may not be the master for others, but he is the master for you. Disappear into him.
You ask: “What is the difference between being totally surrendered and being a brainless robot?” A robot can never surrender, not even partially. Only an utterly intelligent person can surrender. Of course, in the beginning it is partial; slowly, slowly, one gathers more and more courage. As one tastes the joys of it, the more one adventures, explores into it.
The man of utter intelligence surrenders totally. In that surrender, the ego disappears. Not that in that surrender you become a slave to the master – there is nobody to make you a slave. The fact that there was nobody to make you a slave is why you were feeling so beautiful in saying yes to the man. If there was somebody to make you a slave you would have naturally felt it impossible to say yes. His ego would have offended your ego; there is a subtle interaction between egos.
If the man has helped you to surrender, that simply means there was nobody to offend you. There was pure love, there was nobody trying to possess you. You were not being cowed down. Once you have surrendered the ego, you will be surprised that there is nobody to take possession of you – the ego has disappeared. The master and the surrender was just a device. You have attained to primal innocence; you can move on your own.
When the master sees that you have surrendered totally, he makes you absolutely free. He says, “Now there is no need, now there is no question of surrender.” Once surrendered, then there is no need for any surrender. The need for surrender is because of the ego. Once the disease has disappeared, the medicine has to be thrown away. The master takes it away, himself.
And then you are free of ego and free of egolessness. That’s what Ikkyu calls real emptiness: you are empty of everything and empty of emptiness too. Ego has gone and egolessness has also gone. Now there is nobody, absolute nothingness. And the purity of it and the benediction of it are such that if you don’t taste it in this life, you have wasted it again.

The seventh question:
Osho,
If I disappear, who will pay the rent?
Let the other party bother. Why should you be worried? But my feeling is that you have not asked the question rightly. You must be worried about those who have to pay the rent to you if they disappear.
It happened…

A man came to a psychoanalyst and he was very worried and going berserk. The psychiatrist asked, “What is your problem really?”
He said, “I am worried. The worry is that I have to pay ten thousand dollars I owe to people. And there seems to be no way! And I am thinking to commit suicide, because this is becoming too heavy and I cannot live with this heaviness.”
And the psychoanalyst said, “Don’t you be worried. Just look at me: I had to pay one thousand dollars to a man. I simply dropped the idea of paying and all worry disappeared.”
And the man said, “I know it – I know about it. You tell me something else.”
The psychoanalyst asked, “How do you know it?”
He said, “I am the man to whom you were going to pay $1000 – that too is part of my worry. This won’t help! Give me some other idea.”

Why are you worried: “If I disappear who will pay the rent?” Is rent so very important? Are you here only to pay the rent?
I have heard…

The Scotsman was visiting London for the day and called upon a lady of pleasure in Soho. After he had partaken of her bodily delights, he gave her a hundred pounds.
“Why, that’s incredibly generous of you!” exclaimed the surprised lady. “No man has ever given me so much. And yet, from your accent you sound Scottish, which makes it even more incredible for you to be generous. Which part of Scotland do you come from?”
“From Edinburgh,” replied the Scotsman.
“How fantastic! My father works in Edinburgh.”
“I know,” said the Scotsman. “When your father heard I was coming to London he gave me a hundred pounds to give to you.”

Do you come from Scotland? What part? Thinking of paying the rent? There is nobody to pay the rent, there is nobody to be paid, really no rent either, no house either. That’s what Ikkyu says: all is dream.

Have you not heard this: A madman was asked, “What are the differences between psychoanalysts, psychologists and psychiatrists?”
The madman said, “Psychologists build castles in the air, psychoanalysts live in them, and psychiatrists collect the rent.”

What are you talking about? Forget all about it! Disappear! And remember, when you disappear as an ego, that does not necessarily mean that you disappear from the world – the world continues. Kabir disappeared as an ego but continued to remain a weaver, continued to work, but now it is no longer serious, now it is just a dream. If others are enjoying, why disturb them? You can disappear and still pay the rent. Don’t be worried about it, unless you don’t want to pay the rent and only for that reason you want to disappear. That is another matter. Otherwise, what is the problem? Disappear and still pay the rent!
“If I disappear, who will pay the rent?”

Osho,
Yesterday you talked of natural and unnatural. Money, it seems, must come into the unnatural category. With the ego and the mind, it is relatively easy to deal with it. But if we are to live in the marketplace and to live naturally, will money not become a problem?
Money is not a problem at all unless you want to make it a problem. Down the ages, the so-called religious people have been very worried about money – such a foolish thing to be worried about. Play with it! If you have it, enjoy; if you don’t have it, enjoy. What else can you do when you don’t have it? Enjoy! When you have it, what else can you do? Enjoy! Don’t make unnecessary problems about it. Money is a toy, when you have it, play with it.
But my feeling is: people who can’t play with money, who renounce money, are very serious about it. Then they become very afraid about money, because deep down clinging is there.
Do you know that the chief disciple of Mahatma Gandhi, Vinoba Bhave, can’t look at money? If you bring a one rupee note – which is worthless, which has no monetary value at all – he closes his eyes. Now what kind of attitude is this? And this is thought to be very saintly; it is praised all over the country, that he is so free of money. If you are really free of money, why do you close your eyes? Is that one rupee note so attractive that you have to close your eyes? Is there some fear that if you don’t close your eyes you may jump upon the man? Something must be there. This looks a little obsessive; there must be great fear, otherwise why close your eyes? So many things are passing and you don’t close your eyes – just poor money!
Money is nothing but a device to exchange things, but people who are really misers deep down, clingers, are very much in despair and misery. They think that it is money that is causing their misery; it is not money that is causing misery. How can money cause misery? It is miserliness that is causing the misery. Thinking that it is money that is causing misery, they renounce money, they escape from the world of money. Then they are continuously afraid; in their dreams they must be entering into banks and opening treasures and things like that – and making love to money. That is bound to happen.
Money is not a problem. It can be used. If you have it, use it; if you don’t have it, then use the freedom that comes from not having money. This is my approach. If you are rich, enjoy; richness has a few things which no poor person can enjoy. I have been both rich and poor, and I tell you honestly, there are a few things only rich people can enjoy. Enjoy when you are rich. And I tell you again, I have been both rich and poor, and there are a few things which only poor people can enjoy. And there is no way to enjoy both together.
So, whenever, whatsoever is happening, enjoy it. A poor person has a kind of freedom. Poverty has a kind of cleanness, a relaxedness, contentedness. The mind is not very worried; there is nothing to worry about. You can sleep perfectly well; insomnia is impossible for a poor man. So sleep well and snore, and enjoy the freedom that comes from poverty.
And sometimes when you find yourself rich, enjoy richness, because there are a few things that only a rich person can enjoy. You can have great paintings on your walls; a poor man cannot have that. You can have the best music in your house; the poor man cannot have that. You can create a Zen garden around your house; the poor man cannot do that. You can read poetry, you can paint, you can play on the guitar, you can sing, you can dance, you can meditate – a thousand and one things become available.
My approach is: whatsoever is the case, just see what you can make out of it. If it is poverty, become a buddha, start wandering; take a begging-bowl – and enjoy the beauty that only a beggar can have. He belongs nowhere. Today he is here, tomorrow he is gone. He is a flow; he clings nowhere, he has no home. He need not worry that the rains are coming and the roof has to be fixed. He need not worry that somebody may steal something from him – he has nothing.
Enjoy poverty when you are poor, and enjoy richness, then become a Janak, an emperor, and enjoy all the beauties that become available through money. My approach is total. I don’t teach you to choose. I simply say: whatsoever is the case, the intelligent person will make something beautiful out of it.
The unintelligent person suffers. If he has money he suffers because money brings worries; he does not enjoy the music that money can bring, the dance that money can bring, the painting. If he has money, he does not go to the Himalayas for a rest, to meditate and to sing and to shout in the valleys and to talk with the stars. He worries, loses his sleep, loses his appetite – he chooses wrongly when he has money. And this man, if somehow he becomes poor, if he becomes poor by God’s grace, then he suffers poverty. Then he is continuously worried that “I don’t have this and I don’t have that.” You have poverty! Enjoy it.
But there are people who are wrong in every situation: wherever they are, they will always choose the negative part of it, and they will suffer. And there are people who enjoy wherever they are, and I call those people intelligent people, and I would like my people to be intelligent people.

In my childhood it happened: once my father was very angry, so he locked me into the bathroom. I meditated! What is the point…? After three, four hours, he became worried. He was at the shop, but he was restless. He became worried about what had happened to me, and no message had come from the home – my mother had not sent any message, no servant had come to say what had happened to me. Have I disappeared, or what? Or has somebody opened the bathroom? So he could not do his work there; he had to come.
He came close and he listened and there was silence. He knocked and I told him, “Don’t disturb me.” That was the last time he punished me that way. It was pointless! He said, “I became so worried I could not do my work in the shop – I had to come.”
I said. “This is nonsense! – I enjoyed it.”

In my school when I was small, in second grade, my teacher was very strict and he used to punish us by demanding: “Go and run seven times round the school. Run!” And he gave me this punishment: to go seven times.
I said, “Why not seventeen?”
He said, “Are you mad?”
I said, “This is such a good exercise and every morning I would like to do it.”
I started doing it every morning. He would see me and he would beat his head; he would say that I had destroyed his punishment by making it an exercise.
I used it! Then he stopped giving me punishment.
Why not use an opportunity, whatsoever it is? And if you are alert you can find opportunities everywhere – even if you are imprisoned you can use that as a great opportunity. And there are people who are under the sky, free, and not using that opportunity. Money or no money, house or no house, the question is not what you should have: the question is what you should do, whatsoever you have.
My emphasis is totally different. You disappear, and then let things happen. If you feel good to be in the marketplace, then that is natural, because there are born shopkeepers. Don’t think that there are only born poets; that is wrong, there are born shopkeepers, too. Whatsoever you try to make of them, they will become shopkeepers; wherever they are they will open a shop. They cannot avoid it.

Have you not heard about the Jew? A ship was moving and it was attacked by a crocodile, a great crocodile, a very great crocodile. And they started throwing things in her mouth: chairs and things, tables and a bag of oranges, and finally the Jew. But again and again the crocodile came to attack.
Finally they decided, “This is not going to help. We go on giving it things; just for a few moments the crocodile becomes engaged, and again it comes.” So all together they attacked and cut open the belly of the crocodile, and do you know what they saw? The Jew was sitting on the chair, the table was in front of him, he had opened the bag of oranges and he was selling to other people who had been swallowed by the crocodile before.

You cannot escape, where will you go? There are born shopkeepers. So if you are a born shopkeeper, even when you have disappeared you will be in the marketplace. But then it will have a totally different quality to it: you will enjoy it. It is God’s world, a beautiful dream. You will know those customers are dream customers, and the things that you are selling to them are just dreams, and the money that you are collecting is just a dream. Why not enjoy it? That enjoyment is not a dream.
Let me remind you again: everything is a dream, but if you can consciously enjoy it, that joy is not a dream – that joy is the goal of all religions. And you can enjoy more if everything is a dream. Then there is nothing to be worried about. If success comes, good; if failure comes, good.

The last question:
Osho,
I know that I am not my body, but still I want to love and be loved. Is spiritual love possible in this rotten world?
This world is not rotten. This world is full of godliness, or, in Buddha’s words, full of nothingness – which is the same. If anything is rotten, it is your mind. And, yes, it is very difficult with a rotten mind to find love.
Never think in terms of spiritual and material love. Love is simply love, it is neither material nor spiritual. How can love be material or spiritual? Love is simply love. Love means the joy of sharing your life with somebody. Yes, your body can be shared, your being can be shared, but sharing is love, not what you share. Sharing is love; all love is simply love.
But I can see the problem must be coming from your upbringing: “I know that I am not my body.” Who told you? You are more your body than your mind. You are more your body than your so-called self. That’s what Ikkyu is saying: self is a false entity, rotten, and the mind is just a phenomenon conditioned by society. Your body is truer than your mind and than your self; your body belongs to existence.
But you must have been contaminated by the priests into believing that you are not the body. They have created a dichotomy in everybody that “You are the soul, and how can a soul fall so much as to love a body?” You will not find ghosts around here; you will find people who live in their bodies, who are their bodies.
That’s why you cannot find somebody to love and be loved by – you are in search of a ghost. And I don’t think if you really come across a ghost that you will like it. But that’s what you are hankering for. You have been told to condemn your body; and if you condemn your body and if you don’t like your body, do you think somebody else is going to like it? If you don’t even like it, who is going to like it? By liking your body, by loving your body, you create a situation in which somebody else can also love your body. But you create that milieu, that climate.
Deep down you hate your own body because from the very beginning you have been told to hate the body – the body is something ugly, the body is something unspiritual. You have been taught that the body is the enemy. The body is the temple of godliness. In this body lives that nothingness that Buddha talks about; in this body lives that seed of enlightenment I go on talking about. This body contains your greatest joy, this body contains godliness. Don’t condemn it, otherwise it will be impossible.
You say: “I know that I am not my body, but still I want to love and be loved.” The desire to love and to be loved is natural. It is part of human consciousness, an intrinsic part of it, built in. Society can contaminate your ideas about the body, but it cannot destroy your desire to be loved and to love; that desire continues. But now it becomes impossible because that desire can be fulfilled only through the body. So you are in a fix.
Either drop the idea of love – which you cannot do, which nobody can do. We are made of the stuff called love, it is impossible to drop it. Just let me remind you again: a single glimpse of the real man, and you are in love. Even at the ultimate stage, love explodes, love remains; you really become totally loving. So you cannot drop that, it is your destiny; it has to be fulfilled. But when you condemn your body, it is very difficult. You want to go to the other shore and you condemn the bridge. You want to go to the other shore and you condemn the boat. Now, how are you going to manage it? The bridge can take you to the other shore. The bridge can take you beyond the bridge. The boat can take you beyond the boat, but only the boat can take you.
Love your body. Accept yourself as your body; receive it with gratitude, it is a gift. Otherwise it will be impossible. And even if somebody falls in love with you – the question is from a woman – if somebody falls in love with you, you will not allow him to love you. If he wants to hold your hand, you will shrink back. You will think, “Here comes a hedonist, a materialist. He wants to hold my hand! He should only hold my ghost hand, spiritual hand, not my real hand. This is just the rotten body.” And he wants to hug you and you will escape because this is that same rotten lust. You won’t allow anybody to approach you.
And, naturally, when a person wants to have communion with you, he would like to hold your hand. It is not that he just wants to hold your hand – it is through the hand that something else is contacted. It is not necessarily so that it will be contacted, but there is no other way to contact it. When he holds your hand, he is holding something of you, and there is no way to hold it without holding your hand. If he hugs you, he is hugging your soul; but the body is the visible part of the soul. It is through the body that you communicate.
Even if silence has to be communicated, words have to be used. Words are the body of the silence; silence is the soul. Even I have to use words, Buddha has to use words. Drop that conditioning. And drop the idea that this world is rotten, because if it is rotten then nothing is going to happen in it. You have already become prejudiced.
Meditate over this anecdote:

Cuthbert married a very refined virgin from an impeccable background, and took her away to Tunis for their honeymoon.
On the first night in their hotel, Cuthbert quickly stripped off all his clothes and jumped into bed and then watched while his wife slowly removed all her garments.
But Cuthbert was rather surprised when she clambered into bed completely naked except for her white gloves.
“Why don’t you take your gloves off?” he asked.
“Because mummy said that I might actually have to touch the beastly thing,” she replied.

Now, this type of mind is not going to know what love is. This type of mind is closed, absolutely closed. And this type of mind is there in everybody, more or less. Drop this mind. All is good and all is divine, the body included. The whole body is included; never make any distinction between the upper body and the lower – there is nothing lower and nothing higher. The whole body is one, it is a unity. Accept it, welcome it, and you will start blooming, and you will start radiating love. And that radiating love will attract others toward you.
You must not be attracting; you must have become very repulsive. The ideas that this world is rotten, that “I am not my body,” that “I want some spiritual kind of love,” are all wrong ideas. They will poison your whole life.
I know there is a love that goes far beyond the ordinary forms, but that love is not against the ordinary forms – it is based, rooted, in the ordinary forms. The tree grows very high in the sky and starts whispering with the stars, but it remains rooted in the earth. The tree blooms into beautiful flowers, but it remains rooted into the earth, in the dark earth, with a thousand and one roots, invisible.
Godliness is rooted in matter, the spirit is rooted in matter; never be against matter. Once you create this dichotomy of matter and spirit, you are forever going to remain a schizophrenic.
Bridge yourself. Come together! Become one piece, and out of becoming one piece, peace arises, love flows, life becomes a fragrance.
Enough for today.

============================================================

My abiding place
Has no pillars;
It is roofless –
Yet the rain does not wet it,
Nor the wind strike it.

When it blows,
The mountain wind is boisterous,
But when it blows not,
It simply blows not.

Though it has no bridge,
The cloud climbs up to heaven;
It does not ask aid
Of Gautama’s sutras.

Ripples appear
On the unaccumulated water
Of the undug well,
As the formless, bodiless man
Draws water from it.

The mind:
Since there is really
No such thing as mind,
With what enlightenment
Shall it be enlightened?
A story…

Zen master: “I have here a staff, and yet I don’t have a staff. How would you explain that?”
Jewish novice: “I wouldn’t!”
Master: “Now, don’t be impertinent! It is incumbent upon you, if you really wish to attain enlightenment as you claim, to make every possible effort to answer this.”
Novice: “All right, I guess that looked at one way you have a staff; looked at another way you don’t.”
Master: “No, that is not what I mean at all! I mean that looked at exactly the same way, I have a staff and I don’t have a staff. Now how do you explain that?”
Novice: “I give up!”
Master: “But you shouldn’t give up! You should strain every ounce of your being to unravel this.”
Novice: “I won’t argue with you as to whether I should give up. The existential fact simply is that I do give up.”
Master: “But don’t you wish to attain enlightenment?”
Novice: “If attaining enlightenment means considering such damn fool questions, then to hell with it! I am sorry to disappoint you, but goodbye!”
Twelve years later:
Novice: “And so I return to you, Oh master, in a state of absolute contrition. For twelve years now I have been wandering about feeling terrible for my cowardice and impatience. I now realize that I can’t keep running away from life. Sooner or later, I have to face the ultimate problems of the universe. So now I am ready to steel myself and try to work in earnest on the problem you gave me.”
Master: “What problem was that?”
Novice: “You said that you have a staff and yet you don’t have a staff. How do I explain that?”
Master: “Is that what I really said? Why how silly of me!”

Zen has no teaching, Zen has no doctrine; Zen gives no guidance because it says there is no goal. It says you are not to move in any certain direction; it says you are already there! So the more you try to reach there, the less is the possibility of reaching. The more you seek, the more you will miss; seeking is the surest way of missing. Getting it simply means getting the point that it is already available, it has already happened; it is the very nature of existence.
Enlightenment is not a goal but the quality of being herenow. How can it be a goal? A goal is never herenow, it is always there-then; it is always somewhere else. It is like the horizon: it is always distant and yet it looks close by. One feels that “If I travel a little bit, I will reach the horizon.” But one never reaches, because the more you reach toward the horizon, the more the horizon goes on receding. In fact there is nothing, it is just an illusion.
The earth and the sky are not meeting anywhere. They can’t meet because they are not two, they are one. The earth is just a materialization of the space of the sky; it is a wave in the ocean of the sky. How can they meet? At least two are needed for a meeting, and they are not two. The horizon exists only in the mind of man; it has no existential truth in it. But you can go on searching and searching. And the more you feel that you are not getting it, the more anxious you can become to find it. You can become mad searching after it.
Zen says: There is nowhere to go, so no guidance is needed. Then what is the purpose of a Zen master? His purpose is to bring you herenow. His purpose is to hit you so hard that you awake herenow. You have fallen asleep and you have started living in dreams.
Another story…

Zen student: “So, master, is the soul immortal or not? Do we survive our bodily death or do we get annihilated? Do we really reincarnate? Does our soul split up into component parts which get recycled, or do we enter the body of a biological organism as a single unit? Do we retain our memories or not? Is the doctrine of reincarnation false? Is perhaps the Christian notion of survival more correct? And if so, do we get bodily resurrected, or does our soul enter a purely Platonic spiritual realm?”
Master: “Your breakfast is getting cold.”

That’s the way of Zen: to bring you herenow. Breakfast is far more important than any paradise, far more important than any concept of God. Breakfast is more important than any theory of reincarnation, soul, rebirth, and all that nonsense, because breakfast is herenow. For Zen, the immediate is the ultimate, and the imminent is the transcendental. This moment is eternity; you have to be awakened to this moment.
Zen is not a teaching but a device to disturb your dreaming mind, to create such a state that you become alarmed, that you have to get up and see, to create such strain around you that you cannot remain comfortably asleep.
This is the beauty of Zen and the revolution that Zen brings to the world. All other religions are consolations; they help you to sleep better. Zen tries to awaken you; it offers no consolation at all. It does not talk about great things, not because great things are not there but because talking about them is not going to help.
People have a very stupid idea that talking about a problem is doing something about it. That is why psychoanalysis has become so important. It is nothing but talking: the patient goes on talking about his problems and he thinks that by talking about his problems he is solving them.
People ask questions, and get answers, and they think that by asking a question and getting an answer they are doing something about their real problem. Answers that are given by others are not going to help you; they may help you only as consolations.
You ask somebody, “Is there survival after death?” and he says, “Yes.” And you are freed of a fear – the fear of death; you start thinking the soul is immortal. If you look at the people who believe in the immortality of the soul, you will find they are the greatest of cowards. This country, at least for five thousand years, has believed in the immortality of the soul, and for one thousand years this country remained in slavery. People had become so cowardly they could not rebel against it. Not a single revolution has ever happened in India.
People who believe in the immortality of the soul should be absolutely courageous; they can face death because they are not going to die. But the case is just the opposite; in fact, their belief in the immortality of the soul is nothing but a protection, just armor around their cowardice. They are afraid of death; hence they believe in the idea that the soul is immortal. They go on clinging to the idea – against death. They don’t know.
If you ask a Zen master, “Is the soul immortal?” he will not answer, because he knows it is your fear that is asking for the answer. Your fear wants to be calmed; you need a solace. You need somebody authoritative who can say, “Yes, don’t be afraid.” You need a father figure.
It is not just a coincidence that Christians think of God as the father, or the Catholic priest is called “father.” Out of fear, people are searching for the father. They need fathers here and they need a great father up in the heavens. These people are childish, immature; they can’t stand on their own. They can’t live their lives on their own; they need someone to lean on.
Zen does not talk about God, not because God is not, but God is not a father. And neither is God a mother. You cannot conceive of God in any word; all your words are irrelevant. Godliness can only be experienced in utter silence, in absolute silence. But there is no point in talking about it, because in talking about it people start thinking they are doing great work. Then they read the scriptures and they philosophize, and they polish their concepts and doctrines, and go on believing, and nothing ever changes in their lives. Their belief never brings any light to their lives; their belief hinders the light.
Zen is not a belief system: it is a way of awakening. The Zen master is bound to be tough, out of compassion. He has to hit you, and he goes on finding devices to hit you.
Just listen to this story:

A Zen master was worshipping at a statue of the Buddha. A monk came by and said, “Why do you worship the Buddha?”
“I like to worship the Buddha.”
“But I thought you said that one cannot obtain enlightenment by worshipping the Buddha?”
“I am not worshipping the Buddha in order to obtain enlightenment.”
“Then why are you worshipping the Buddha? You must have some reason!”
“No reason whatsoever. I like to worship the Buddha.”
“But you must be seeking something; you must have some end in view!”
“I do not worship the Buddha for any end.”
“Then why do you worship the Buddha? What is your purpose in worshipping the Buddha?”
At this point, the master simply jumped up and gave the monk a good slap in the face!

It looks so wild, unexpected. The monk is not asking any irrelevant question: he is asking a simple human question out of curiosity. He should not be treated like that; there is no need to hit him. No Hindu priest would hit him, nor would a Catholic priest hit him, because their purposes are different. Only a Zen master can hit him – his purpose is different.
Why didn’t the master hit him in the first place? Why did he bother to answer so many questions and then hit him? He created the situation, the right situation. He created heat, he created more and more curiosity. He brought the monk to a state where the hit could simply shock him to a kind of awareness.
He helped the monk to think about it more and more and more, to bring a peak of thinking, because only from the peak can the hit be of any help. But his hitting the monk is neither wild nor arrogant – it is not out of anger, remember. I have found a story in a book written by an American who thinks the master became angry because of the persistent query of the monk, and hit him out of anger. This is stupid, he missed the whole point; it is not out of anger. He is not offended by the question; he is enjoying the question. He is bringing the monk to a more and more feverish state by answering in such a way that the question is not answered, but enhanced. Just see the difference.
Ordinarily, you answer a question so that the question is finished. The Zen master is answering so that the question becomes even more pointed and poignant. He is helping the question to arise with a totality. He is giving the idea to the monk that his question is very important and the master is unable to answer it. He is helping the ego of the monk to become a big balloon so that with just a small prick the balloon bursts.
It is not out of anger; it has nothing to do with anger. He is not angry with the monk, he is not annoyed with the monk. He must be feeling perfectly happy with the monk because he has asked and now is giving a chance for the master. His not answering is a device.
Even the slap is not the answer, remember. A few people think the slap is the answer and it is not. The slap is just to give you a jerk, just to shake your foundations, so if for even a single moment you slip out of your thinking you will have a glimpse of reality. Then you will forget about God and about Buddha and worship and you will just see that your breakfast is getting cold. You will come to herenow.

Zen is not a philosophical approach toward life. It is an existential approach, and it has helped tremendously; it has brought many people to awakening. Zen does not believe in analyzing a problem because it does not believe that any problem can be solved at its own level. No problem can be solved unless your consciousness is raised a little higher than the problem. This has to be understood; this is something very fundamental.
You ask me a question. I can answer it, but you remain on the same level of consciousness. My answer cannot raise your consciousness. You ask, “Does God exist?” I can say yes or no – but you remain the same! Whether I say yes or no, it will not help you in any way to become more conscious. It will not give you more being; it will only give you more knowledge this way or that.
If you are an atheist and you ask, “Is there a God?” and I say no, you will feel very happy. You will say, “So I was right.” Or if I say yes, you will say, “This man is wrong. He does not know anything. He is just a blind person. I have argued, I have looked into the matter deeply, and I can’t find any proof for God.”
Whether I say yes or no, whether you are a theist or an atheist, either you will accumulate the knowledge, receive it if it fits with you, or if it doesn’t fit with you, you will reject it. That’s what you are doing continuously in your mind. But your consciousness is not raised, and unless your consciousness is raised, no problem can be solved. In the first place the problem is created because of your consciousness, and it cannot be solved by any answer; it can only be solved by helping your consciousness to rise a little higher.
That’s the work of Zen. It is not a transfer of knowledge; it is a transfer of consciousness, being. By slapping the monk, the master has simply helped the monk to become a little more alert. And if the monk becomes a little more alert, that slap is not just a slap, it is a leap of the master’s being into the disciple. But for that you need great love for the master, otherwise you will miss the slap. You need great trust in the master.
This happens here every day. If I slap somebody, if I say something hard, if I hit somebody’s ego, then out of a hundred people ninety percent will start reacting antagonistically. They will miss the point; they will miss a great opportunity. If I criticize you, that is a slap on your face. If I am hard on you, that is a slap on your face, a subtle slap.
But humanity is no longer interested in truth as much as it is interested in its ego. Immediately you are ready to leave; this man is not for you. A single slap and you forget all about the search. Rather than becoming aware, alert, rather than receiving more consciousness and being, you simply close up.
Zen needs a particular atmosphere, a milieu of love, trust. That’s why I insist that unless you are a sannyasin, my work cannot start on you.
Just the other day, somebody had written a letter, a beautiful letter that must be from a very good heart. He asked, “Can I not relate to you without becoming a sannyasin? Can I not just be a friend? Is it a must to be a disciple?” The question is relevant. You can be a friend to me; that is not a problem. But you will miss as surely as the foes miss. The friend is going to miss as much as the foe – because when I slap you, you will not be able to awake. You will become angry because you don’t expect that from a friend. When I hit you hard, you will simply be angry; you will retaliate, you will argue, you will fight back. You will simply say, “Then I am going!”
Sannyas means that you are ready to go with me even if I hit you. You are ready to go with me even if I crush you, annihilate you. You are ready to go with me to any limits. Your trust is more in me than your trust in yourself. Then the work starts. “The work” simply means you have become available to the master. Only then can you be awakened, because awakening is going to be painful. It is not going to be very sweet, you have slept so long, and you have dreamed so many beautiful dreams. Awakening is certainly going to destroy all those dreams. They are dreams, but you have thought that they are realities. When somebody starts taking them away from you it hurts. You start feeling that “I am getting nothing – on the contrary, I am losing all that I had before.”
Zen is a particular milieu, a climate between the master and the disciple of trust, of love, of infinite love, so the disciple is ready to go to any end. You will be surprised: sometimes Zen masters have been really wild.

It happened in one Zen master’s ashram: whenever he would talk about truth, he would raise one of his fingers toward the sky. That was his particular gesture. Naturally, it became a joke; anybody who wanted to imitate the master would raise the finger.
A very young disciple became artful in repeating and imitating the master’s gestures: his face, the way he walked, the way he talked, the way he sat. And anywhere and everywhere, whenever there was some serious discussion going on, this young boy would raise his finger toward the sky in the same way as the master.
One day, the boy was standing behind him while the master was talking to people, and when the master raised his finger, the boy also raised his finger. The master called him, then took a knife and cut off the boy’s finger.
Now, you cannot think of cutting off his finger as compassion. The boy screamed out in pain, and the master said, “Don’t miss the point! Now raise the finger.” The finger is gone, there is nothing to raise, and the master says, “Now, raise the finger – don’t miss the point!”
And the boy, with tears in his eyes, raised his cut finger toward the sky; in that very moment the satori happened. The boy was transformed.

On the surface it seems very cruel, violent. If you can only see the surface you will be forever against these Zen people. They don’t look like saints. Saints are not known to do such things. Saints talk to the fish and saints talk to the trees, and birds come and sit on their shoulders. We have known such saints. But saints who cut off the finger of such a simple young boy, who was, out of his innocence, imitating the master? What is the reason? Is the master angry? But if you look deep down, the boy was transformed.
If you see the transformation, then it was worth it; even if the master had cut off the head of the boy it would have been worth it. A finger is nothing. The boy was totally transformed.

It is said about this same Zen master that when he was searching with his own master he became very famous because birds would come and sit on his shoulders and on his head. Once even, while he was meditating under a tree, a bird made a nest in his hair. He had become famous all over the country; people used to worship him like a buddha.
He became very egoistic, naturally with such a great attainment. His own master came and was very angry. He said, “What is this bird doing in your hair? Drop all this nonsense!”
He was hurt, but he understood. And since that day, birds stopped coming to him.
People would come to see, and were surprised that there were no birds. They asked the master, “What has happened to your disciple? First birds used to come, animals used to come and sit by his side, but now they no longer come.”
The master said, “Now he has disappeared, he is no longer special. He has attained. Now birds don’t take any note of him. Animals simply pass by. He is not there. First he used to be there. He was becoming a special person; he was attaining to a specific kind of ego – now even that is dropped – he was becoming enlightened! Now even enlightenment is dropped, so birds no longer come to him. Why should they come when there is nobody? And why should animals come and sit there? They can sit anywhere, it is all the same. There is nobody anymore.”

Now see the point: Zen has a totally different approach toward life. Now the master is happy that the disciple has completely disappeared, because one can even become attached to the idea of enlightenment. You have to be alert about it.
Just a few months ago I told Somendra “You have had a small satori,” and since then I have not seen him laughing. Since then, he has become very serious. He has become enlightened! He has taken it to his heart. He has become special. He cannot laugh, he cannot enjoy, cannot be ordinary.
And now, if this idea gets too much into him it will become a crust around him. He has to drop it. He has to become unenlightened again. He has to forget that satori. Not because it did not happen, it did happen, but many satoris happen before the ultimate satori happens. And the ultimate satori is dropping of all satoris, of all samadhis. The ultimate enlightenment is when you forget the very idea of enlightenment. Then there is innocence, there is just simple nature. I played a joke upon Somendra and he got caught in it.

I am creating here a climate of work: many things are happening, and many are going to happen. You have to be ready, and the first readiness is when I hit you, when I shock you – and now Somendra will be shocked – when I shock you, use the shock to become a little more alert, a little more aware.
Zen is a device, not an analysis of life. And always remember, the universe is unknowable, absolutely, because it is alive. Analysis kills. And remember also: only dead things can be known. Life remains unknown and unknowable. The moment you know, you have killed something, and people go on killing. They kill love: once they analyze it, it is killed. People are so violent that even in love their violence is clearly there, loudly there.
Sending flowers is a form of life sacrifice to show high esteem. When you send a beautiful roseflower to your girlfriend or boyfriend, what are you saying? What are you saying when you say something with a flower? You give a roseflower to your girl, and you are saying: “I will kill for you, baby! I am ready to kill, I can murder. Look, I have murdered this rose.” This is not understanding.
Even your love is nothing but a power trip. Power always kills. Bacon has said knowledge is power, and it must be so, because knowledge also kills. When you can kill something, you feel great power.
I have heard that the most favorite pastime of people around Stalin was hunting. When Brezhnev took Kissinger on a hunting trip, he showed his power. It is said that whenever Tito wants to know that he is still in control, he kills stag and bear. Whenever people want to show that they are powerful, they kill. Adolf Hitler had to kill to show his power. And killing goes on, on many levels. Knowledge is also a subtle way of killing a thing.
Zen people are not interested in knowledge because they are not interested in power. They are interested in life as it is. They are interested in breakfast, not in God, not in heaven, not in the soul, not in past lives, not in future lives, simply breakfast. They are utterly for the immediate.
We know only that which we have killed. So never be a seeker for knowledge, otherwise you will become a killer; you will be a murderer. That’s what science goes on doing. In all the scientific laboratories what is happening is nothing but murder and murder: they have murdered nature. It is a beautiful device to hide violence.
Just go and look in a scientific lab at the many ways they have devised to torture simple, innocent animals in the name of experimentation, in the name of inquiry, in the name of truth – unimaginable torture. But when it is for truth’s sake, it is allowed – nobody thinks of the scientist as violent. Nobody thinks of the philosopher as violent, but he is also violent. He goes on analyzing everything.
Zen is not interested in killing – not even in killing a single word. It is not interested in knowing. It is interested in being. And these sutras will help you to see the point.
My abiding place
Has no pillars;
It is roofless –
Yet the rain does not wet it,
Nor the wind strike it.
Go into each word with deep love, with deep sympathy.
First: My abiding place has no pillars… The inner has no boundaries, no supports, no pillars. It is infinite space, it is pure space. It is nothingness. And there is nobody there. It is utterly silent. Not a single sound has ever penetrated there. Nobody has ever walked on that beach of your inner being, no footprints are there; it is virgin land.
If you look into that inner space, you will start disappearing. The more you look inside, the more you will disappear. That’s why people don’t want to look inside. They talk about self-knowledge, they talk about how to look inside; they talk about techniques, but they don’t look. And there is no technique!
It is a very simple phenomenon to look inside. It is as simple as looking outside. You can simply close your eyes and look inside. But fear arises, great fear arises in looking inside because that emptiness overwhelms you. You start disappearing; you start feeling as if you are going to die. You rush back. You start thinking a thousand and one things.
Have you observed that whenever you sit silently and look inside, the mind creates many thoughts immediately? Why? It is your device. It is just like the octopus: whenever he sees that some enemy is coming around, the octopus releases dark black ink like a cloud around himself. Immediately the ink cloud surrounds him and the enemy cannot see where he is.
When you go inside, immediately your mind starts secreting a thousand and one thoughts; immediately there is a great rush of energy into thinking. This is just like the octopus releasing dark black ink around himself; it is to create a cloud so you cannot see the innermost nothingness. You don’t want to see. To see in, is to commit suicide: to commit suicide as an ego, as a self.
Ikkyu says: My abiding place has no pillars; it is roofless… It is just the vast open sky, no pillars, no roof. It is infinity. …yet the rain does not wet it, nor the wind strike it. How can the rain wet it if there is no roof and no pillar, and no ground either? Do you think when it rains the sky is wet? The sky remains as it is, rains can’t wet it. Do you think when it is cloudy those clouds leave any impact on the sky? Do you think the sky becomes contaminated, polluted by the clouds? Do you think it becomes darkened? Do you think any mark is left on the sky? Nothing is left.
How can you touch pure nothingness? And just as there is an outer sky, there is an inner sky; outer and inner are just arbitrary words. It is all one sky – outer and inner, it is all one. One has to be very courageous to go into it. Once you have the courage to see your reality, all fear disappears, because all fear is for the ego, all fear is because of the ego. “Am I going to survive or not?” is what fear is all about. But once you have seen the inner sky, the fear cannot remain. You are not, so what? You have never been and you will never be, neither born nor dying. And that which is has been always there and will always be there. But you are not that.
It appears only when you are not, when you have disappeared. You are just a dream. The dreamer is also part of the dream, and when the dream disappears, the dreamer also disappears. Living in this inner space, you are not afraid about security. Then insecurity is security.
That’s what Alan Watts means when he says “the wisdom of insecurity.” There is only one way to be really secure and that is don’t have any roof, don’t have any pillars. Just move into the open sky. And then if it rains, let it rain; you will not get wet. You will be the sky, how can you get wet? Then if death comes, let it come, you will not be dying, because how can you die? You were never born. You don’t exist as a thing, as an entity.
Living in insecurity, one is secure. Trying to be secure, one remains insecure. This is the law of reverse effect. If you want something you will miss it just because you want it. The more you want, the more difficulties you create, and then there is a vicious circle. You want to be secure, you don’t want to die. If you don’t want to die, you will have to die a thousand and one deaths; you will have to die every day. If you don’t want to die, then everything will become a death message; then you will be continuously trembling and afraid. You will see death coming from everywhere.
If you forget all about death, and you accept death, then even in death you will not die, even in death you will be a watcher. Death will come and go. You will see it coming, you will see it passing, and you will remain, you will abide. That which abides in you forever and ever is not an entity, it is a consciousness. It is not a soul, it is awareness; it is pure awareness. And that awareness is part of the universal awareness.
My abiding place has no pillars; it is roofless – yet the rain does not wet it, nor the wind strike it. One Zen master was walking with his disciples. They came to a small river which they had to cross. It was not very deep, a shallow river. They started passing through it. The master had always said to his disciples, “When an enlightened person passes through the river, his feet never become wet.” They were all waiting for an opportunity to see. They were puzzled because his feet were becoming wet. They became very confused: “Is our master not yet enlightened?”
And just standing in the middle of the river, the master started laughing an uproarious laugh, a belly laugh, and they asked, “What is the matter?”
He said, “You fools! I had said that the enlightened person’s feet never become wet, and my feet are not becoming wet, and the feet that are becoming wet are not my feet. You need not be confused; you need not look so puzzled and perplexed. This water is not touching me. Nothing can touch me because I am not. This water of the river is not touching the sky, it is not making the sky wet, how can it make me wet? I am part of the sky.”
…yet the rain does not wet it, nor the wind strike it. So when you are communing with a master, remember you are communing with somebody who is a nobody; you are communing with something which is not an entity, but only a presence. Communing with a master is not communing with a person, but with a presence. A person will become wet, but the presence cannot become wet. The presence remains uncontaminated.
That presence is you. One has just to find it out, that’s all. But you have become so entangled with the ideas about yourself – that you are a Hindu, a Mohammedan, a Christian, a man, a woman, white, black, this and that – you have become so entangled with identities that you never look inside to see that you are just a pure sky and nothing else. No Hindu exists there, no Mohammedan, no man, no woman, no black, no white. These are all identities.
Think of the one who is identified with these things, think of the inner sky. These are all clouds – Hindu, Mohammedan, Christian, Communist, capitalist – these are all clouds. Don’t get too obsessed with the clouds. Go on remembering the sky.
When it blows,
The mountain wind is boisterous,
But when it blows not,
It simply blows not.
Once seen, this inner nothingness, a person becomes a suchness. This word suchness is of infinite value in Buddha’s experience, on Buddha’s path – tathata or suchness. When there is nobody, then what happens? A few things happen…
First, if there is nobody, there is nobody to control your life, there is nobody to manipulate, there is nobody to discipline. All control, all discipline, all manipulation disappears. That’s what freedom is – that’s what moksha is. Not something far away in the skies, but something deep inside you right now.
When you are not there, how can you control your life? All control disappears, and as control disappears all kinds of tensions, all uptightness, all anxieties also disappear. You become an open flow, so open that:
When it blows, the mountain wind is boisterous, but when it blows not, it simply blows not. Then whatsoever happens, happens. A man of Zen is totally different from the man of Yoga, and the distinction has to be understood. The man of Yoga is in tremendous control. The whole methodology of Yoga is how to control yourself, how to control absolutely. The man of Yoga cannot be disturbed because he is in such utter control. The man of Zen cannot be disturbed because there is no control. But the difference is great.
The man of Yoga is not absolutely in control, nobody can be. There are possibilities when he will lose his control. You just have to bring about those possibilities and he will lose control, because all control is relative, it is only to a certain extent.
Watch your control: if there is a ten rupee note you may not steal it, but ten thousand rupees? Then you feel a little inclined. And ten lakh rupees? Then you start thinking; then the idea seems to be worth thinking about. You start dreaming about ten lakh rupees. And you start thinking, “Just this once!” People are doing so many sins, you will be doing one and only one. Then you can donate half of the money to the church or to the temple. “And it is not so wrong either, because it doesn’t belong to a beggar, it belongs to some very rich person, and it doesn’t matter to him whether he has ten lakh more or less. And in the first place he has exploited people for all this money.” Now you are gathering energy to do it. But if it is ten crore rupees? Then you will not think twice: you will simply grab it and rush.
There is a certain limit to all control; beyond that you will fall. Nobody can be in absolute control, because control is an unnatural thing and nothing unnatural can ever be absolute. Only nature can be absolute. The unnatural has to be maintained; it takes energy, conflict, struggle, And when you are controlling yourself, there is somebody inside you who is against it, otherwise what is the need of controlling?
Control always splits you: the one who controls and the one who is being controlled, the top dog and the bottom dog. And the bottom dog waits for its own opportunities. There is constant barking and they go on fighting inside you, and you know it. There are moments when you can control your anger, and there are moments when you cannot. There are moments when you can control anything, and there are moments you cannot control. Sometimes the top dog is powerful and sometimes the bottom dog is powerful.
The conflict continues and the victory is never absolute; nobody ever wins it because the other remains there, maybe tired, resting, waiting for its time. Whenever one is in control, the other is gaining power by resting; and the one who is in control is losing power by controlling, because controlling means energy is being lost, dissipated. Sooner or later, the controller becomes weak and the controlled becomes powerful. And this goes on, this is a wheel.
The man of Yoga seems to be in great control, but cannot be in absolute control. He has repressed, and all that he has repressed is waiting there underneath him like a volcano. It will erupt, and when it erupts, he will be thrown into fragments.
The man of Zen cannot be disturbed but the reason is totally different. It is not because he is in absolute control that he cannot be disturbed. He cannot be disturbed because he is not! Then one thing more has to be understood: because he is not, there is no division. He is just a natural man. But you carry the idea of control from the man of Yoga, and that’s why the natural man has always been misunderstood. For example…

A master died and his disciple started crying, great tears started coming, sobbing. The disciple himself was known as an enlightened person. Others said, “This is not right – you should not cry, you should not weep. What will people think? Is it right for a man who is enlightened to cry?”
That disciple said. “There is no question of right and wrong – if tears are coming, they are coming. There is nobody to prevent them.”
This is a totally different vision – this is the natural man.
The people said, “But you have been telling us that only the body dies, then why are you crying and weeping for the master’s dead body? Only the body has died and the body was just material. It was going to die – dust unto dust.”
He answered, “What are you talking about? I am not crying for the soul – the soul never dies, okay, so I am not crying for the soul. I am crying for the body, because it was beautiful, so beautiful. I will never be able to see such a beautiful man walk again. I will never hear his voice.”
And they said, “But you should not be attached!”
But he said, “I am not attached. Just a flower has withered away and tears are coming to my eyes – I am not attached. These tears are not out of attachment.”

This is very difficult to understand, because we know only tears which come out of attachment. We have not known natural tears – we have forgotten all that is natural. We know tears of attachment; we don’t know tears of innocence.
A Zen man is a natural man. When it blows, the mountain wind is boisterous… This is the description of a Zen man. …but when it blows not, it simply blows not. When he laughs, he laughs; when he cries, he cries. It is a simple phenomenon. Just as birds sing, the Zen master speaks; just as flowers bloom, he lives. But his life has no ulterior motive, no goal. His words are not teachings but assertions of joy – hallelujah! It is his celebration of being. And that, too, when it happens, happens; when it doesn’t happen, it doesn’t happen.
There have been Zen masters who talked their whole lives, and there have been Zen masters who never talked. Sometimes it happens that the song is sung in words, and sometimes it happens that the song is sung in silence. But there is nobody to do anything, whatsoever is happening, is happening.
This is what Buddha called freedom: nobody to control and manipulate. When all control disappears freedom is born: freedom from the self, the true freedom, Freedom for the self is the pseudo-freedom. Yoga tries freedom for the self, and Zen is nothing but freedom from the self. Then one becomes like a tree, like an animal, like a child.
The sage is like a child, not like a yogi, not like a mahatma. The mahatma is trying to control himself continuously: day in, day out, curbing, dropping this, creating that. His whole life is his own effort. And, naturally, the so-called mahatmas look very tired, sad, desperate. Their life does not have the quality of joy. They talk about sat-chi-anand, but their life has no quality of joy.
Zen people have the quality of joy. They don’t talk about sat-chit-anand, they are sat-chit-anand. They are truth, they are bliss, they are consciousness.

Once Ma Tzu was asked, “Why did Buddha never talk about God?”
Ma Tzu said, “He was busy living him, that’s why. He didn’t talk about God because he was too busy living him.”

This state is a simple state, a natural state. You cannot brag about it. No child brags about his childhood, no sage can brag about his sagehood. It is the second childhood; he is reborn, the circle is complete. He has seen the world, he has seen the ways of the world, he has seen all the miseries of it; he has become wise. Now desires no longer drag him away from reality. He simply lives. Feeling hungry, he eats; feeling sleepy, he sleeps. He goes on doing the small things of life, but he becomes absolutely a nobody.
Though it has no bridge,
The cloud climbs up to heaven;
It does not ask aid
Of Gautama’s sutras.
When you become natural, spontaneous, simple, you start rising on your own accord. You need not ask Gautama Buddha for his help. No help is needed.
Though it has no bridge, the cloud climbs up to heaven; it does not ask aid of Gautama’s sutras. There is no need to have any guide. If you are simple, then simplicity is enough. If you are natural, then that naturalness is enough. If you are not natural, you will need the help of a master. And the master is not going to give you anything – he will simply take away all that is plastic in you, all that is inauthentic in you.
The master, the real master, simply throws you back to your own utter naturalness. He does not make you an achiever. He does not give you great dreams that you have to become this and you have to become that. He simply says: Relax, be in a let-go; be – don’t become.
This is one of the basic messages of Buddha: Be a light unto yourself. If you are not, then you need the help of a master, just for the time being. But what is his help? He throws you back to yourself; he goes on throwing you back to yourself. You would like to cling to the master and he goes on throwing you back.
The real master does not allow you to cling to him. He helps you to un-cling, because un-clinging is maturity, clinging is childishness. And remember: to be a child is one thing, to be childish is quite another. To be a child means to become a sage; to be childish means to remain clinging, immature.
Ripples appear
On the unaccumulated water
Of the undug well
As the formless, bodiless man
Draws water from it.
This is the constant refrain of Buddha: all is a dream. Nothing has ever happened, and nothing is ever going to happen. But the mind lives in hope and through hope; it goes on thinking that something is going to happen. Nothing has ever happened; nothing is ever going to happen. All is; hence, the master reminded the disciple about the breakfast.
All is. You have to be reminded constantly of it, because you go on rushing away from it. All seeking is dreaming, whether you are seeking money or God does not matter. Whether you think of the body or of the soul does not matter. Whether you want to become very rich, very famous, or enlightened, does not matter. All is a dream: becoming is a dream.
Look into that which you are, and don’t go on looking for that which you would like to be. Hope is the secret of the mind; the mind lives through hope, nourishes itself on hope. Once you stop hoping, once you relax and just let hopes disappear, suddenly you are awakened to the truth – the truth of your being, the truth of the whole existence.
Ripples appear on the unaccumulated water of the undug well… Such is your life. In your dreams again and again you will see a lake with ripples, and a boat, and you are traveling in the boat, and in the morning you find yourself just lying in your bed: there is no lake and no ripples and no boat and no traveler. There is nothing, but it all had appeared.
Let me remind you of the famous dream of Chuang Tzu:

He dreamed one night that he had become a butterfly. Next morning, sitting among his followers, he started laughing madly. And one disciple asked, “What is the matter? We have never seen you laugh so madly.”
He said, “There is such a trouble, and I don’t think that I will ever be able to solve it. I have fallen into a great riddle.”
They said, “Just tell us – maybe we can be of some help.”
And Chuang Tzu said, “Last night I dreamed that I had become a butterfly.”
So they said, “But that is not a great riddle. We all dream, and we know it is a dream.”
Chuang Tzu said, “That is not the point. Now the problem arises: it may be that now the butterfly has fallen asleep and is dreaming that she has become Chuang Tzu.
“Now who is right? Whether Chuang Tzu was right dreaming that he is a butterfly, or the butterfly is right dreaming that she is Chuang Tzu?
“And who am I? Am I just a dream in the mind of a butterfly? Because if Chuang Tzu can become a butterfly in the dream, then why cannot a butterfly become Chuang Tzu in a dream?”

Just think of butterflies sitting under the shade of a tree taking a good sleep in the afternoon, and dreaming that they are sannyasins, in orange, meditating, doing Vipassana, thinking of great things. And you will also be puzzled, perhaps Chuang Tzu was right.
Who is true? A butterfly dreaming of Chuang Tzu, or Chuang Tzu dreaming of a butterfly?
Buddha’s answer is that neither is true, only the one who has become aware of the problem is true. He is neither Chuang Tzu nor butterfly, he is the mirror in which these dreams are reflected, the screen on which these dramas are played; he is that witnessing.
The mind:
Since there is really
No such thing as mind,
With what enlightenment
Shall it be enlightened?
And now comes one of the most significant sutras, and only those who have followed the sutras up to now will be able to understand it. Now Ikkyu hits hard. He says:
The mind: since there is really no such thing as mind… Mind means nothing but all the processes of dreaming. You call a mind a materialistic mind because it dreams of money; and you call a mind a spiritualistic mind because it dreams of satoris, but mind is only dreaming, mind lives in dreams. It thinks of the faraway, of the distant. It lives in imagination and in memory; both are part of imagination. It never comes to reality; reality is too much for it. Facing, encountering reality it melts and disappears just like dewdrops disappear in the morning sun. Whenever the mind comes to herenow, to the breakfast, suddenly it evaporates.
Try it: eating your breakfast, just eat breakfast and don’t think of God and the Devil and money and the woman and the man, and love and a thousand other things. Don’t think, just eat; just be there, totally there, in it. Don’t go here and there, be utterly present. And where is the mind?
You will not find the mind. Mind has never been found. Those who have looked, they have always found there is no mind.
The mind: since there is really no such thing as mind, with what enlightenment shall it be enlightened? Then the question arises: If there is no mind, then why this talk about enlightenment? If there is no mind, then there is nothing to enlightenment, nobody to become enlightened. If there is no mind, no illusion, then how is it possible to get out of illusion? If there is no mind, then how can we become something which is beyond mind? If mind does not exist, then what is the point of saying that one has to attain to no-mind?
Mind in itself is not; one cannot talk about enlightenment any more. But in fact, this is enlightenment. Enlightenment is not getting out of the mind, enlightenment is seeing that the mind does not exist. Then you are suddenly enlightened; you are a buddha.

There is the well-known incident about the Confucian scholar seeking enlightenment from a Zen master. The student constantly complained that the master’s account was somehow incomplete, that the master was withholding some vital clue. The master assured him that he was withholding nothing from him. The student insisted that there was something the master was withholding from him. The master insisted that he was not withholding anything from him.
Later on, the two went for a walk along the mountain path. Suddenly the master said, “Do you smell the mountain laurels?”
The student said, “Yes!”
The master said, “See! I am not withholding anything from you.”

It is a strange story, but of tremendous importance. What is the master saying? The smell of the laurels… He says to the disciple, “Do you smell the mountain laurels?” Zen masters always bring you to the immediate: to the breakfast, to the mountain laurels. They don’t bother about philosophical things.
And the disciple smells and he says, “Yes!”
And the master says, “See! I am not withholding anything from you. Just as you can smell the mountain laurels, so you can smell buddhahood right now, this very moment. It is in the mountain laurels, it is on this mountain path, in the birds, in the sun. It is in me, it is in you. What keys and clues are you talking about? What secrets are you talking about?”
It is said that Zen has no secrets. Zen is all openness. Zen is not a fist, it is an open hand. It has no esoteric ideology. It is down-to-earth, very earthly, very simple. If you miss, that shows that you have a very complex mind. If you miss, that simply means that you have been looking for complex ideologies, and Zen drags you back to reality, to the breakfast, to the mountain laurels, to…this bird calling.
This is Buddha calling! In this utter silence is Buddha present, in this communion between me and you, in this moment when I am not and you are not. All is open, all is available.

Someone asked a Zen master, “What is the ultimate nature of reality?”
The master replied, “Ask the post over there.”
The man responded, “Master, I don’t understand.”
The master said, “Neither do I.”

It is not a question of understanding. Either you see it or you don’t see it. Either it is there, felt, seen, recognized, or you have missed. It is so simple. There is no complexity in it.
The master says, “Ask the post over there!”
It is very natural that the disciple said, “Master, I don t understand – how is the post going to answer me?” because he had asked one of the greatest questions: What is the ultimate nature of reality? And so he said, “Master, I don’t understand.”
And the master said, “Neither do I.”
There is nothing to understand and nobody to understand. All simply is! Understanding creates problems. You think you don’t understand so you have to understand – then understanding creates new problems, and then you solve them and your solutions again create more new problems…and it goes on and on. One answer creates ten questions, and it is an infinite regress.
Nothing has to be understood! Life has to be lived, not understood. You are buddhas, and so are the posts.
Another time it happened…

The same master inquired of a disciple, “You have come very late. Where have you been the whole day?”
The disciple said, “There was a great polo match going on and I became interested. I was watching.”
The master asked, “The players were tired?”
He answered, “Yes, by the end they were very tired.”
“And the horses were tired?”
The disciple said, “Yes, the horses were also tired.”
The master asked, “And the posts? The posts were tired?”
Now the disciple was puzzled – how can posts be tired? He said, “Sir, give me a little time to think.” He meditated over it the whole night, and only by the morning, as the sun was rising did he get the point.
He rushed to the master’s room and said, “Yes, master, they were tired.”
And the master said, “So you have seen the point.”

All is one, so if the players were tired, the horses were tired, the posts must have become tired. All is one. Nothing is separate. We are not islands. The stones and the stars, all are joined together.
And everything is joined in this moment, is participating in this moment. If you become just this moment, all is attained. There is no other enlightenment.
Zen is a way back home – and the simplest way and the most natural way.
Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
What exactly is boredom? If I don't do something, even something needless, a panic arises, a huge fear. What is it that causes this frenzy of movement? Why am I so uncomfortable with this feeling?
The frustration of boredom increases when I think that what I would do is equally a meaningless frenzy. I feel caught.
Boredom is one of the most important things in human life. Only man is capable of boredom; no other animal is capable of being bored. Boredom exists only when mind starts coming closer and closer to enlightenment. Boredom is just the polar opposite of enlightenment. Animals cannot become enlightened; hence, they cannot become bored.
Boredom simply shows that you are becoming aware of the futility of life, its constant repetitive wheel. You have done all those things before, nothing ever happens. You have been into all those trips before, nothing comes out of it. Boredom is the first indication that a great understanding is arising in you about the futility, meaninglessness, of life and its ways.
Now, you can respond to boredom in two ways. One is what is ordinarily done: escape from it, avoid it, don’t look eye to eye into it, don’t encounter it. Keep it at your back and run away; run into things which can occupy you, which can become obsessions; which take you so far away from the realities of life that you never see boredom arising again.
That’s why people have invented alcohol, drugs. They are ways to escape from boredom. But you cannot really escape; you can only avoid for a while. Again and again the boredom will be coming, and again and again it will be louder and louder. You can escape in sex, in overeating, in music; you can escape in a thousand and one ways, but again and again, the boredom will arise. It is not something that can be avoided; it is part of human growth. It has to be faced.
The other response is to face it, to meditate on it, to be with it, to be it. That’s what Buddha was doing under the bodhi tree, that’s what all Zen people have been doing down the ages.
What exactly is meditation? Facing boredom is meditation. What does a meditator do? Sitting silently, looking at his own navel, or watching his breathing, do you think he is being entertained by these things? He is utterly bored! That’s why the Zen master moves with a stick in his hand – because those bored people are bound to fall asleep. There is no other escape, so only one escape is left: at least they can fall asleep. They cannot escape. They have themselves, of their own accord, become part of the Zen training and the discipline – they cannot escape. But one escape is always available: you can fall asleep, then you forget all about it. That’s why in meditation one feels sleepy.
The whole effort in meditation is this: be bored but don’t escape from it – and keep alert, because if you fall asleep you have escaped. Keep alert! Watch it, witness it. If it is there, then it is there. It has to be looked into, to the very core of it.
If you go on looking into boredom without escaping, the explosion comes. One day, suddenly, looking deep into boredom, you penetrate your own nothingness. Boredom is just the cover, the container in which is contained your inner nothingness, shunyata. If you escape from boredom, you are escaping from your own nothingness. If you don’t escape from boredom – if you start living with it, if you start accepting it, welcoming it – that’s what meditation is all about: welcoming boredom, going into it on one’s own; not waiting for it to come, but searching for it.
Sitting for hours in a yoga posture, just watching your breathing, one gets utterly bored. And the whole training of meditation is such that it helps boredom. In a Zen monastery you have to get up at the same time in the morning every day, year in, year out. It doesn’t matter whether it is summer or winter. You have to get up early, three o’clock, you have to take a bath, you have to drink the same tea, and you have to sit… The same gestures followed again and again. And the whole day is also a very, very fixed routine: you will eat your breakfast at a certain time, then you will meditate again, then you will have a meal at a certain time, and the same food will be served…
Everything helps boredom: the same clothes, the same monastery, and the same master every day with his stick walking around. Every evening you have a session with the master, and the questions he asks are such boring questions to meditate on: What is the sound of one hand clapping? Just think of it – it will drive you mad! What is the sound of one hand clapping? There is no answer to it, you know it; everybody knows there is no answer to it. And the master goes on insisting, “Go on repeating, go on meditating on it.”
It is all well managed. The boredom has to be created immensely, tremendously. The boredom has to be allowed as totally as possible, has to be helped, supported from every side: the same evenings, the same work, the same chanting of the mantra, the same time to go to bed again – and this goes on, this wheel. Within a few days you are utterly bored and you cannot escape. There is no way to escape. You can’t go to the movie, you can’t look at the TV; you can’t have anything that can help you to avoid it. You are thrown into it again and again.
Great courage is needed to face it. It is almost like death; in fact, much harder than death, because when death comes you become unconscious. In the monastery you are stirring all sorts of boredoms. What happens? There is the secret of all meditations: if you go on watching, watching, watching, boredom becomes bigger and bigger, more and more intense, and then the peak…nothing can go on forever. There is a point from where the wheel turns. If you can go to the very extreme, to the very peak, then the change, transformation, enlightenment, satori, or whatever you want to call it, happens. Then one day, suddenly, the boredom becomes too much. You are suffocating; you are almost being killed by it. You are surrounded by an ocean of boredom. You are over-flooded by it and there seems to be no way to escape. The very intensity and totality of it, and the wheel turns. Suddenly boredom disappears and there is satori, samadhi. You have entered your nothingness.
Now there will no longer be any boredom, you have seen the very nothingness of life. You have disappeared. Who can be bored? With what? You exist no more. You are annihilated.
You ask: “What exactly is boredom?” It is a great spiritual phenomenon. That’s why buffaloes are not bored; they look perfectly happy, enjoying. Only man is bored, and even in man, only very talented, intelligent people are bored. The stupid people are not bored. They are perfectly happy doing their jobs, earning money, making a bigger bank balance, raising their children, reproducing, eating, sitting in the movie, going to the hotel, participating in this and that. They are enjoying, they are not bored. They are the lowest types; they really belong to the world of buffaloes. They are not yet human.
A man becomes human when he starts feeling bored. You can see it: the most intelligent child will be the most bored child, because nothing can keep his interest for long. Sooner or later he stumbles upon the fact and asks, “Now what? What next? This is finished. I have seen this toy, I have looked into it, I have opened it, I have analyzed it, now I am finished with it, what is next?” Soon he starts finishing things. By the time he becomes a young man, he is already bored.
Buddha was utterly bored. He left his kingdom when he was only twenty-nine, at the peak of his youth. He was utterly bored: with women, with wine, with wealth, with the kingdom, with everything. He had seen all, he had seen through and through. He was bored. He renounced the world not because the world is wrong, remember. Traditionally it is said he renounced the world because the world is bad – that is absolute nonsense. He renounced the world because he became so bored with it.
It is not bad, neither is it good. If you are intelligent, it is boring. If you are stupid, you can go on. Then it is a merry-go-round; then you move from one sensation to another. You are interested in trivia and you go on repeating and you are not conscious enough to see the repetition that yesterday you were doing this, and today you are also doing it, and you are imagining doing the same thing again tomorrow. You must be really unintelligent. How can intelligence avoid boredom? It is impossible. Intelligence means seeing things as they are.
Buddha left the world out of boredom; utterly bored, he ran away from the world. And what was he doing for six years sitting in those forests? He was getting more and more bored. What can you do, sitting in a forest watching your breath, looking at your navel, day in, day out, year in, year out? He created that boredom to its ultimate peak, and one night it disappeared. It disappeared of its own accord.
If you reach to the peak, the turn comes. It comes! And with that turn of the tide, light enters into your being; you disappear, only light remains. And with light comes delight. You are full of joy – you are not, but full of joy – for no reason at all. Joy simply bubbles up in your being.
The ordinary person is joyous for a reason: he has fallen in love with a new woman or a new man and he is joyous. His joy is momentary. Tomorrow he will be fed up with this woman and he will start looking for another. The ordinary man is joyous because he has got a new car; tomorrow he will have to look for another car. It goes on and on…and he never sees the point of it, that always, finally, you are bored. Whatever you do, finally you are bored, every act brings boredom.
The intelligent person sees it. The sooner you see, the more intelligence you show. Then what is left? Then only boredom is left, and one has to meditate over it. There is no way to escape from it. Then go into it. See where it leads. And if you can keep going into it, it leads into enlightenment.
Only man is capable of boredom, and only man is capable of enlightenment.

The second question:
Osho,
It seems that though the society is at present rejecting you, by and by it will accept you.
Please comment.
Siddhartha, why are you worried about the society, its rejecting me or accepting me? Forget about the society! It has always accepted people like me only when they are gone; it always accepts buddhas when they are dead. It accepts only when buddhas cannot do anything; it accepts only when buddhas become just theories. The flame is gone; it is only a memory now. Then they accept, and not only do they accept, they worship. That is what they have always done and what they will always do in the future too.
Nothing has changed fundamentally. The unenlightened remain unenlightened. Why do they reject? They reject out of fear. Just listen to me: just now I was saying something about boredom. Now the ordinary person can’t accept it, that one has to go deep into boredom. He will be afraid. He will say, “What nonsense is this man talking about?” He will become afraid even to listen to it, because who knows? The idea may get into his mind that life is boring. Then all his joys that he was going along so happy with and all those small toys that so delighted him will all be gone. Those toys will be broken! He does not want to do that; he is too obsessed with his toys. He does not want to listen to such things. When I am gone, then he can worship me, because I will not be shouting at him.
Worship is cheap. To be with a living master is hard, arduous; it needs guts. Worship is a polite gesture. Worship says, “You may be right, but we are not ready for it. You must be right; we are not even ready to argue about it, because who knows? If we argue about it, you may prove right. So we don’t argue; we will worship you. You must be right. How can you be wrong? But we don’t want to follow you, yet. We will make a beautiful image of you in the temple. We will bring flowers to your feet, we will repeat your name, and we will go on doing the same stupid things we have been doing before. You will be just decor, a decoration. We will put a beautiful picture of you in the home; it makes the drawing room look so pretty. But that’s all. And once in a while we will even garland your picture, but that’s all.”
This is a polite way of avoiding, a very polite way of saying, “No, we can’t come with you, at least, not yet. Ultimately you may be right, but we are not worried about the ultimate. For the moment, forgive us, and let us live our joys. Life is so enchanting, who cares about enlightenment?”
And any person who comes and throws a stone in your glass house looks like an enemy. Any person who comes and disturbs your sleep and destroys your dreams looks like an enemy. So when a buddha is alive he has to be rejected. If he is not rejected, then he is not a buddha. When he is dead, he has to be worshipped. If he is not worshipped when he is dead, then he is not a buddha.
That’s how we have always been behaving with Buddhas, Krishnas, Christs – that has been our usual procedure. We have found a very, very cunning, clever way. We don’t want to say no, because then we have to enter into the argument with these people – and these people are argumentative. To face them is dangerous because they may convince you, their very being is convincing. One does not want to come close to them. When they are dead, then it is perfectly okay. When Christ is alive, crucify him – and these same people who crucified him now go to the church. The same people! If he comes again, these same people will crucify him. People are people; they are not Jews and not Christians and not Hindus and not Mohammedans. They are just the same people.
There are only two possible categories: the enlightened and the unenlightened. The unenlightened are all the same, and the enlightened are all the same. Their tastes are not different.
It was not that Jews crucified Jesus – it was the mediocre mind, the mind that is afraid, afraid to face reality; the mind that is afraid to go into utter boredom. And utter boredom is a passage: it leads to the temple of celebration.
But don’t be worried about people. Why should you be worried? Is there some doubt in your mind? Are you searching, seeking support from the people? It must be creating a certain restlessness in you: “How can Osho be right if so many people are against him?” You feel a little shaky, afraid, a little trembling arises in you. When you are here with my orange people, it feels good: “Osho must be right because there are so many orange people.”
When you go to M.G. Road, naturally you start thinking. “What am I doing here? These are not orange people, and not only are they not orange, they are dead against all orange people.”
Fear arises in you, doubt arises in you: “Maybe I have fallen in the trap of a magician, of a hypnotist? An intelligent person like me, what am I doing here? Why did I get caught into these meditations? Nobody else is meditating. And I am coming from so far away, and the people who live in Pune don’t care a bit.” Something seems to be unsettled; you become shaky, you tremble. Now, deep in your mind you would like to be with me, but what to do with this crowd that is against me? Now you are creating consolations for yourself.
You ask: “It seems that though the society is at present rejecting you, by and by it will accept you.” You are not really concerned with the society. You want to hear from me that “Yes, don’t be worried, these people are going to follow me,” so you can feel good. “These people will accept me, wait. All these people are going to become orange, just wait, just time is needed.” You want an assurance from me so the presence of those people who are against me does not disturb you.
Look into these things: become very alert to what happens in your mind when you ask a question, why you ask a question. The question may not show anything of the reality of you, but you cannot hide it from me. I don’t answer your questions as much as I answer the reason why the question has arisen in you. So sometimes it feels that I am not directly answering your question; sometimes you may even be surprised that I am going a little roundabout, not direct. Sometimes you may even think that I am avoiding the question that has been asked – it is not so. My whole effort here is not to answer the question on the surface, but in the depth, from where it has arisen, why it has arisen.
There are people who ask questions, and then they make a note that “This is not really my question, I am asking it for others.” But why can’t the others ask it? Why should you be worried about others? Now, this person wants to ask but does not want to show that the question is his.

One day a man came to me and he said, “One of my friends has suddenly become impotent. I have come for him. Is there some help?”
I told the man, “Why didn’t you tell your friend that he could have come himself and told me that one of his friends has become impotent, because I see perfectly well that you are your friend.”
He became very worried; he started perspiring. I said, “Don’t perspire! But why can’t you face it? If you have become impotent, don’t be so impotent that you cannot even ask the question. At least save that much potency, face the problem.”

There are a few people who go on thinking… And it is not just that they are deceiving, they really think that they are asking to help others. Yoga Chinmaya often asks questions saying that “This is to help others.” Deep down the question is his, but he cannot accept that “It is my question.” That hurts: “I am asking such a question? I should not be asking such a question. I have lived with Osho so long, I should not be asking such a question.” But the question is there and it has to be asked, so one finds a clever way to ask it.
Now, on the surface it seems Siddhartha is worried about the society. Deep down, he is worried about himself. He wants an absolute promise that “You are on the right track, and the others are wrong. Just wait! They will not only worship me, they are going to worship you, too. You are going to be my apostles; you are my Luke and Thomas and Mark. Wait, just wait! You have done such a great work by becoming a disciple to a madman. Just wait – these foolish people will not only worship your master, they are going to worship you too. Then they will recognize; then they will see what a great opportunity they have missed.”
Just go deep into your own fear and let the fear be expressed clearly in your question. At least find the cause of your questions. If you can find the cause of your questions, out of one hundred, ninety-nine questions will simply disappear because in the very cause you will find the answer. To go deeply into a question, to its very roots, is to find its answer. And the one question that will not find an answer from yourself…asking it will be of great import – that will become a bridge between me and you.
Always go into the unconscious roots of your question.

There is another question on similar lines:
Osho,
In your last lecture you called Yudhishthira, the Dharmaraj, an irreligious person simply because he lost his wife in gambling. But what about one of your own followers who is mad after wine and women? Not only this but he smokes charas and ganja freely. In what sense is he following a religion superior to that of Yudhishthira? Please explain.
The question is from Sohan Bharti. He is a new sannyasin; he took sannyas just a few days ago. He must be having a very, very strong Indian mind, deeply conditioned.
Now, staking a woman in gambling – and he says, “Simply because he lost his wife in gambling!” A wife in India is just a thing, furniture, so what is wrong in it? In fact, Yudhishthira and his brothers were behaving with the wife with that attitude that “she is property.” There were five brothers and the five had divided the wife; the wife had five husbands. You can’t divide a person like a property. This is such a horrible thing to think about: a woman has been divided by five men as if she is a piece of land!
And then, finally, he staked her as a bet in gambling and lost her. Can you think of any woman staking her husband in gambling? Would you say, “So what, it’s just a husband – why not?” But there is no such story in India. You would never have forgiven that; you could not have conceived of it.
The husband in India is called swami – master. And the wife is called dasi – servant, a slave. This is ugly. But Sohan Bharti’s Indian mind must have been hurt when I said it, because this man, Yudhishthira, is thought to be a great religious man, one of the great religious leaders of the Hindus. To me he is not even human! What to say about his being religious? He is not even human, he is inhuman.
And he asks: “But what about one of your own followers who is mad after wine and women?” Then he is perfectly human; nothing inhuman about it. What is wrong in being mad after a woman? It is natural. Yes, one can go beyond it, but one goes beyond only when one has gone through. And everybody is in search of some kind of wine, some kind of intoxicant, to drown one’s miseries, one’s anxieties.
Morarji Desai is trying to create prohibition in India. Now, he himself is intoxicated with power. That is a far more dangerous intoxication than ordinary wine; when you drink alcohol you harm only yourself, nobody else, but when you drink the alcohol of power, you harm millions.
If a person is smoking charas and ganja freely, he is simply harming himself. Yes, he is doing harm, but he is simply harming himself. That is his birthright, to harm himself. He is committing a slow suicide, but that is his birthright. He is not harming anybody; he is not trying to force his ganja on you or his charas on you.
Now, Morarji Desai is trying to force his idea on the whole country! That is bossy, that is irreligious. Who are you to direct everybody’s life? Nobody should be so arrogant. You can say what you feel, but it should not be imposed as a law. I also know that alcohol is not good, but you should go and teach people, tell people that alcohol is not good. Nobody should try to impose it by violence. To make it a law is violence: it means now the police will be behind it, bullets will be behind it.
What does it mean when you make a law? It means now you are not capable of converting people, persuading people; now you are trying to do things by force, by power, by violence. This is undemocratic, this is absolutely undemocratic.
And nobody sees the power trip, the alcoholic, intoxicating state of power. Whenever somebody gets into power, he is drunk!
I am not saying that people should drink alcohol or use charas and ganja, but I am saying that it is everybody’s birthright. One has to be allowed at least one thing: to do harm to oneself if one wants to, if one decides that way. You make it dear that this is harmful, that’s all. Nothing else can be done; you cannot be the deciding factor.
So, if you ask me, “What higher religion is your follower following?” I will still say that he is better than Yudhishthira because at least he is not staking his wife in gambling. He may be staking himself, he may be foolish, but I cannot say that he is harming anybody else. Yudhishthira had no respect for the woman. And if you don’t have any respect, how can you have any love? Love and respect go together.
Don’t pretend that you love your woman if you don’t respect her. If you respect, only then do you love. If you don’t respect, you only exploit her; your relationship is that of lust, not of love. Yudhishthira had to be exploiting this poor woman. Just think of the idea, of the horrible idea, using her like a thing. She was being used like a thing, and now she was being staked like a thing. And that’s what happened: Yudhishthira lost her. The others who had won immediately tried to undress her then and there. And then Yudhishthira and the four brothers were all sitting silently there, watching: “Now you cannot do anything, now she is somebody else’s property. Whatsoever they want to do, they can do.” What kind of respect? What kind of love? It is ugly, irreligious, and inhuman.
Remember, I am not saying that my follower – I don’t know who this follower is, may be just a figment of your imagination – is doing very well if he is doing these things, but still if you compare him with Yudhishthira he is far better, he is just harming himself.
The other has to be respected as an end, is never to be used as a means. The woman is equal to man. But for the Indian mind it is very difficult to accept the equality of the woman. So many so-called saints of India have been condemning the woman, down the ages, in such words that it seems unbelievable that these people had any sense of respect, of love, of sympathy, of compassion.
The Indian saints have been saying that the woman is the door to hell. The woman is not the door to hell; it depends on you. She can be a door to hell if you decide to go to hell, and she can be a door to heaven if you decide to go to heaven. Don’t forget that the same is also true about you. If women are the door to hell, only men must go there – then where do women go? And how can they go? They will not find any door. Men must be functioning as a door for them, too.
Nobody is a door to heaven or hell. You create your heaven and hell. But these so-called saints were so afraid of woman and their fear shows in their condemnation.

I have heard a story that a rabbi used to go around the famous condemned city, Sodom, shouting to people from every corner of every street, “Stop your sins! Don’t do this! Don’t do that! Avoid sex, avoid this, avoid that…” for years.
One day, one of the disciples of the rabbi asked, “You never become tired? Nobody listens to you, nobody has ever listened or paid any attention to you, but you continually go on shouting around the town. People are tired of you, but are you not tired? From where do you get this energy? Do you still think, do you hope, that you will be able to convert these sinners?”
He said, “What are you talking about? I am not worried about them. If I go on shouting against them, at least I can save myself. If I don’t shout, there is every possibility they will convert me. I may start doing the same things that they are doing, that is my fear. So I go on shouting! The more I shout, the more I become convinced. I am not worried about whether they are convinced or not. The more I shout, the more I convince myself that I am on the right track. And then I can easily repress those desires which are also in me. And if I don’t say anything against them, there is every possibility I may become just like these people.”

Your so-called saints who have been talking against women are afraid. They know if they don’t talk, if they don’t go on condemning, they will fall into some kind of relationship with women. They are afraid of their desires, they are afraid of their own sexuality. By condemning women they are simply creating an atmosphere around themselves, they are simply trying to repress their sexuality and nothing else. But the Indian mind has become accustomed to this, that’s why you can ask such a question: “In your last lecture you called Yudhishthira, the Dharmaraj, an irreligious person simply because he lost his wife gambling.”
Now, Sohan Bharti must not be behaving humanly with his own wife. How can he behave respectfully with his own wife if he has this idea? Look deep into your question. If you cannot respect women, you cannot respect anybody else. It is from women you come; the woman mothered you for nine months, then she took every care, she loved you for years. And then again you can’t live without a woman; she is your solace, your warmth. Life is very cold; the woman becomes your warmth. Life is very uninspiring; the woman becomes your inspiration. Life is very, very arithmetical; the woman becomes your poetry. She gives grace to your life. She takes care of you. She loves you, she goes on loving you, tremendously, totally. And you say “…simply because he lost his wife gambling?”
He must have been a man without heart. Instead of a heart, there must have been a hard rock.

The fourth question:
Osho,
“I am life, love, joy. Here I give you life, love, joy.” Osho, when I heard you say this two mornings ago, my body trembled with awe and also a deathlike fear of getting lost in you or of missing out completely.
Why am I finding it so hard to receive this life, love, joy, from you?
Chintana, everybody finds it hard, because to receive joy, to receive light, love, goes against your ego. The ego wants to be the donor, not the receiver; the ego always wants to give, not to receive. It is easier to give love; it is very difficult to receive it. To be at the receiving end ego feels very hurt.
It is always difficult, and it is going to be still more difficult if you are with a Buddha or a Christ or a Krishna, because you have nothing to give to them. You have to take from them and have nothing to give them in return. Your ego feels annihilated.
If you can give me something in return, it will not feel so bad, but what can you give? And whatsoever you can give will be just a token and nothing else, because whatsoever you have is nothing.
Just the other night a sannyasin gave me a seashell, must have found it on some beach. I loved the gesture. It is nothing, but shows great love for me. Not only love, something else too. You receive so much from me, you would like to give something in return so it remains balanced. And all that you can give, all, I say, can’t be more than seashells.
So, fear arises in everybody. You have to drop that fear; when you are receiving from me, you are not really receiving anything from me, because I am not there. I am just a passage. If you are receiving anything from me, you are receiving from existence, not from me. Forget all about me! You need not even say a thank you.
Whenever a sannyasin comes to me and says, “Thank you, Osho, for all that you have done for me” I feel a little uneasy, because what is he saying? There is nobody to receive this thankfulness.
Remember Jesus: he was passing through a crowd and a poor woman, an ill woman, rushed behind him and touched his garments. And she was healed – immediately, instantly, so deep was her trust. She had come from a great distance in much agony and pain and suffering. But such was her trust that she believed if she could even touch the garments of Jesus all would be cured – and all was cured.
Jesus looked back and the woman said, “How should I thank you, Lord? You have healed me! I had come ill and I am now healthy and whole.”
Jesus said, “Your faith has healed you.” And he said not to thank him, but to thank God.
Never be worried. Don’t feel that you are becoming grateful toward me. I am just a vehicle, a passage, a window. And if the sun has penetrated through the window to you, feel thankful to the sun, forget about the frame of the window. I am just the frame and nothing else. You can receive from me as much as you want, as much as you can dare, as much as you need.
Remember always, you are receiving from existence. From wherever we receive, we always receive from existence. It is the only giver; there is no other.
You ask me: “‘I am life, love, joy. Here I give you life, love, joy.’ Osho, when I heard you say this two mornings ago, my body trembled with awe and also a deathlike fear of getting lost in you or of missing out completely. Why am I finding it so hard to receive this life, love, joy, from you?”
Feel fortunate that you are standing on that verge from where, if you receive, you will be transformed. If you don’t receive, you will suffer all your life. The memory will haunt you. If you have come to me, and you don’t dissolve, the memory will haunt you. You will never be at ease with life again. You have tasted something of the beyond; now life will feel almost tasteless. Going back, hiding, back into your old caves of the mind, is dangerous. And the mind tends to do that. Beware of it. Take the jump! When I give you the call, take the jump.
Remember always that it is not from me as a person that you are taking anything, because the person no longer exists. It is only a presence. It looks like a person to you, because you cannot yet see the presence. Once you accept this love, this joy, this life, that is happening here, you will forget about me as a person, you will start feeling me as a presence. You will forget my boundaries – they are arbitrary – and you will start seeing the unbounded, which is true, which is truth.
The person is just a wave in the ocean; presence is the ocean itself. Let me be just a door, an opening. And that’s exactly what I am, and that’s exactly what a master is supposed to be.
Put your ego aside, and open up. Receive it! A disciple has to be feminine to receive godliness; a disciple has to be just a womb, become a womb. That’s why it happens almost always that women are the best disciples in the world.
Buddha had fifty thousand disciples, and forty thousand were women. This was also true with Mahavira. Why? Why does a woman easily become a disciple, very easily, naturally? She knows how to receive.
For a man it is a little more difficult. For a man it takes a little longer because he has no physical womb; he does not know how to receive. He also has a spiritual womb, but that is unconscious. The woman has a spiritual womb and a physical womb too, so she is conscious of being a womb. She receives, and gives birth to a child. She knows that she can receive with great joy, in exhilaration, in ecstasy. But man ordinarily is a donor, biologically a donor. His ego is hard; he never thinks in terms of receiving, in terms of surrendering and trusting.
That’s why it is difficult for man to surrender; it takes him a little longer. And whenever a man surrenders to a master, you will see in the man disciple some feminine grace arising. Many women have reported to me again and again, “What is happening to your men disciples? They are turning feminine.” That is true. Whenever somebody becomes a disciple, naturally a feminine grace arises. He becomes less aggressive; his aggression slows down. His ego is no longer so prominent. And, slowly, slowly, spiritually he comes to recognize his womb.
Only when you have recognized your womb can you connect with a master – that’s what sannyas is all about. When I say to some new person, “You are ready for sannyas,” and he hesitates, and he says, “But I have not thought about it.”
Just the other night it was happening. You must remember Mark – I had told him that I never miss a Mark. Last night he came to see me, and he tried, but I didn’t miss him. He was so perfectly womblike, but he was not aware of his own womb. It is hidden deep in the recesses of the unconscious. And the moment he surrendered, a great grace arose in him. His face changed, became luminous.
The problem with you, Chintana, is you are a woman but you have fallen into wrong company. She has been a Catholic nun, and that is the difficulty. She has forgotten about her biological womb also. A nun has to forget; a nun has to forget her biological receptivity. A nun has to become a non-woman.
So Chintana has almost turned into a man as all nuns do. She has lived in wrong company. Those people have enforced a certain structure upon her being. She is a soft woman deep inside, but on the outer side the character of a nun, the armor of a nun, has made her hard. It is fortunate that she has come here. Slowly, slowly that hardness is disappearing; her woman is arising, her womb is taking possession of her again. The nun is going away. But when you have practiced a certain thing for years, it takes time, it lingers.
That Catholic nun, the shadow of that Catholic nun, is around Chintana yet. That is what is making her so hesitant about taking the ultimate jump. In fact, she must have had a great religious desire, otherwise why should she have become a nun? She must have been a seeker for many lives, otherwise nobody becomes a monk or a nun. It is out of people’s search. And the search was such that she was not contented there; naturally, she moved to the opposite polarity.
My sannyasins are a totally opposite polarity from being a Catholic nun or monk. Now, here, she can relax. But the conditioning is there and it will go, slowly, slowly. Don’t cooperate with that conditioning. It is on the way, it is dying. Let it die.
Once the nun has disappeared from Chintana’s consciousness, she will bloom into a beautiful flower. And the day is not far off.

The fifth question:
Osho,
Yesterday you said a major difference between Buddhism and Christianity, Hinduism, etcetera, was that in the former there were no a priori concepts, and in the latter a predetermined image of God conditioned one's experiencing of that God, which in turn reinforces the initial image: a vicious circle. However, in the Buddhist way, not holding a priori images, holding non-images, obviously still conditions one to experience God as no-thing, void, which then in turn reinforces the initial non-image – still a vicious circle. Please comment.
Don’t play with words; see a simple fact. Buddhism is not giving you an image of nothingness, there cannot be any image of nothingness. Can you imagine nothingness? Try. How will you imagine nothingness? What image? Nothingness simply means: no thing, no image. You cannot make an image of no image. Buddhism is not saying create an image of nothingness. In the first place, it cannot be created. If you create an image of nothingness, then certainly you are conditioned again; then God will look like nothingness. But Buddhism is not saying to create an image of nothingness. Buddhism is simply saying avoid all images. And if you can create the image of nothingness, that is included in “all images.” Avoid all images; just keep your inner space clean and open, mirrorlike, and then see whatsoever is seen.
Buddhism is simply saying: Don’t decide before knowing. That is the meaning of don’t have an a priori image: don’t decide before knowing. Let knowing happen, and let the decision come through knowing. Don’t believe beforehand, because your belief will contaminate your knowing, and you will never be able to know whether what you have known is really there, or is there because of your belief. Your belief can create it.
Man’s mind has great potential to create imagination. That’s why hypnosis works. Have you watched a hypnotist working? He can hypnotize a person, and he can just put a small pebble on the hand of the person and can say, “This is burning coal, red hot burning coal.” And the man who is in deep hypnosis simply believes it, because deep hypnosis means your faculties to doubt have been put to sleep. He believes, and the belief creates reality. His hand will burn – from the cold pebble! He will shriek, he will scream in pain; he will throw away the pebble. Not only that – a blister will arise on his palm.
Now what has happened? When this man is dehypnotized, the blister will be enough proof that a burning coal had been in his hand. And you know that there was no burning coal, nothing like that, just an ordinary cold pebble. But the belief has created the reality.
Vice versa also happens: you can put a burning coal in the hand of a deeply hypnotized person, in a deep trance, and you can say, “This is a cold pebble,” and there will be no blister, the man will not scream and there will be no mark left. That’s how people fire walk.
Now, what Buddhism is saying is: belief can create a certain kind of reality. Buddhism is not saying believe in nothingness, because that will create, certainly. But how can one believe in nothingness? You can’t create the image of nothingness.
Nothingness simply means no image. So don’t play with words. Logically, it looks relevant, your question looks relevant, that Buddhism creates the belief, the image of nothingness; then God appears as nothingness, and so it is the same vicious circle. It is not. Buddhism simply takes all the beliefs away. It does not create any belief; it leaves you in a state of no-belief.
Remember: it does not create disbelief either. It simply leaves you in a state of no-belief. No-belief is not disbelief. Buddhism is not atheist; Buddhism is not theist. Buddhism does not say anything about God. Buddhism says be silent, utterly silent, utterly imageless, empty, your eyes completely clean of all dust.
Now you can say, “This cleanness will be the dust in the eyes” – then you are playing with words. If I say, “Let your eyes be clean, then you will be able to see better,” you can say, “But cleanness will be there. How can I see better? Cleanness will be a disturbance just like any dust!”
Logically, linguistically, you are right. Existentially, you are not right. Cleanliness does not mean any thing; cleanliness simply means there is no dust, all is clean. When I say, “Nothing is written on this paper,” will you say, “Then nothing is written on this paper, so something is written?” You say nothing is written on this paper – nothing at least is written on the paper. Now you are creating an unnecessary puzzle for yourself.
When I say nothing is written on the paper, I am simply saying nothing is written on the paper, the paper is empty. But you can start a philosophical argument: “At least nothing is written on the paper, so the paper is not empty because nothing is there.” Nothing is nothing, sir.
There is a beautiful story…

Alice reached the king. When she reached the king, the king asked, “I am waiting for a messenger. Did you meet somebody on the way coming toward me?”
Alice said, “Nobody, sir.”
The king thought that she had met somebody who is known as “Nobody.” Alice simply said, “Nobody, sir.” She is saying, “I have not met anybody,” but the king must have been a great linguist, a philosopher. He thought, “So she has met Nobody on the way.”
After a few minutes he asked, “But it seems Nobody walks slower than you, otherwise he must have arrived by now.”
Alice thought, “He is saying, ‘Nobody walks slower than you,’” that he was condemning her. So she said, “No, sir, nobody walks faster than me!”
And the king said, “But then it puzzles me: if Nobody walks faster than you, then why has he not arrived yet?”
Out of desperation Alice said, “Sir, ‘Nobody’ is nobody!”
And the king said, “Of course, Nobody has to be Nobody – but why has he not arrived yet?”
And so it goes on…

Buddhism is not saying nobody is there inside, not in the sense the king took it. Buddhism is saying there is simply nobody, it is empty.
And beliefs gather around. And then you start looking through the beliefs. Then those beliefs change the color of reality. Then you start seeing things as they are not. Drop all belief systems. And remember: Buddhism is not a belief system; you are not to replace it. It is not saying to drop Christianity and replace it with Buddhism. Then you would not be doing anything except choosing one disease for another. Then you would move from one prison into another, from one bondage into another.
That’s why Ikkyu says Buddhism is not an “ism.” It is not a religion in the ordinary sense of the term. It is not a church: it is an insight. It is not an organization: it is an understanding. It is not a philosophy: it is a realization.
Once you understand the point, this problem will not arise. But if you have a philosophical bent of mind, you can go on creating such unnecessary questions and solving them, and you can get very messed up.
It happened:

Dashing young Edward was walking through the park one afternoon when he heard a female voice cry out, “Get down, you beast! If you put your filthy paws on me once more I’ll never come on the grass again.”
He rushed behind the hedge from whence the voice had come, hoping to rescue a fair maiden from a foul creep, but instead discovered a little old lady talking to her pet dog.

These are your ideas, your interpretations. Drop all ideas, drop all interpretations. Ikkyu is not saying to accept Buddha’s interpretation instead. Listen to what he says: “Sakyamuni, this mischievous guy – how many people has he misled?” Not that Buddha has misled anybody, but people have been misled, that is true, people like you. They start creating images of nothing, they start believing in nobodies, they start believing in nothingness, they create a belief around nothingness, and then nothingness is lost. Then your nothingness is no longer empty, it is full of nothingness. Then you miss the point.

When Ma Tzu attained to emptiness he went to his master, bowed down and said, “Sir, now I have attained emptiness.” He had been waiting for this moment for years and years, to go one day and tell the master. Now the moment had come, he had attained. And the master slapped him.
He said, “What nonsense are you talking? Go out and empty your mind of this emptiness. Empty your mind of emptiness! Go out! How can you have emptiness inside you? Because then emptiness becomes something.”
And Ma Tzu understood, and that very moment the illumination happened. He bowed down, and he said, “Yes, I had started clinging to emptiness. I was cherishing it as something great. Again the ego was coming from the back door. Now it was claiming, ‘I have attained emptiness.’”

One has to be empty of emptiness, too. One has to be simply without any beliefs; then the reality is as it is, then you know its suchness.

The last question:
Osho,
I very strongly believe in God. Why do you condemn belief?
I am not condemning belief: I am simply explaining it to you, that belief is the barrier to God. Belief is not a bridge, but a barrier. It is your belief that is hindering you from God. If belief is dropped, immediately you are in God, you are God.
And why is there any need to believe? You don’t believe in the sun, do you? You don’t believe in the earth, do you? You know the earth exists, so there is no point in believing. You only believe in things which you don’t know. Belief is out of ignorance. Buddha does not believe in God because he knows God! You don’t know God, that’s why you believe in God. And if you go on believing, beware – you will never come to know.
Belief simply means you are hiding your ignorance. Rather than destroying it, you are hiding it, decorating it, making it a little comfortable, convenient, acceptable. You are worried that you don’t know God, so you cling to a belief, and you make yourself feel that you know. Repeating your belief constantly, again and again, you start creating a kind of autohypnosis that “I know, I believe!”
Just look at your question: “I very strongly believe in God.” Just belief won’t do? It has to be strong – and then very strong! What does it show? You can’t hide. The truth shows itself: you are very afraid of your ignorance. Deep down you know that “I don’t know.” You have to push that ignorance, you have to fight with it, so you have to believe strongly.
Just think: somebody comes to you and says, “I love you very strongly!” What in the world does he mean? Love is not enough? Has it to be very strong? If love is there, it is enough. If love is there, there is no need even to say it. Silence is its expression.
But when somebody says, “I love you very strongly, very, very strongly,” then there is one thing certain, that he is afraid that his love is not there. He is managing it somehow, creating it somehow. He is making great effort to create it; that’s why he calls it strong, because he knows his unloving nature is difficult to repress. He has to fight with his unloving nature.
Your very words, “Very strongly I believe in God,” shows that you don’t know God at all; otherwise, there will be no need for strength. There will be no need for belief. God simply is. How can you believe or disbelieve? It is not left to you. But we go on hiding.
Just listen to this story:

Farmer Jim was very worried about the poor performance of his prize bull for which he had paid an astronomical sum. He talked to all his friends every time he went to the market, and one day learned from a cousin that there was an amazing vet way down in the West Country.
He was so depressed about the bull that he decided this last resort was the answer, so he set off to Cornwall to find the vet. At last he found the chap who urged him to give his bull a great big pill once a day.
A few months later he met his cousin who asked him how he had got on. “Oh, it was marvelous,” he said. “He gave me these pills for the bull and I had no sooner started him off on them than he hit the jackpot. In fact,” he said, “I’m making a fortune out of the local farmers – they can’t get their cows round here fast enough!”
“What are these pills then?” asked his cousin.
“Oh!” said Farmer Jim, “huge, great green jobs like bombs – with a peppermint taste!”

Do you see the point? Do you get it? You cannot hide it: that peppermint taste will say everything. Very strong belief? That is the peppermint taste.
You don’t know anything about God. That’s why you are worried about why I am condemning belief. Your belief must be feeling shaken; the fear is that if the belief is gone, you will again be ignorant. But that is my work here. Excuse me, but that is my work here – to make you absolutely as you are. If you are ignorant, you are ignorant. It is better to be that which you are, because only from that authentic reality can you be bridged to ultimate reality. With your false beliefs… All beliefs are false. Belief as such is false; knowing is true, believing is false.
I am here to make you ignorant again. If you cooperate with me, this will happen: you will become ignorant, innocent. Your knowledgeability will disappear – and in that very disappearance you will find for the first time the mystery of life dancing around you, and the benediction of that mystery. That mystery is godliness.
Godliness can never be a concept. Godliness cannot be reduced to an idea. Godliness cannot be reduced to a belief. Become ignorant. I have never heard of pundits and scholars reaching godliness. Sinners have been known to reach, but not scholars. The original sin is the sin of knowledge.
Remember the biblical story again and again. It is one of the most precious parables of human history. Adam has been turned out of the Garden of Eden because he has eaten of the Tree of Knowledge. His sin is his knowledge.
You will have to vomit your knowledge. Vomit the apple! Become innocent and ignorant again. You will be attaining to a second childhood – and fortunate are those who can attain to second childhood, because through it, and only through it, is one bridged to existence. But then there is no belief. One knows.
And remember, knowing and knowledge are different. Knowledge consists of beliefs, knowing consists of experience.
Enough for today.