---
title: Tao The Golden Gate Vol 2 01
series: Tao The Golden Gate Vol 2 01-10
talk_number: 1
url: https://oshoworld.com/tao-the-golden-gate-vol-2-01
language: English
duration: 01:46:14
author: TAO
scraped_at: 2026-01-03T09:21:59.653464+00:00
---
The first question:
Osho,
Why is it that only humans repress, manipulate, kill, try to conquer the natural flow in nature, the Tao? Why are we so stupid?
Man is not a being, man is a becoming. This is one of the most fundamental things to be understood. The trees, the animals, they are all beings. Man is different: he is a becoming, he is a process. And with the process the problem arises: you can fall below the animals, you can rise above the gods. A dog cannot fall below doghood, nor can he become a buddha; both are impossible. He is neither stupid nor a genius; he has no growth. The way he is when born is the way he will live and die. Between his birth and death there is not going to be any evolution.
Man is different. That is man’s privilege, his prerogative, but there also lies great danger. Man is not born fully complete; he is not born entire – birth is only the beginning of a process. Now, the process can take any form: it can become deformed, it can take a wrong route, it can go astray. Man begins his life as freedom but freedom has its price; you can’t have it for free. No other animal has any freedom except man.
Hence for centuries the mystics have said that man is a bridge between two eternities: the eternity of the unconscious and the eternity of the conscious. Man is always moving between these two polarities. He is like a tightrope walker. Each moment is full of danger, but full of possibilities too. No possibility comes alone; it has its own danger. You can miss – you can fall from the rope into the abyss.
Man has been called a ladder by the mystics. Now, the ladder can do two things: you can use it to go upward and the same ladder can be used to go downward. You use the same ladder for both purposes, just your direction changes. When you are moving upward your direction is one way; when you are moving downward your direction is just the opposite. But with the same ladder the result will be totally different. Man is a ladder between heaven and hell.
That’s why it is only human beings who repress, who manipulate, who kill, who try to conquer the natural flow in nature, who are stupid – because they can be buddhas. Because man has intelligence, that’s why he can be stupid. Stupidity simply means you have not used your intelligence; it does not mean absence of intelligence. If there is no presence of intelligence you cannot call man stupid. You cannot call a rock stupid; a rock is a rock – no question of stupidity.
But you can call man stupid because with man there is hope, a ray of great light. With man, a door opens toward the beyond. He can transcend himself and he is not transcending – that’s his stupidity. He can grow and he is not growing, he is clinging to all kinds of immaturity – that is his stupidity. He goes on and on living in the past, which is no more – that is his stupidity. Or he starts projecting in the future, which is not yet – that is his stupidity.
He should live in the present with deep passion, with great love, with intensity, with awareness and that will become his intelligence. It is the same energy: upside down it is stupidity; put it right, rearrange it and it becomes intelligence.
Intelligence and stupidity are not separate energies. The same energy functioning in harmony is intelligence, functioning in contradictions is stupidity. Man can be stupid – don’t think that it is unfortunate. It looks on the surface that it is unfortunate, but hidden behind it is great glory, great splendor which can be discovered.
But the society, the so-called religions, the state, the crowd, they all want you to be stupid. Nobody wants you to be intelligent. They all condition you to remain stupid your whole life, for the simple reason that stupid people are obedient. Intelligent people start thinking on their own; they start becoming individuals. They start having their own life, their own lifestyle, their own way of seeing, of being, of growing. They are no longer part of the crowd – they cannot be. They have to leave the crowd behind, only then can they grow. And the crowd feels offended. The crowd does not want anybody to be more than the average person – it is against the average person’s ego. The crowd, the collectivity, has a great involvement: the involvement is that anybody becoming more intelligent, more individual, more aware, will not be part of the mob psychology any longer.
You cannot force Buddha to follow the stupid people. And the stupid people are many, the majority, ninety-nine point nine percent. They have a great power with them – the power of violence – and they show it whenever it is needed. They showed it to Jesus, they showed it to Socrates, they showed it to Mansoor… They would like to show it to me.
The man who threw a knife to kill me just few days ago was simply a representative of the ninety-nine point nine percent people. He was not a single individual. The whole crowd psychology is behind him, he has the support of the crowd. The crowd also thinks in the same way; there is no difference in it. He is a leader, he is fulfilling the desires of many. They would like to remove me from the scene – I am becoming a disturbing factor to them. I am going against their taboos, I am going against their inhibitions, I am going against their past. They call it their culture, their heritage, their religion.
Before he threw the knife, the man shouted, “You are talking against our religion, our culture! We cannot tolerate it!” He is simply a mouthpiece. He is trying to show that the crowd can be violent if you try to be an individual. It will not tolerate your existence even. All the vested interests would like everybody to be stupid.
You will be surprised to know, in fact, that your schools, colleges and universities don’t exist to help you to become intelligent – no, not at all. I have been associated for many years with universities as a student and then as a professor. I know the very inner structure of your educational system: it is not concerned with creating intelligence in people. Of course it wants to create efficiency, but efficiency is not intelligence, efficiency is mechanical. A computer can be very efficient, but a computer is not intelligent.
Never think that intelligence and efficiency are synonymous; intelligence is a totally different phenomenon. Efficiency is not intelligence, it is mechanical expertise. The universities are concerned to create efficiency so that you can be better clerks and better collectors and better station masters and better postmasters, etcetera. But they are not concerned to create intelligence, in fact they are all against intelligence. The whole structure of your educational system all over the world is to make you more and more capable of memorizing things because memory is a biocomputer.
Intelligence is a totally different phenomenon. Intelligence arises out of meditation, intelligence arises out of rebellion. Intelligence does not arise out of memory. But your examinations are only concerned with your memory. Whosoever has better memory is thought to be more intelligent. But it happens many times that stupid people have beautiful memories and intelligent people are not so good as far as memory is concerned.
Edison was not good as far as memory is concerned. He discovered one thousand scientific gadgets; nobody else had discovered so many things. Just the quantity of his discoveries is enormous, unbelievable. You may not be aware that you are using Edison’s discoveries every day: the gramophone record and the light bulb. These things that you are using come from one single person, Edison. But as far as memory is concerned, his memory was very lousy, very sloppy, so much so that once he forgot his own name, which is really very difficult. It is almost impossible to forget your own name. If you can forget your own name, you can forget anything! This seems to be the last thing. He managed to do the last thing.

In the First World War, rationing came into existence for the first time, and he was standing in a queue to take his ration card. Slowly, slowly he came closer to the window. Then the last person in front of him moved and they called his name: “Thomas Alva Edison!” And he looked around as if they are calling somebody else; he looked in the queue.
One man recognized his face because many times he had seen his pictures in the newspapers. He said, “As far as I remember, you seem to be Thomas Alva Edison. Why you are looking here and there?”
He said, “You are right. I had completely forgotten! Many, many thanks that you reminded me. Yes, I am Thomas Alva Edison.”
His wife used to keep everything in order because his whole room was in constant chaos: thousands of papers, research papers, and whenever he would want to find a particular thing it would take days. He will go on forgetting everything. He may have already discovered something and he may start discovering it again. And his wife will remind him, “You have done it. It is already in the market!”
He used to keep loose papers and would go on writing whatsoever thought would come to his mind. Then those loose papers would be lost here and there. His wife told him, “You better keep a notebook.”
He said, “That’s beautiful idea! Why has it never happened to me?” But then he lost his whole notebook! He said, “Look, I followed your suggestion. With loose papers one thing was good: once in a while I used to lose few a papers, but not all. Now all of the papers are lost!”

Albert Einstein was not a man of memory. He failed in his matriculation simply because he could not memorize anything. This greatest mathematician of all the ages and for ages to come, was incapable of counting small amounts of money. He would have to count again and again.
Once he was traveling in a bus. He gave the conductor some money; the remaining money was returned to him. He counted it once, twice, thrice, and each time the result was different, so he started counting a fourth time.
The conductor was looking and he said, “What is the matter with you? Don’t you know figures? Thrice you have counted, now you are counting for the fourth time! Don’t you know figures?”
He said, “Yes, I am a little lousy with figures!”

This man who has worked out the greatest figures possible was incapable of counting small amounts of money. He would go into his bathroom and would not come out for hours because he would forget that he had to come out.
One of my friends, Doctor Ram Manohar Lohia, went to see him. He was telling me, “I had to wait six hours because he was in the bathroom! And his wife started apologizing again and again and she said, ‘He is in the bathroom, he is in the bathroom.’ I said, ‘But what is he doing in the bathroom?’ The wife said, ‘Nobody knows but if you disturb him he becomes very angry – he starts throwing things! But he always forgets; whenever he goes in he forgets to come out. Now we have to wait for whenever he comes out. When he feels hungry or thirsty or something, then he will remember.’”
Doctor Lohia asked, “But what does he go on doing there?”
The wife said, “Yes, I have also been curious my whole life what he goes on doing. So in the beginning I used to peep through the keyhole – what is he doing? He sits in his bathtub and goes on playing with soap bubbles! And when I asked him, ‘What are you doing?’ he said, ‘Don’t disturb me, never disturb me, because it is by playing with soap bubbles that I have discovered the Theory of Relativity and the theory that the universe is expanding just like a soap bubble. It goes on expanding and one day it will burst – just like a soap bubble!’”

Down the ages you will find thousands of geniuses with very bad memories and thousands of people who had tremendous memories with no intelligence at all, because memory and intelligence come from different sources. Memory is part of the mind, intelligence is part of no-mind. Intelligence is part of your consciousness and memory is part of your brain. The brain can be trained – that’s what universities go on doing. All your examinations are tests for your memory, not for your intelligence. But universities give you the wrong impression – as if memory is intelligence. It is not.
This whole educational system exists to destroy intelligence and to divert you from intelligence toward memory. Memory is useful, utilitarian. Intelligence is dangerous; it has no utility for the status quo, it has no utility for the vested interests. Intelligent people have always proved to be difficult people just because of their intelligence. They cannot bow down to any stupid thing. And our society is full of superstitions, stupidities – all kinds of nonsense prevails in the name of religion, in the name of politics, in the name of literature, art.
Each child is distracted, is diverted. Hence so much stupidity. It is really a miracle how few people have escaped from this prison – a Buddha, a Zarathustra, a Lao Tzu, a Jesus, a Pythagoras – very few people. It is almost impossible to escape from this prison because the prison is all around and it begins from the very beginning. From your very childhood you are conditioned to be a prisoner: a Christian, a Hindu, a Mohammedan – these are all prisons. And when you are prisoners of churches, nations, races, then naturally there is going to be violence.
No animal is as violent as man. Animals kill but they kill only when they are hungry, otherwise not. Man is the only animal who enjoys killing for no reason at all, as if killing in itself is a blissful activity.

One day, a lion and a hare entered a restaurant. The manager was shocked. Nobody could believe their eyes. A great silence fell over the restaurant. Many people were there eating, talking, gossiping; all became absolutely silent. What is happening? The manager rushed to the new customers. Somehow he managed to stammer to the hare, “What would you like, sir?”
The hare asked for coffee. The manager asked, “And what would your friend like to have?”
The hare laughed and he said, “Do you think if he was hungry I would be here? He is not hungry; otherwise he would have taken his breakfast – I would be gone! We can be together only when he is not hungry.”

In a zoo in Moscow, they have kept a lion and a sheep in one cage to show the philosophy of peaceful coexistence. Everybody goes to see the cage. It is a miracle! The sheep and the lion sitting side by side – sometimes the sheep is fast asleep, just so close to the lion, her head resting on the lion’s belly. This is something!
A very curious young boy asked the zoo keeper, “How do you manage? How have you trained them?”
The zoo keeper was retiring from the job on that very day, so he told the truth. He said, “There is no miracle in it. All that we have to do is to change the sheep every day – a new sheep every day, that’s all. There is no miracle. And when the lion is no longer hungry there is a peaceful coexistence.”

But a lion won’t kill if he is not hungry. It is only man who kills for no reason at all – for stupid ideas. One can understand if somebody is hungry, one can understand, but one cannot understand Hiroshima and Nagasaki – destroying one hundred thousand people within three minutes, a sheer joy of destruction.
This is happening because we have not allowed man’s intelligence to flower. And whenever it has happened in any society that intelligence was allowed a little freedom, that society becomes weaker than other societies. In India the country has remained a slave for two thousand years for many reasons. One of the reasons was the great revolution that was brought by Krishna, Patanjali, Saraha, Mahavira, Buddha. These people brought such a great revolution, such a radical change in the consciousness of this country that many people were released from the bondage of stupidity; a great intelligence was released. The result was that the intelligent people stopped killing, they became nonviolent; they refused to be recruited in the army. Buddhists and Jainas refused to be recruited into the army, the brahmins refused to be recruited into the army. Now, this was the cream and the cream refused to fight. Then very stupid countries and very ordinary people – Hunas, Turks, Moghuls, who were far backward in every possible way – ran over the country. And because the most intelligent part of the younger Indian generation was no longer interested in killing and violence, there was no resistance, no fight. They conquered the country. A big country was conquered by very small countries. For two thousand years this country remained in slavery for the simple reason…
The same thing happened in Athens. Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Pythagoras, Heraclitus, these were the people who released great intelligence and a climate was created of freedom, of free thinking. And the whole Greek civilization disappeared. It was destroyed by stupid people who were surrounding the civilization. It was one of the most beautiful phenomena that was happening on the earth.
Now the same thing is happening again in America. If America and Russia are ever in conflict, there is every possibility America will be defeated for the simple reason that American youth is far more intelligent than the Russian youth. American youth has started thinking; Russian youth is absolutely conditioned – they function like machines. In these two world wars and in many small wars it was noted down that American young soldiers are very disinterested in fighting. Otherwise, how you can explain the phenomenon of Vietnam? America with all its sophisticated arms could not defeat a poor country with no scientific sophistication at all.
It was found that thirty to forty percent of American soldiers never used their weapons. They would go to the battlefield every day but they would not kill. It is beautiful, it is something to be appreciated, but dangerous too because thirty to forty percent is a big percentage and soon it will be fifty to sixty percent.
If Russia and America are ever in conflict, if the clash ever happens, there is every possibility that America will be the first to lose. The difference will not be much, maybe ten to fifteen minutes difference, because now the question is not of human beings fighting. The question is of releasing atomic energy, hydrogen bombs and missiles and they are all controlled by computers. If the Russians attack America, then it will take ten minutes for the American computers to react and launch against Russia. And the same will happen if America attacks Russia: it will take ten minutes for Russian computers to react and launch against America. The difference will be only of ten to fifteen minutes; both will be destroyed. But if it ever happens, then that difference of fifteen minutes will be predictable. America will be the first to go for the simple reason that great intelligence is being released. Always higher cultures have been defeated by lower cultures, hence no culture can afford to release intelligence.
My own suggestion is, unless we create a world government, intelligence cannot be allowed. And the time has come for a world government. National governments are no longer needed: they are things of the past, they are part of our stupid past. Nations are no longer needed, just a world government. And if there is a world government it will have a totally different quality, for the simple reason that armies will have to be reduced because there will be no question of fighting with anybody.
Now seventy percent of money, wealth, income goes to the army – seventy percent; only thirty percent is left for other purposes. That means seventy percent of our energy is to kill, to be violent, to be destructive. A world government is an absolute necessity to save humanity. And the quality of the world government will be totally different because it won’t need great armies; just small police forces will be enough. It will have all the functions – the post office, the railway, the airplanes, etcetera – but they are not destructive; they serve people.
And once armies disappear from the world, great intelligence will be released because it is armies that are destroying intelligence. They recruit the healthiest people and destroy their minds, because a real soldier is possible only if he becomes absolutely mechanical.
Man kills for no reason. Man tries to repress rather than to understand, manipulate rather than to relate, because to relate with somebody needs great understanding. Manipulation needs no understanding. Repression is easy, very easy – any fool can do it.
That’s why if you go to the monasteries you will find all kinds of repression and you will find all kinds of fools gathered together there. I have never come across intelligent monks and nuns; if they are intelligent they would not be monks and nuns any longer. They will renounce that nonsense, they will come out of their so-called religious prisons. But repression needs no wisdom; it simply needs a powerful ego, so you go on suppressing everything into the unconscious. But whatsoever you suppress will have to be suppressed again and again and still it will never be eliminated. It will become more and more powerful as you grow older because you will become weaker. The suppresser will become weaker and the suppressed will remain fresh and young because it has never been used.
The real problem arises in old age when suppression starts exploding and creates all kinds of uglinesses. It is five thousand years of suppression that is creating all our neurosis, all our perversions. Suppress sex and you will become more sexual; your whole life will be colored with sex. You will think always in terms of sexuality and nothing else. Suppress sex and the ugly institution of prostitution will arise, is bound to arise. The more suppressive a society is, the more prostitutes will be found there; the proportion is always the same. You can count your nuns and monks and you can know by counting them how many male and female prostitutes will be in the country. It will be exactly the same number because nature keeps a balance. And perversions…because sexual energy will find its ways, its own ways. Either it will create neurosis or hypocrisy; both are ill states. The poor will become neurotic and the rich will become hypocrites.

It is told that when Moses in his rage smashed the tablets of the Ten Commandments, everybody rushed to grab a piece.
Of course the rich and the politicians were the first. They got all the good pieces on which was inscribed, “Commit adultery,” “lie,” “steal.” The poor and all the rest got only the pieces that said, “Thou shalt not,” “Thou shalt not.”

Repression creates cunningness. You lose authenticity, you lose naturalness, spontaneity, you lose truth. You start lying to others, you start lying to yourself. You start finding ways to lie and to go on lying. And a single lie will need thousand other lies to protect it, to support it.

Two mediaeval knights are leaving on a crusade. Since they are old friends, the one asks the other, “Explain something to me. You are always complaining that your marriage is finished, that your wife is a bore and that she has become as ugly as a witch. Is that right?”
“That’s right,” answers the other.
“So then tell me,” says the first, “why did you lock her in a chastity belt?”
“Because on my way back,” he explains, “I am going to tell her that I lost the key!”

Either lying, hypocrisy, deception, or madness…

The safari had been in the remote African jungle for months, capturing animals for the zoo. Smedley’s sexual frustration had risen to a point where he decided to try sex with a huge, ferocious female gorilla.
His friend helped chain her down and put a bucket over her head and Smedley started making love right away, when suddenly the gorilla broke the chains and wrapped her arms around Smedley.
The others grabbed her arms to rescue him, as Smedley moaned incoherently. When, with three men on each arm, they finally freed him, he shouted, “No. The bucket, you fools! Take off the bucket! I want to kiss her!”

In madness you can do anything!
Repression means a method of creating conscience instead of consciousness. Consciousness is non-repressive; it depends on understanding, it depends on meditativeness, awareness. Conscience is repressive: it simply goes on giving you orders, “Do this. Don’t do that.” It does not change you but it poisons your life.
Friedrich Nietzsche is right when he says, “Religions have not been able to transform man but only to poison his joys.” I perfectly agree with this man about this – religions have really poisoned all your joys. If you are eating, then there are religions which condemn everything that you eat… And great guilt arises about sex, about food, about clothes, about everything.
Jainism even teaches… Particularly its monks and nuns don’t take any baths; they are not allowed to take a bath because to take a bath means you are trying to make your body look beautiful. That is sex, nothing else. You may never have thought about it that taking a bath has something to do with sex, but perversions know no limits. Jaina monks and nuns are not allowed to brush their teeth because that means you are trying to make yourself beautiful. There is no need – the body is dirty. There is no need to give it an appearance of beauty, freshness, fragrance – no need. It has to be hated: it is disgusting, it is nauseating.
But then I have come across Jaina monks and Jaina nuns who will take a sponge bath, but they have to lie about it. They will keep their toothpaste hidden in their bags – they have to hide it; nobody should know about it. They used to come to see me when I used to travel around the country and I would immediately know in whose bag there was toothpaste because their mouth smelled so foul if they didn’t use any toothpaste or any kind of cleaning their teeth. Then to talk with them was almost a torture. So I would immediately know if some nun… Particularly nuns because women after all are women; even if they are Jaina nuns it makes no difference. They are more body-oriented and nothing is wrong about it; it is perfectly good, it is perfectly healthy. So I would immediately know – if the foul smell was not coming I would immediately know – and I would tell them that “I know that your bag has toothpaste in it!”
And they would be surprised. They would say, “How do you come to know about it? Nobody knows about it! Can you see inside our bags?”
I said, “Yes! I can see inside you; what about your bag?”
They would say, “You are the first person who has immediately discovered it.”
I said, “There is nothing much in it. Don’t think that there is some miracle or anything. Just I am so tortured by Jaina monks and nuns that whenever somebody from your company comes and is not smelling bad, I immediately know that there is something in the bag. You must be taking a sponge bath.”
Now, even to take a sponge bath seems to be doing a crime. Cleaning your teeth looks like you are getting ready for hell. It has poisoned your life, it has not transformed your life.
Repression cannot transform. Either it makes you hypocrites… If you are a little intelligent, just even a little intelligent, you will be a hypocrite. If you are utterly stupid, you will go insane.

“How was your boat trip to Europe?” asks Pedro to his friend.
“Fantastic! Imagine, on the first night I met a girl, one of the most beautiful I’d ever seen. We chitchatted for a while and it was love at first sight. We were soon in each other’s arms. It was only the next morning as I held her in my arms that I found she was the wife of one of my best friends. It was such a shock that we both felt tremendously guilty, we both cried and cried and cried.”
“That’s really something! But how was the rest of the trip?”
“Well, you know, it was just fucking and crying, fucking and crying, fucking and crying!”

That’s what is going to happen.
Repression is one the greatest calamities that has happened to humanity. And it is because of repression that manipulation comes in. Because you cannot be true with yourself, you cannot be naked with others. You lose all truth, all respect for truth. You lose all authenticity and you start being deceptive. Manipulation is a deceptive way of exploiting the other. You lose all respect for humanity because you have lost respect for yourself. How can you respect yourself if you are lying, if you are not authentic, if you are not sincere? And if you don’t respect yourself, you cannot respect anybody else in the world. When you lose respect for others you manipulate, you start using them as means.
Respect means each individual is an end unto himself; disrespect means nobody is an end and you can use everybody as a means for your own purposes, for your own ends. The husband uses the wife as a means, the wife uses the husband as a means; this is manipulation. And because you use each other as means… Even parents use their children as means and children use their parents as means. Religious people are using God as a means, what to say about others? Everybody is using everybody else as a means. Then you are constantly afraid: somebody may take your means.

============================================================

The Venerable Master said:
When he has clearly thought about these three he perceives only a void, but when he contemplates the void, he realizes that the void is also void and has become a nothingness. The void having vanished into nothingness, he realizes that the nothingness of nothing is also nothing, and when the nethermost nothingness is reached, there is most truly to be found a deep and unchanging stillness.
In this profound stillness how can desires be begotten? When desires are no longer begotten, then there is essential and unchanging stillness.
Truth is essentially unchanging.
All things in heaven and earth are in essence unchanging.
The East has respected the master tremendously. The West is absolutely unaware of the phenomenon of the masters. It knows the teachers, it is perfectly aware about the teachers, but not about the masters. People even write about Jesus as a great teacher – Western scholars write about Buddha as a great teacher – not knowing the difference. The difference is immense; the difference is so immense that it is unbridgeable. The master is a totally different world.
The teacher is part of the ordinary, day-to-day existence. He knows more than you know: the difference is of quantity, not of quality. You can know more by just a little more effort. The teacher is just a little ahead of you as far as learning, knowledge, information, is concerned, but his being is the same as yours.
The master may not know more than you, he may not know even as much as you know, but he is more – he has more being. The difference is of quality: he exists on a different plane. He has entered a totally different dimension that you are completely oblivious of. He knows only one thing, that is his own inner being. And that knowing cannot be called knowledge for the simple reason because knowledge needs three things: the knower, the known, and between the two exists the knowledge. The relationship between knower and the known: that is knowledge. But when you know yourself – the knower is the known, the knower is the knowledge – there is no distinction at all. There is no subject and no object. There is unity, not division.
The master is one who has become united in the fundamental sense of ultimate consciousness. He is simply conscious. This consciousness gives him a totally different world view; with this consciousness everything else changes. He sees things in a new light, his eyes are unclouded. He has clarity, he is transparent, he is a pure mirror, crystal clear – not even a thought moves in his consciousness. Hence there is no longer any veil, no longer any obstruction.
The teacher is so full of thoughts that he is just the opposite to the master. Never call Buddha a teacher or Jesus a teacher or Lao Tzu a teacher – they are masters. Moreover, they don’t teach at all – why call them teachers? They don’t impart any new knowledge to the world. Albert Einstein can be called a great teacher, Newton can be called a great teacher. Darwin can be called a great teacher, Marx, Freud – these people can be called great teachers: they have taught many things. What has Lao Tzu taught? What has Buddha taught? What has Zarathustra taught? Nothing at all! But they have imparted a new vision, a new style of life. They have touched people’s hearts and they have transformed those hearts. They don’t give you information, they give you transformation. What they say is not important, what they are is important. What they say is only a device; their silence is important.
If you want to understand Buddha, Lao Tzu, Ko Hsuan, Kabir, Nanak, you will have to learn how to read between the lines. You will have to learn how to understand silence and the music of silence. You will have to be silent. It is a totally different kind of learning – in fact, it is unlearning. Whatsoever you know you will have to drop. You will have to drop all your beliefs, ideologies, philosophies. All that has been given to you by your teachers from the kindergarten to the university level. You will have to get rid of it, you will have to transcend it. You will have to transcend all your teachers, only then will you be able to understand a master. A master is against all teachers.
The East has not respected teachers; its total respect goes to the masters. The teachers are utilitarian; they are experts. If something goes wrong in your bathroom you call the plumber. He knows more than you as far as plumbing is concerned, but that is no reason to pay him great respect and call him “venerable.” Something goes wrong with your body, you call the doctor. He is another kind of plumber: he fixes your body. If you want to learn mathematics you go to a teacher.
You go to a master only when you are tired of all this utilitarian existence. When you have come to see that there is something more, when you have felt a deep urge, a great longing, to know that which is nonutilitarian, which has intrinsic value, which can neither be sold nor purchased, which has no price but immense value, when you have come to feel the existence of the mysterious, of the miraculous, then only you are capable of contacting a master.
In fact, the ancient Egyptian scriptures say: “When the disciple is ready the master appears himself.” When the disciple is ready? When he is tired of the utilitarian world. In the world everything has a utility; but God has no utility, truth has no utility, love has no utility, bliss has no utility, beauty has no utility. What is the utility of a roseflower? An atom bomb has utility, a sword has utility. What is the utility of a beautiful sunset? There is no utility in it. Only when you start feeling the longing for the nonutilitarian are you capable of being with a master; otherwise you will go on moving from one teacher to another teacher.
To be with a master needs tremendous preparation. And the greatest thing required is the longing for the unknown, the longing for that which is not of this world. The longing seems to be almost mad to those who are concerned with money, power, prestige. They will think you have gone crazy if you become interested in meditation, if you become interested in silence, if you become interested in a master. But the East has paid tremendous respect to the masters.
Ko Hsuan starts each sutra with these beautiful words:
The Venerable Master said…
He does not mention the name of the master. In fact, names are of no use as far as a master is concerned because a single master represents all the masters of the past, of the present, and of the future too because the taste of a master is the same. Whether you come close to a Buddha, or to a Mahavira, or to a Moses, or to a Mohammed, it makes no difference. You will have the same taste, the same ecstasy, the same perfume. The same joy will pervade you; the same dance will start happening in your heart.
Buddha has said again and again that you can taste the sea from anywhere: you will always find it salty. So are the masters – names are irrelevant.
Ko Hsuan does not mention the name of the master – names are utilitarian. A master represents the ultimate, the nameless. He is the spokesman of the nameless experience – let him also be nameless. That is his message. The Venerable Master said…
Remember a few things before we enter into the sutra. Why does the East respect the master and not the teacher? Why the master and not the scholar? Why the master and not the pundit? Because the East has known that the pundit is only a parrot: he repeats what others have known; he has not experienced it himself. And because he has not experienced it himself, it has no validity. He may be able to argue well, he may be able to convince you, he may be able to masquerade many proofs for what he is saying, but what he is saying is still borrowed; it has no roots in his own being. He is only talking to you from his memory, not from his consciousness.
And truth is not in the scriptures. Truth is your very center of being, it is your essential core. You can become very clever with words – it is not difficult either – but those words are impotent, those words are empty, those words really don’t have any meaning. Meaning comes through experience.
When Jesus says something it has meaning. You can repeat the same words; it cannot have the same meaning because your experience is not of that level, of that plane. You will put your own meaning into it, you will pour your own experience into it. You will use Jesus’ words as containers, but the content will be yours. The bottle will be Jesus’, but the wine will be yours.
And what have you got? You know nothing of importance. All that you know is simply rubbish – maybe useful in the world, maybe even necessarily needed in the world for a livelihood, but you don’t know what life is. You know how to earn money and you know only how to waste life.

There was an old professor of Darjeeling
Who traveled from London to Ealing.
It said on the door,
“Please don’t spit on the floor,”
So he carefully spat on the ceiling.

“That philosopher really suffers for his beliefs,” said Mulla Nasruddin one day to me.
“Why, what does he believe?” I asked him.
“That he can wear a size 8 shoe on a size 11 foot!”

All your beliefs are like that. You are wearing clothes which were perfectly good for a buddha but are not good for you. You are wearing shoes which were perfectly good for Lao Tzu but are not good for you. You are living in houses made by others for a totally different purpose, which is not your purpose. Your whole life is a long, long misery for the simple reason that if you have a size 11 foot and you are wearing size 8 shoes, whatsoever you believe, your belief is not going to help; it will create misery for you.
Look at people’s lives – no joy, no song, no celebration. And these are Christians: they believe in Christ. And these are Hindus: they believe in Krishna. And these are Buddhists: they believe in Buddha. Something very fundamental has gone wrong. They may say they believe in Buddha, but only the words can be of Buddha. Who is going to put the meaning in those words? You will put your own meaning – and unless your experience changes, your meaning is going to remain very ordinary.

A man and his son are driving in a taxi with a great scholar in Paris near Place de la Madeleine. They pass through a street full of prostitutes standing on the sidewalk. The taxi is almost stopped by the traffic.
“Daddy, Daddy, what are all these women doing standing there?”
“Well…hmm…these women must he waiting for their husbands. You see, it is six o’clock and offices are closing.”
“Don’t listen to your father! These are whores!” says the scholar who is a great believer of straightforwardness with children.
“Daddy, what are whores?”
“Well,…hmm…you see…it means they have more than one husband.”
“You mean like movie actresses?”
“Yes, but more – lots, hundreds, thousands of husbands!”
“Gee! But all these thousands of husbands… Then they must have lots of children too!”
“It is quite rare, but it happens, of course.”
“And these children, Daddy, what do they become?”
“They become…scholars!”

The East has never paid any respect to the scholars. They are intellectual laborers, they are not real intelligentsia – the West has always mistaken them for real intelligentsia. They are intellectuals, but they are not intelligent people. Sometimes you will find the so-called intellectuals more stupid than farmers, gardeners, fishermen, and carpenters, for the simple reason that they live close to nature, to life, to existence. They have a far truer experience, far closer, intimate contact with reality than your so-called professors, pundits and scholars. They live surrounded with words – big words, bombastic words – but they live in prisons of words. You can be very easily deceived by them because they talk in the same way as the masters. They are pseudo, they are pretenders. Beware of it and beware of their stupidity.

An Englishman is walking up a mountain when he sees a famous professor of philosophy passing in a car, driving backward up the hill.
“Hey, professor!” the surprised Englishman calls out. “What are you doing?”
“Well,” the professor answers, “I have to deliver a package up the mountain and I was told it was impossible to turn around up there.”
After this both continued their trip up the hill. Fifteen minutes later the Englishman sees the car coming down the hill backward again.
“Hey, professor, stop!” he says, “What is the matter?”
“Oh!” the professor replies smiling. “I was wrong – I could turn anyway!”

The master is one who lives the truth. Not that he knows about it, not that he has heard about it, not that he philosophizes about it, but he lives it, he knows it – he has become truth itself. His being is his teaching; everything else is just a device to bring awakening to the sleeping ones. If he uses words it is not to convey the truth, he uses words like alarm clocks to wake you. The teacher uses words to convey truth. And truth can never be conveyed by words. The master also uses words, but never to convey the truth. He knows perfectly well truth cannot be conveyed; it is untransferable. It cannot be communicated by any means, but you can be awakened to it.
The real thing is not to tell you the truth; the real thing is to make you aware. The moment you are aware you know the truth because truth is already within you. It is not something that comes from the outside; it is something that is asleep within you and has to be awakened.
The master uses words and because he uses words, scholars go on repeating the same words for centuries, thinking that they are important words, very important words. They must be containing truth because Buddha used them, Ko Hsuan used them, Bodhidharma used them, Rinzai used them, Bahauddin used them. Such great masters have used them – those words must contain something of immense value. They contain nothing. They were used for a totally different purpose. The purpose was to awaken the sleeping ones.

Brigitte Bardot was given a parrot as a gift and she put it in her bedroom. Every night she would bring a new lover to her bed and from his cage the parrot would encourage all her lovemaking with words like, “Go on! Go on! You are coming!”
After a few days Brigitte Bardot got rather annoyed with him and when one morning, while she was walking around naked, the parrot shouted, “Come here, beloved, I want to make love to you!” she got infuriated and beat the parrot up.
While smoothing his feathers the parrot sadly said, “But you did not treat the other cocks like this!”

The pundit is a parrot. He thinks Buddha influenced millions of people by his words. He thinks that Krishna transformed thousands of people with the Bhagavadgita and the words that it contains. Likewise that Mohammed has inspired thousands of souls for centuries by the Koran and the words that it contains – these words must be of great potential. So he goes on repeating those words. But those words contain nothing. He is simply imitating a device not knowing the exact purpose of it.

A corporal is instructing his platoon. He calls a newly-arrived soldier and asks him, “You, Gino! What is the flag for you?”
“The flag,” answers the soldier, “is a piece of cloth of different colors.”
“What! What are you saying? You idiot! The flag is everything. The flag is your mother, remember, your mother!”
Then he turns to the next soldier and asks, “Tell me what is a flag?”
“Gino’s mother,” replies the soldier.

Beware of the scholars; they are the most stupid people around. But they talk beautifully, and if you are not alert you can be very easily deceived by them. They recite the Koran, they recite the Bhagavadgita, they quote the Vedas, the Upanishads, they comment and they interpret, and in a very logical way, in a convincing way – it will appeal to your mind. But, in fact, Buddha never wanted to appeal to your mind, neither Krishna wanted to appeal to your mind. They wanted to help you to go beyond the mind. They were not to convince your mind because if you are convinced about a certain idea you will remain in the mind. They were trying to unhinge you from the mind.
Can you see the totally different purpose? The purpose of a master is to push you beyond the boundaries of the mind, and the purpose of the scholar is to convince you intellectually about the rightness, about the validity of a certain ideology, philosophy. He makes your mind stronger, he gives you more mind. The master takes away your mind, the master destroys your mind. The teacher nourishes your mind. So, many times the teacher will look more appealing to you, more convincing to you.
You can miss the master very easily because he will seem a dangerous person to be around. A teacher seems to be very fulfilling; he enhances your ego. It is not accidental that the West has respected the teacher because the West has believed for thousands of years that the ego has to be strengthened, that a strong ego is needed; without a strong ego a man has no personality. It is true: without a strong ego a man has no personality; but the ego is false and so is the personality.
The word personality comes from a Greek word persona; persona means a mask. In ancient days Greek actors used masks. Those personas, masks, we are all carrying. A strong ego certainly gives you a strong personality in the original sense of the word, but the personality is not individuality and the ego is not your soul – just the contrary.
The master destroys your personality so that your individuality can be discovered. He dismantles your personality, he takes away all your masks, so that you can know your original face. His work is difficult and only very courageous people can be with him because it is surgical. Your mask has become almost part of your existence; to take it away now needs surgery. It is not easy to take it away, it is painful. Only a master can take it away and slowly, slowly, chunk by chunk, he goes on taking away your mask. Finally, when the mask has completely disappeared, you discover your reality, your original face.
The teacher gives you much thought; the master only gives you a meditativeness. The teacher gives you much to dream about, to desire about; the master hammers on all your dreams and destroys them. The master is against your sleep; the teacher is a sedative, a tranquilizer. The master is not a solace, is not a consolation, is not a tranquilizer. The master hurts, wounds, but he transforms.

A man finds himself in purgatory. The angel-in-charge welcomes him in.
“Not your turn today,” says the angel. “You still have more time to pass on earth. Come with me.”
The angel takes him to a huge room full of small bottles full of oil. “These show how much life you have left,” says the angel. His bottle is almost empty.
“Can I see my wife’s and children’s bottles?” he asks.
“Sure,” says the angel, pointing to the three bottles next to his. The man cannot believe his eyes. For the children, the quantity seems normal, but his wife seems to have an extraordinary large quantity in her bottle.
Left alone and thinking, as the angel is working with newcomers, he delicately sticks his finger in his wife’s bottle, takes a little oil and puts it in his own one. He keeps on doing this until the two bottles are more or less even. He wants to go on, but is suddenly awakened by a big slap and his wife’s voice saying, “You dirty old man, always wandering fingers, even when I sleep!”

Man is deep asleep, dreaming, desiring, of hell, of heaven, of a thousand-and-one things. The function of the master is to hit you so hard that you cannot avoid waking up.
Ko Hsuan says:
The Venerable Master said:
When he has clearly thought about these three he perceives only a void, but when he contemplates the void, he realizes that the void is also void and has become nothingness.
This is a very significant sutra, but the first few words have to be put right. The translation is done by a scholar and that too by a Western scholar. He says: When he has clearly thought…
Now, the original cannot mean that he has “clearly thought” because clarity and thought cannot exist together. That’s impossible; their coexistence is impossible. If there is clarity there is no thought; if there is thinking there is no clarity. It is like saying, “The sky was full of clouds and very clear. The sky was full of clouds and it was very sunny.” It is impossible. Either it is sunny and the sky is clear, then there are no clouds… If there are clouds, and many clouds, then the sun will be hiding behind the clouds and there can be no clear sky. You cannot see the sky because of the clouds.
Clarity is a by-product of meditativeness, not of thought. But this is what is going to happen when scholars do these things. In their own way they are doing a great service, without knowing any different. And one cannot expect that they will be able to know – they have not experienced clarity. They have thought about it, but to think about clarity is one thing; to know clarity is a totally different thing.
I know clarity, but in clarity there is no thought at all. And I have known thoughts: when there are thoughts there is no clarity. Hence, read this sentence in a little different way: When he has clearly meditated these three things he perceives only a void…
In the last sutra we talked about the three things: sexuality – in India it is called kama; it is the source of all desires. Remember it: sexuality is not only the source of sex, it is the source of all desires. Hence you can change your desires, you can forget about sex completely, but if desires persist it is still sexuality. And you can watch it…
There are people who are obsessed with money. You can see one thing: they are no longer interested in sex; their whole interest has moved into money. But now money has become their sex object. When they touch money they touch it as if they are touching their beloved. I have seen people touching one hundred rupee notes with such tenderness that it is unbelievable.
I used to know one person whose only joy was money, even somebody else’s money. Just as if you are interested in beautiful women, it does not matter whose wife it is. If a beautiful woman passes by you become immediately interested; a great desire arises in you. Civilization prevents you; the police is there, the law is there, so you don’t do anything, you don’t act – that is one thing – but the thought starts fantasizing. The mind starts spinning, weaving dreams.
The same was true about this man. He was a relative of mine. Somebody else’s money… If he sees that you have many notes in your pocket he will just take the money out, will count it, with such tenderness – and it is not his money either! He will give it back to you, but as he gives, you can see the sadness arising in his eyes, you can see the unwillingness.
He was always asking for money, and he had enough money. He was always borrowing money from others.
I used to ask him, “You have money – why do you go on borrowing?” And slowly, slowly he became very honest with me and he said, “I cannot use my own money in any way. It hurts to bring the money out of my own pocket – it hurts. I feel almost paralyzed! I can borrow it from somebody.”
And he never used to give the money back. It was well known all over the city that once he takes money from you he will never give it back – he cannot. Everybody used to feel pity for him. He had ten bungalows, but he himself used to live in a very small room, in one of his bungalows’ servant quarters. He could have afforded a beautiful car, but he used to move on a bicycle so ancient and old that I have never seen anything older than that bicycle.
And I told him, “At least you can purchase a new bicycle!”
He said, “But this bicycle has served me for so long. Moreover, it is a gift from my father. Now my father is dead and this always reminds me of my father. And one thing is very good about this bicycle – nobody else can ride on it!”
It was really difficult to ride on this bicycle; only he was an expert at riding it. It had only the most absolutely essential things on it – no chain cover, no mudguards, no horn, nothing, no brakes – and it used to make a noise that would be heard at least half a mile away. He would put it anywhere. He said, “Nobody ever steals it. Who will steal it?” – the whole city knew whose bicycle it is – “You will be caught immediately. And wherever you will move the whole neighborhood will know whose bicycle it is.”
He would go into the movie house, but he would not put the bicycle on the stand because there you have to pay ten paise or twenty paise or something. He would put it anywhere outside the movie house and he would always find his bicycle in its place, he never lost it. To the very last day of his life he was using his bicycle.
He lived a poor man’s life, a very poor man’s life – the life of a beggar. And he collected so much money; he had no son, no daughter. It almost always happens that miserly people don’t have children; there must be some psychological reason in it. In India the most miserly and rich people always have to adopt children. Poor people have many children, too many, in fact; they need birth control. And the rich people, the very rich, the miserly people, don’t have children. They are so miserly that something deep happens even to their chemistry. Their whole sexuality becomes obsessed with money.
Hence, remember, Ko Hsuan calls sexuality the first poison. It does not mean only sex, it means all desires.

A Scotsman arrives at the tollgate of a bridge, gives a penny to the attendant and walks on.
“Hey, young man!” shouts the attendant. “The toll is two pennies!”
“I know, I know,” replies the young man in a tired voice, “but I will only go halfway and then I will jump!”

Coroner: “What were your husband’s last words, Mrs. Boccafucci?”
Mrs. Boccafucci: “Emilio said, ‘I don’t see how they can make a profit on this Chianti at a dollar a gallon.’”

Last words! Last words are always very important; they are the essence of your whole life. There are people who even at the very end of their life are thinking of money.

When God created Switzerland he asked a Swiss, “What do you want?”
Without hesitation the Swiss replied, “I want a lot of milk!”
And so it was.
After a few days God, curious, asked the Swiss, “Is your milk good?”
“The best, my Lord,” replied the Swiss. “Try some!”
God tasted it and found it really good. Then he asked the Swiss, “Do you want something else?”
Again, without hesitation, the Swiss replied, “Yes, My Lord. Four francs for the milk you drank!”

Even if you come across God, if you are obsessed with money you won’t see God at all; you will do what you have been doing your whole life. You will not change just by seeing God – nothing can change you unless you drop the poison yourself. And this happens only when a person becomes really meditative, when all thoughts disappear and he has a clarity to see, when he becomes a seer.
The first poison is sexuality. And when you are thinking in terms of sexuality, whatsoever form your sexuality has taken – it may have become money obsession, it may have become power obsession, it does not matter – when you are thinking in terms of sexuality, everything deep inside you becomes sexual. Your whole life functions as a transforming mechanism for everything, to create more and more sexuality. Whatsoever you see, you see your own sexuality projected – you can’t see anything else. You lose all clarity. You become surrounded by your own inner poison; it goes on rising like smoke around you and you can see only through the smoke. The smoke distorts everything that you see.

A black army private and a white sergeant were getting ready to go on leave, when, at the last minute, orders came that the private’s leave was canceled. The black man said to the white, “Sergeant, would you please tell my girlfriend what happened so she won’t think I ran off with another lady? She will believe you because you are my sergeant.”
The sergeant agreed and took the address. When he arrived in town he looked up the house number and it turned out to be a whorehouse in the red light district of town. He went up to the house and knocked on the door.
A large, black madam opened the door. She looked at the sergeant and said, “I am awfully sorry, sergeant, but we do not serve white men here, only black men.”
The sergeant answered, “You don’t understand, madam! You see, I have got this black private…”
The madam smiled and said, “Well, ain’t you the fancy one”

The second poison, anger, arises whenever your sexuality is prevented. Anything that comes as an obstruction to your desires creates anger. You cannot drop anger unless desires disappear.
Many people have asked me how to drop anger, and they don’t understand that they are talking of dropping a symptom. Anger is only a symptom. It simply says that somewhere your desire has been obstructed: something is coming between you, your desire, and the object of your desire – hence the anger. Anger means, “I will destroy the obstruction!” You cannot drop anger unless your sexuality disappears.
It is not accidental that husbands and wives continuously quarrel and are angry with each other, for the simple reason…the sexuality. They are each other’s sexual object, and wherever there is sexuality there is anger. Anger is like smoke. Logicians say, “Wherever there is smoke there is fire.” You can say, “Wherever there is anger there is sexuality.” When anger disappears, that means sexuality has disappeared.
The disappearance of anger happens only, is possible only, when the root is no longer there. You cannot drop your anger; you will have to go to the very root. Trying to drop your anger will only create new kinds of anger: you will repress it from one side, it will come from another side.
It is because of this well-known fact that for centuries no country has allowed its soldiers to have free sexuality because if soldiers are allowed to have freedom about their sexuality, if their sex is not obstructed, then they lose destructiveness, then they lose anger, then they are no longer angry.
Their sex has to be obstructed in many ways. They have to be deprived of their wives, they have to be kept away from their wives. Not only that: they have to be allowed to see all kinds of pornographic films, all kinds of pornographic magazines; they have to be allowed to come in contact with actresses. When two countries are at war, actresses go to meet and visit the soldiers to encourage them. And what is their encouragement? The encouragement is this: when an actress comes, a Sophia Loren comes, all the soldiers become sexually aroused. Of course, they cannot do anything about it; that aroused energy turns into anger, it becomes rage. Then they start destroying the enemy, then they are madly into destruction. If they are allowed to have their wives or girlfriends with them on the front, then they will lose interest in war.
That is one of the reasons why the Americans now go on losing all their wars: their soldiers are the least sexually repressed people; they are not going to win any war. Sexual repression is a must – it creates anger. And when there is so much anger and there is no other outlet, then the only possible outlet is to destroy the enemy.
And have you watched? It always happens that whenever an army conquers a country: the first victims are the women of that country; they are raped immediately. Cannot you see the relationship? Were the soldiers fighting for the women? Why do soldiers, immediately the moment they enter a city as conquerors, start raping around as if they were just waiting for the opportunity? There was no opportunity available; now it is available. The first thing is: rape the women. And the second thing is: rob people of their money. The first comes out of anger and the second comes out of greed, but the cause of both lies in the first. Repressed sex will create anger and greed.
You will be surprised to know that any religion that has been teaching its followers some kind of repression has always helped its followers to become rich. In India, Jainas have become very rich; they are the most repressive people. And something of significance has to be understood about their psychology. Their religion says: “Repress sex.” Brahmacharya, celibacy is their goal. And the second thing it says is: “Don’t be violent.” So anger is not allowed. Sex is not allowed, anger is not allowed. Now where is the energy to go? Now only the third possibility is left – greed. So the Jainas have become the greediest people in this country.
They are a small community, a very small community. In such a big, vast country they are nothing – but still they are very powerful because they have all the money. You will not come across a single Jaina beggar; nothing like it exists. They are not poor people – they cannot be poor. Their religion has made it absolutely certain for them that they will be rich. Sex has to be repressed and anger has to be repressed. Now only one outlet is left – greed. Become greedy.
Do you know? The English word love comes from a Sanskrit root lobh. Lobh means greed; it is greed for the other’s body. So whenever a person looks sexually at somebody else you can see the greed in his eyes: he wants to possess the other’s body. That’s why every civilization allows only a certain time limit to look; more than that is thought to be offensive. Somehow a subtle agreement has happened, a deep contract: three seconds are allowed. If you look at a woman for three seconds, no offense will be taken. It will be thought just casual. But if you look for longer, then she will become annoyed. If you go on looking at her, then she will be angry; then you are behaving in an uncivilized way. You are looking at her body with greed to possess, to exploit, to use as a means. And of course, nobody wants to be reduced to a means, to a thing, to a possession.
The English word greed also comes from a Sanskrit word, griddha; griddha means the vulture. The greedy person has a vulture-like quality, as if he wants to eat the other. And that kind of expression has come into many languages, particularly in French.
I have heard…

A ship was wrecked, and a Frenchwoman swam to an island. She was absolutely naked; all her clothes had gone into the sea. But the beach was beautiful, and she was lying on the beach naked, taking a sunbath, thinking “What to do next?” – wondering whether anybody lives on this island or not. There seemed to be no sign of anybody living…
And then suddenly she heard a noise; somebody was coming, a very big man, almost like a huge gorilla. A very small tribe lived there. The tribe was of cannibals, hence it was very small because a cannibal tribe cannot grow – they start eating each other. And the cannibal was very happy seeing new food –she was looking so delicious!
He came, looked at her and said, “I would like to eat you!”
And the Frenchwoman said, “Then what you are waiting for?”
The cannibal was puzzled. This was for the first time that somebody has said, “Why you are waiting? For what? Start!” – because in French “to eat” means “I want to make love to you.”

Language gives great indications. In fact, when you look at a woman with greedy eyes you want to eat her – or a woman looks at a man… Ordinarily they don’t look because they have been taught for centuries not to look at the man; that has become their feminine grace. When somebody says to a woman, “I love you,” she looks downward – just to be certain whether he really means it or is just talking nonsense! She does not believe in words, she believes in the body, she believes in the physiology – and the body never lies.
When one has come to deep meditation there is a clarity. In this clarity all the three poisons disappear without leaving a trace behind. And then one perceives only a void.
The first experience of meditation is that of a void, but remember it is the first experience, the first satori: one experiences a void. But remember, the experience is still there; that’s why it is still the beginning, not the end. You experience the void, but the void experienced itself becomes something; it is not nothing.
That’s why you will come across many Zen stories…

The disciple comes to the master and says, “I have experienced nothing,” and the master hits him and says, “Go back and meditate again! You missed!”
“But,” he says, “I have experienced nothing! And that’s what you were saying – that to experience nothing is what meditation is all about. And I have experienced it!”
But the master still persists: “Go and meditate again – you missed.” Because if nothingness becomes also an experience, then it is something. You can experience only something. You have experienced nothingness, but once experienced it becomes an object and there is a division: the knower and the known. Hence it is the first satori.
Ko Hsuan’s sutra is tremendously beautiful. He says: …he perceives only a void, but when he contemplates the void – but when he goes deeper into meditation – he realizes that the void is also void and has become a nothingness.

As he goes deeper, the second satori opens up. Going deeper, he disappears as an experiencer. First the object disappeared and the void was there; but because of the old habit the void became the object. Now the experiencer has also gone. Now there is only nothingness – nobody to experience, nothing to be experienced. This is the second satori.
The void having vanished into nothingness, he realizes that this nothingness of nothing is also nothing…
This is the last possibility of still getting hooked into an experience. You can start rejoicing: “I have experienced nothing,” then you remain hooked with the first satori. You can start rejoicing: “I have experienced that there is no experience and no experiencer. I have experienced that both are void.” It is better than the first, deeper than the first, but somehow the experiencer has still saved itself in a subtle way. It has moved a little deeper – now it says, “I have experienced that there is no experience and no experiencer.” You will be hooked in the second satori.
The third satori happens when:
…he realizes that the nothingness of nothing is also nothing, and when the nethermost nothingness is reached…
And this is the ultimate nothingness; then he does not claim at all. Now if you ask him, “What have you experienced?” he will smile. He cannot say, “I have experienced nothingness.” This is samadhi – the third satori, the ultimate flowering. Now there is nothing left, neither as an object nor as a subject nor as a transcendental subject which transcends both. Nothing is left. Buddha has called it anatta, no-self – a state of total nothingness, absolute nothingness. Hence, what can be said about it?
Whenever anybody asked Buddha about the ultimate experience he will say, “Don’t ask absurd questions, ask practical questions. Ask how to reach it, don’t ask what has happened. It cannot be conveyed.”
Lao Tzu says, “Truth said becomes a falsehood. Truth unsaid remains true but when uttered, becomes false.”
The Upanishads say, “Those who say ‘We know,’ know not.”
Socrates in his last stage of life said, “I know only one thing, that I know nothing.” But Ko Hsuan will say even that is not right: that is the second satori because he is still saying, “I know only one thing, that I know nothing.” Still the statement is there, still the knower is there. According to Ko Hsuan, at least, the statement is wrong. Socrates attained the ultimate samadhi, but Socrates is a Greek, he is not a Chinese – he speaks the way Greeks would have understood. He cannot speak in paradoxes, he speaks logically. Hence he says, “I know only one thing, that I know nothing.”
Ko Hsuan will not even say that; Buddha will not say even that; Lao Tzu will not even say that.
…when this nethermost nothingness is reached, there is most truly to be found a deep and unchanging stillness.
Now for the first time a deep, unchanging stillness prevails. Eternity has opened its doors to you. Now there is no more falling back. You have gone beyond the beyond. You have transcended even the transcendental.
In this profound stillness how can desires be begotten? When desires are no longer begotten, then there is essential and unchanging stillness.
Truth is essentially unchanging.
All things in heaven and earth are in essence unchanging.
So whatsoever changes is only the appearance, what in India the mystics have called maya. It is only appearance.
Forms change; the essential truth remains the same. Waves change; the ocean remains the same forever. Once you have seen this, you are no longer in any misery because you are no longer in any desire, no longer in any dreams. Once you have experienced this, you have become part of the organic whole. You have disappeared; you have become the very ocean. You are no longer a wave, you are no longer a dewdrop, you are oceanic.
To experience this oceanic vastness is the experience of Tao. And the secret is in meditation. One has to pass through three stages: the first satori, the experience of the void; the second satori, the experience that the void is void; and the third satori – now nothing can be said anymore. Now all is silent and still, absolutely silent and still.
The master is one who has reached this third, one who has transcended the transcendental, one who has gone beyond the beyond. Then he has the being of the whole. To be in tune with him is to be in tune with existence, with Tao, with truth. To be in tune with him is to be in tune with bliss, with beauty, with benediction.
Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
Could you say something about innocence and ignorance?
The difference between the two is immense; it is as vast as possible. It is the difference between darkness and light, the difference between death and life, the difference between unconsciousness and consciousness, the difference between hell and heaven.
Ignorance is darkness. It is a state of total negativity; it is a state of knowledge – the lowest state of knowledge, the zero state of knowledge. But it is not different from the knowledgeable mind; they belong to the same category. The ignorant person and the knowledgeable person are not qualitatively different, only quantitatively different. The difference is that of degrees: the knowledgeable person knows more, the ignorant person knows less. And you can be knowledgeable in comparison to one person and ignorant in comparison to another. Hence it is a question of relativity.
Even the most ignorant person may be knowledgeable in comparison to somebody else, or even the most knowledgeable person may be ignorant except in his own expertise. The mathematician is ignorant as far as physics is concerned, the physicist is ignorant as far as chemistry is concerned, the chemist is ignorant as far as mathematics is concerned and so on, so forth. All experts are knowledgeable only in one direction and in all other directions they are utterly ignorant.
That’s why a very strange phenomenon is well known: that the people who are very logical, very argumentative, rational in their particular field, prove to be very gullible in other fields. You may find a great scientist believing in Satya Sai Baba. It looks absurd, but it is not so absurd. Deep down that great scientist knows nothing of religion. He is as ignorant or even more ignorant than an ordinary person. The ordinary person knows much more about religion than the great scientist. The great scientist has poured his whole energy into one concentrated field, excluding everything else.
You can deceive a scientist very easily; it will not be so easy to deceive a farmer. The farmer is not a great logician but he knows many things. He is not an expert in any specialized field, but his general knowledge is far bigger, vaster than the expert. Many great scientists fall victim to all kinds of superstitions.

I have heard the story of a Nobel Prize winning scientist who was hanging a horseshoe behind a chair in his study. Another scientist had come to visit him and he could not believe his eyes, because it is believed by only the ignorant masses that keeping a horseshoe hanging in your room is very good. It protects you; it is a kind of supernatural protection. The visiting friend asked the scientist, “I cannot believe my eyes! You are a Nobel Prize winning scientist; do you still believe in this nonsense, in this superstition that a horseshoe is protective?”
The Nobel laureate laughed. He said, “No, not at all – this is all nonsense. I never believe in such stupidity!”
The friend was even more puzzled. “Then why you are hanging this ugly horseshoe behind your chair?”
The scientist said, “But the person who has given it to me said whether you believe in it or not, it protects you all the same!”

It is defined that science is an effort to know more and more about less and less. That’s exactly what specialization is. If you follow this logic, then the ultimate science will be to know all about nothing; that will be the logical conclusion. If science is knowing more and more about less and less, then where it will end? It will end in knowing all about nothing.
Scientists are very gullible people, and the priests and the so-called saints exploit this opportunity very much. And then they brag, “Look, such a great scientist is my follower!” In fact, it is not the scientist who is his follower, it is the remaining part in him which is not a scientist, and which is far bigger than the scientist. Only a small fragment of his being has become scientific – maybe just one percent of his being – ninety-nine percent is as stupid or even more than the ordinary people, because the ordinary people don’t know more and more about less and less; they know something about everything. You cannot exploit them so easily.
Ignorance simply means that you are missing knowlegeability. A little education and your ignorance can become knowledge. Just a little conditioning, schooling, and your ignorance can be changed into knowledge. There is no difference between ignorance and knowledge; they are interchangeable.
But innocence is a totally different phenomenon. It has nothing to do with knowledge and nothing to do with ignorance either. It is a state of total freedom – from both ignorance and knowledge. It is a state of wonder. It is a very positive state of tremendous awe. When you are full of wonder and awe; when your heart starts throbbing with each beautiful moment that passes by – with the roses, with the marigolds, with the lotuses, with the stars, with the sun, with the moon, with people, with rivers, mountains.
When you can experience and feel the mystery of life, when you are so sensitive, so vulnerable, so open that the miraculous can penetrate to the very core of your being, then you are innocent.
The knowledgeable cannot be innocent. His wonder dies because of his idea that he knows. All his answers are borrowed. All that he knows he really does not know, but he carries all kinds of answers, ready-made answers. Because of those ready-made answers nothing surprises him, nothing at all. He can go on amid this beautiful existence without feeling any joy, any surprise, any wonder, any thrill, any excitement, any ecstasy. He is almost deaf. He cannot hear the music of the birds singing in the morning, he cannot hear the music of the wind passing through the pine trees. He cannot see the life of the trees, of the grass. He cannot see the beauty of a bird on the wing in the silent infinite sky. He walks without ever experiencing the splendor of the stars. He remains blind. He knows no poetry. His approach toward life is completely blocked by his acquired knowledge, by his accumulated answers. He has a ready-made answer for everything. Before a question arises, the answer is already there; even before the question, the answer is already there. The knowledgeable person never listens to the question. He never tries to go deep into the question itself. He hears the question and a process of many answers is triggered in him and he starts answering.
But the man of innocence has no answers. He listens to life in silence. He listens, he sees, he tastes, he smells, he touches. He is very alive. The knowledgeable person is dead, completely closed. He lives in his own grave, that’s why he drags. He has to carry such a burden.
The man of innocence dances; he does not even walk. He is very light. And each small thing fills him with the presence of the mysterious. A butterfly and all its colors, a rainbow in the sky, is enough to throw him into deep meditativeness. He knows no answer, he can only watch the rainbow. He has nothing to say, he can only see – his seeing is clear – he can only hear.

I used to know a very knowledgeable man when I was a child. He used to stay with my family once in a while. He was a great scholar; interested in all kinds of details. For example he knew the names of all possible trees. He used to take me for a morning walk and he would tell me the name of each tree. I have never come across a man who knows the names of all the trees, small shrubs, bushes, all kinds of plants; not only the names – their history, from where they come, what country is their original place.
But one thing I became aware of: he never looked at the trees; he could not. Seeing a rose he would immediately say, “This rose has come from Iran. The Indian word for rose is gulab. The word rose is of Persian origin. That means the flower has come from Persia; it is not of Indian origin. There is no Sanskrit word for gulab – naturally, the flower never existed in India in the Vedic age. It must have come later on. Who brought it first? How did it come?” And he would go on and on; he wouldn’t look at the rose. And he was thinking that he was teaching me.
I told him, “You are destroying something tremendously beautiful in me. Please stop all this nonsense!”
He said, “What do you mean? Is this nonsense? I have acquired it through my whole life!”
I said, “You have wasted your life because you don’t allow me to see any tree, any plant, any flower. If this is going to be so then I am not coming with you tomorrow. You go alone and you can say to yourself whatsoever you want to say. I am not going to be a part of this stupid dialogue. I am perfectly happy with the rose, I don’t want to know from where it has come. Who cares? I am not interested in its origins. I am not interested in the word. What does it matter whether it has come from Persia or not? The rose is not interested so why should I be interested? The rose is enjoying the morning sun, dancing in the morning breeze – and you are talking about Persia and language and grammar and how the word has come into use and when it started for the first time in Indian literature, when it entered Indian books for the first time. If you want me to accompany you, then you have to keep completely silent.”
And he certainly wanted me to accompany him because he was not acquainted with the territory of my town: the roads, streets and ways that lead you out of the town. And he wanted to go every day toward a new direction.
I said, “If you want to keep my company then you have to be silent; if you don’t want my company then you can keep your knowledge. Then whatsoever you want to do you can do – neither I care about it nor the roses care about it.”
He was very shocked. He told my father, “Your son seems to be against knowledge and this is not a good sign. He should be interested in knowledge. This is the time when one should learn.”
My father said, “He is a little difficult child and I knew before that some difficulty would arise when you are taking him for a morning walk.”
And he said, “He has given me an ultimatum: either I have to keep quiet or he is not going to come with me.”
My father told him, “When he says something he means it! You decide.”
He knew all the names of all the birds and he was trying to show his knowledge. I said, “Stop all this exhibitionism!”
But he said, “Whenever I go to other places and I talk to other people, they all appreciate how much I know.”
I said, “They are just as stupid as you are! But I am not stupid. I am not interested in the names of the birds. I want to enjoy their beauty, of course. I want to see them on the wing, in the wind, moving toward the sun. What tremendous joy! What freedom! If I had wings I would have followed them. But I cannot follow you – you will destroy me.”
It was very difficult for him to keep silent, but he had to keep silent because there was nobody else to take him, nobody else who was so acquainted with the territory around the town. I was acquainted with every inch of the whole territory because I was always roaming around, missing from school. I knew all the hillocks and I had followed the river as far away as possible. I had gone to all the surrounding mountains. I was the best guide for him. Even in the night I could have taken any direction, to anywhere. But I said, “You have to keep the promise: keep completely silent.”
After two days he said, “This is too much! Many times I want to say something to you because you are ignorant!”
I said, “Leave me as I am. I may look ignorant to you; I am not ignorant because I am not hankering for knowledge. If I am hankering for knowledge then I am ignorant. I am not hankering for knowledge; I don’t care a bit about knowledge. I am perfectly happy with my innocence and I want to leave it intact.”

Innocence is a positive state of wonder, of awe. No society allows innocence because the society needs knowledge, it depends on knowledge. And I can understand that knowledgeable people will be needed; the whole technology, science, everything depends on them. So it is okay to be knowledgeable when you are working, but leave it there. Don’t carry it around twenty-four hours. People are carrying for twenty-four hours things which should not be carried for twenty-four hours.
When you are a doctor, be a doctor. But when you leave your hospital, forget all about medicine, forget all about what you know, forget all about your MDs and FRCS and everything. Just be innocent so that you can again be in that tremendously beautiful state of childlikeness.
Jesus says, “Blessed are those who are like small children for theirs is the Kingdom of God.”
Never for a moment get confused between innocence and ignorance. Many times they appear to be the same but they are not the same; they can never be the same. Innocence is a state of meditativeness. When you are silent, aware, open, in contact with the whole, in tune with Tao, then you are innocent.
Lao Tzu is innocent, Buddha is innocent, Krishna is innocent, Jesus is innocent. These are not knowledgeable people. Of course what they have said out of their knowing we have changed into knowledge; what they have said out of their wonder, we have reduced it to philosophy, theology. That is our work. We have destroyed all that was beautiful in it. We have given it a certain shape, a certain pattern and structure. We have interpreted it, commented upon it, dropped many things out of it. And this always happens.
Just the other day I received a note from Arup, that “Sarjano is translating your books into Italian, but he changes many things. He drops a few things, he adds a few things from his own knowledge.”
Of course he is trying to do some good work, his intention is good. He wants to make it more logical, more intellectual, more sophisticated. And I am the type of man who is a little bit wild! He wants to trim me here and there. Look at my beard – if Sarjano is allowed he will trim it like Nikolai Lenin, but then it will not be my beard. He is trying to make it more appealing. There is no doubt about his intentions, but these are the intentions which have always destroyed.
When he was told my message that he has to do exactly as it is: “Don’t try to improve upon it. Leave it as it is. Raw, wild, illogical, paradoxical, contradictory, repetitive, whatsoever it is, leave it as it is!” it was so difficult for him. He said, “Then I will not translate. I would rather like cleaning work.”
You see how the mind works? He is not ready to listen to me, he would rather like to do cleaning work. Otherwise he has to be allowed to interpolate, to change, to color things according to his idea.
Now, whatsoever you will do will be wrong because what I am saying is from a totally different plane and what you will be doing will be a totally different effort – it won’t belong to my plane, it won’t belong to my dimension. It may be scholarly, but I am not a scholar. It may be knowledgeable, but I am not a knowledgeable person.
Knowledgeable people have their own ways. Just small things they will do…
For example, I had said that Saraha is the founder of Tibetan Buddhism; no scholar will say this so decisively. Only a madman can say this so decisively because you have to give proof. You have to give footnotes and you have to make a big appendix in which you have to give proof. I never give any proof, I never give any footnotes, I never give you any sources from where… I know only one source – the Akashic records!
So just to make it more appealing, more digestible, he had changed it just a little, not much, to “Saraha can be said to be the founder of Tibetan Buddhism”. Now using “can be said” is a scholarly way, a legal way, but it destroys the whole beauty of it. It destroys its whole certainty, its decisiveness, its hammer-like quality. And hammers are not supposed to be digestible!
Sarjano, it is not a spaghetti! He is a good cook and makes beautiful spaghetti. I don’t know anything about spaghetti, but I know Saraha is the founder of Tibetan Buddhism. And I will not give any proof about it – I don’t believe in proof, I simply know. I know Saraha; it is a personal friendship with Saraha. Even if the historians prove something else, I won’t listen. I won’t pay any attention to them because I know Saraha.
Just the other day I was reading a beautiful report of the Protestant Church in Germany – again they have published a report about me! Now, it seems the man who has written the report on me and my work has become very confused, has also fallen in some kind of love with me. Now he is wavering. He cannot refute me totally – seems to be a man of some sensibility – he cannot say that I am utterly wrong, so he has found a middle way. He supports me on everything except Jesus. And he says about Jesus that whatsoever I am saying looks appealing, but it does not come from Christian sources.
Who cares about Christian sources? Burn them all! I am interested in Christ, I am not interested in Christian sources. I know Christ directly. And when I say I know Christ or Buddha or Saraha directly, I simply mean that I know that state of being. I know Christ can only say this because from such a state of samadhi no other statement is possible. This is something inner which needs no proof; it is intuitive. My certainty arises within me. Whether Jesus said it or not is not the question at all. When I quote Jesus… He says I interpret Jesus beautifully but my interpretations are very alien to Christian theology. They are bound to be: Christ himself is very alien to Christian theology – what can I do about it?
If Christ comes back, he will not be able to recognize Christian theologians. He will not be able at all to understand what this fuss is all about. He was a simple man making simple statements, very direct, immediate. And these people are creating great sophistication around it. For two thousand years they have been going round and round.
But the man who has written it – he is a PhD, a DD, and the most important expert in the whole of Germany on Protestant theology, but the way he has written the report… He has fallen in love with me. Although he is supposed to refute me, he goes on supporting me in many ways. Of course there is one thing he has to do to keep his salary intact and his profession, otherwise he will be thrown out of the church immediately, so he says everything is okay except what I say about Jesus. And the reason he gives is that it does not seem to come from Christian sources.
But Jesus never came from Christian sources! There were no Christian sources when Jesus was here. He was in contact with strange people; those people were not Christians. He was in contact with Essenes; they were great mystics. He traveled all over Asia, he traveled to India, to Tibet, to become acquainted with the Eastern approach.
Buddha was still very much alive in the air – it was just five hundred years earlier that Buddha had died. And Buddha had said that, “My religion will remain alive for five hundred years.” It was still alive; the last flames were dying. He must have felt the warmth. Jesus must have contacted Buddhist mystics.
He went to Egypt in search of secret mysteries. That’s why Christian sources completely miss many years of his life. They talk about him when he was twelve years old and then suddenly they start talking about when he was thirty years old. And what happened in between? Between the ages of twelve and thirty there is a long distance, and in a life which lasted only thirty-three years it is almost the whole life. Christian sources give no reference to it, but there are other sources.
In Ladakh there are two-thousand-year-old Buddhist scriptures which talk about the visit of Jesus Christ. And they describe the man far more accurately because the people who wrote those things were mystics themselves.
But this has always happened. Innocence will always be interpreted by knowledgeable people and will be destroyed – and with all good wishes, with all good intentions they will do a great harm. They have always done that.
Remember, I am not telling you to remain ignorant; I am telling you to get rid of both ignorance and knowledge. They are not different – two sides of the same coin. Throw the whole coin, and then you are innocent.

The second question:
Osho,
What is ambition? To live without ambition seems frightening, like starting a new life up from the beginning.
Ambition is the greatest poison there is. It brings all the other poisons: greed, violence, competitiveness, struggle, a constant state of war with everybody else. It does not allow you any space for love to grow and your real being flowers only with love. Ambition is against love. Anything that is against love is against you and your real life, your real destiny. And nothing kills love more than ambitiousness.
Ambition means you want to be ahead of others. Ambition depends on creating an inferiority complex in you. It creates an ill state of affairs; it depends on that. Unless an inferiority complex starts existing in you, unless you are full of it, ambition cannot function.
So each child has to be wounded in such a way that he starts feeling a deep inferiority: that others are superior and he has to surpass them, otherwise he is nobody. Each child is taught to create a name in the world, fame in the world. Each child is told, “The way you are is not right. You have to prove your mettle, you have to become ‘somebody’ – as if you are not anybody yet!”
You are born with a certain flavor of your own, with a uniqueness, with an individuality. Nobody else is like you – nobody else has ever been like you – and nobody else will ever be like you. But this truth is never told to you. You are told, “Become somebody,” as if you are nothing. So you have to become, you have to compete to become. And of course then the struggle starts because everybody is told to become somebody, everybody is told to become the president or the prime minister. Now, how many people can be presidents and prime ministers? Then naturally there arises a cut-throat competition. Everybody is against everybody else. Life becomes a war, a constant war. In this state there is no possibility of peace, love, silence, joy, celebration. All is lost.

John Lennon, in one of his creative moods, was sitting alone in his room strumming his guitar. While doing this he saw a beetle scuttle across the floor.
“Hello, little beetle,” said John, “I named my group after you.”
The beetle stopped, turned around and said, “You called your group Eric?”

That was his name. You think only man is competitive? Even beetles are!
This competitiveness in individuals becomes competitiveness on many planes, on many levels. Societies compete with each other, nations compete with each other. Everybody is trying that “I am superior to you” and naturally nobody will allow that “You are superior to me” – it hurts.
Hence so many wars. In three thousand years there have been five thousand wars. If somebody comes from some other planet and looks at us and our history, he will think that this earth is a madhouse. Five thousand wars in three thousand years! What we have been doing except fighting? Seventy percent of our energies go into war; we could have transformed the whole earth into a paradise and we have made a hell of it.
But there is competitiveness about everything.

The NATO forces were on maneuvers in Europe and each country had a separate camp in close proximity to each other.
One day the British camp received a message from the American camp which read: “Please send three dozen condoms, as we have run out of stock. Size: twelve inches long by three inches thick.”
The message was taken to the Commanding Officer who did not know what to do with it, so he sent for the Intelligence Officer. “Matter of prestige, old man,” said the Commanding officer. “Have to do something!”
The Intelligence Officer returned within the hour. “All taken care of, sir. The motor workshop is making something out of old inner tubes and the silk-screen department is going to do the final touches.”
“What are the final touches?” asked the Commanding officer.
“Well, sir,” said the Intelligence officer, “on the package will be printed: ‘Condoms, Made in England, Size – Medium.’”

This stupidity, about everything! But we are brought up in this way; our whole educational system depends on this foundation – and we think we are creating intelligence. If this stupidity is the foundation of our educational system, how can we create intelligence out of it? We can destroy intelligence, but we cannot create intelligence out of it.
An intelligent person is one who comes to see that there is no need to compete at all. “I am myself, you are yourself. I need not be you, you need not be me.” A rose is a rose is a rose; it need not be a lotus. The lotus need not become anxious, worried about becoming a roseflower.
The whole of nature is in deep peace for the simple reason that competition has not poisoned it. There is no competition at all. The biggest cedar of Lebanon has no ego like “I am bigger than others.” Just a small rosebush has no inferiority complex that “I am so small.” Nothing of superiority, nothing of inferiority, but each is unique. This stupidity has entered only human consciousness – human consciousness is being conditioned for it.
You ask me, “What is ambition?” It is a feverish state, it is an insane state. It is not healthy. You say, “To live without ambition seems frightening…” Of course because you have lived with ambition for so long, it has become your very lifestyle. You have become identified with it; you don’t know any other way of living. To drop it feels as if you are dying.
And in fact that’s what has to be done by a sannyasin: he has to die in many ways before he can be reborn. And this is a must: that you should die as an ambitious person, you should die as an ambitious mind completely, totally. Not even a trace of ambition should be left in you because even if a small trace is there, it will start growing again. It is like a root: it will again sprout, again leaves will grow, again there will be foliage. It has to be completely thrown out of your being.
Yes, it feels difficult, very arduous, almost impossible in the beginning because we don’t know any other way to live.
People ask me, “If we drop competitiveness, if we drop ambitiousness, then how we will grow?” and trees are growing and animals are growing, and the whole existence is moving and growing – just you cannot grow without ambitiousness.
And what has happened with ambitiousness? Have you grown? Something wrong has grown in you; something like cancer in your being has grown. Yes, that cancer will not grow anymore. If you drop all ambition, then a totally new process sets in: your natural growth takes over. Then you are not competing with others. You are simply evolving each moment within yourself, not comparing. If you are playing music and it is beautiful in this moment, the next moment it will be more beautiful because out of this moment the next moment is going to be born – from where else will it come? – next moment you will have a deeper music arising, and so on, so forth. You need not be competitive with other musicians. In fact, if you are competitive with other musicians your inner music will never grow. You may learn more tricks, strategies, techniques to defeat them, to go ahead of them by right or wrong means – because competitiveness is so blind it does not bother at all what is right and what is wrong.
Competitiveness believes that whatsoever succeeds is right and whatsoever fails is wrong. That is the only criterion for an ambitious mind: the end makes the means right. For a noncompetitive mind there is no question about thinking of others; you simply continue growing on your own. Your roots go deeper into Tao, into nature. Not that other trees have reached deeper so you also have to reach – you reach deeper for your own nourishment, you reach deeper for your own enrichment, you reach deeper because your branches can go higher. The deeper the roots go, the higher the branches reach. But it has nothing to do with others; the others are accepted as they are. Nobody takes any note of others.
It is certainly starting a new life up from the very beginning. That’s why Christ says, “Unless you are born again you shall not enter my Kingdom of God.” A rebirth is needed.

A championship is held to see who has the largest prick in the world. The theater is filled with people and the gays are screaming with excitement. Up in front sit the judges.
First a Russian comes on stage. He is enormous and the applause is loud. The judges measure him and there is more applause.
Next a black man comes on stage. He is huge and loud applause sounds through the theater.
Then an Italian and a Japanese come forward. Both are measured and receive standing ovations.
The excitement of the crowd is mounting when a dwarf suddenly appears on stage. Everyone whistles and yells for him to leave. But the dwarf raises one arm in the air and asks for silence. Then when all is quiet, he opens his fly and takes out a turtle, shouting, “Just a minute folks, this is just a crab!”

The third question:
Osho,
What do you mean by “live in danger”? Should man not be careful for the future? Please explain it.
To live in danger simply means not to cling to the past because the past gives you a certain kind of security – because it is familiar and well-known. Maybe it is all misery, all anguish, but still because it is known and you have lived through it for so long, you are well acquainted with it. You know the ups and downs and you have become accustomed to it. In fact, you have become adjusted to it and now there are no more surprises in it. It gives you a certain comfortable, convenient, cozy feeling. It may be dirty, it may be enclosed like a prison, but still it feels like your home because you have lived so long in it. Even prison cells become people’s homes.
I used to visit prisons; a governor of one of the states in India was my friend so he allowed me to visit all the prisons in that state. I used to go to the prisons and I was surprised to see that people were perfectly happy. In fact, they started becoming worried when their time for release was coming closer because the outside world looked so alien. Somebody has lived for fifteen years in the prison; now, for fifteen years he had no worries about food, shelter, no problems of any kind. He was taken care of. Now he will have to look for a job again, whether he will get it or not is uncertain. Outside the gate is unknown. Once he is outside the gate he will be thrown into an unknown world. Fifteen years is a long time.
I asked many prisoners, “Why do you come back again and again? Have you not learned the lesson that you should not do such things again?”
They said, “In fact, we have learned the lesson. Inside there is so much security and outside so much insecurity – unemployment, poverty, starvation and all kinds of problems. And once you have been released from prison, your problems increase because nobody wants a thief as a servant. People ask, ‘Why you have been sent to jail?’ People ask, ‘Bring certificates, character certificates.’ From where can we get character certificates? For fifteen years we have been in jail! We can get a character certificate from the jailer that ‘This man behaved well, did nothing wrong,’ but that will be from a jailer and that is enough proof that nobody is going to give us employment, nobody is going to trust us. Outside the prison there are only vast unknown faces, so the only alternative is to do something again so that we are sent back to the jail.”
Our whole system of punishment is stupid; it is utterly nonpsychological. Any person who goes to the prison once is bound to come back again and again and again. He creates friendship there, his friends are there, his room is there, his place is there. Even in prisoners a certain hierarchy arises: there are people who are important and there are people who are not so important and there are people who are just nobodies. And it is a small compact world. There are heroes: people talk about, “This man has murdered seven people and you have murdered only one, just one? And you brag so much? And somebody has been stealing for years, and you did your first theft and were caught? What kind of thief are you?” There are master thieves; people start learning from the knowledgeable people, and when they come out they use their knowledge.
When I say to live in danger, I mean always remain prepared to move into the unknown. It does not mean that you should not be careful for the future, but the best care that you can take about the future is to first get rid of the past. It is the past that does not allow you to take care of the future. It is the past that goes on repeating itself mechanically and you cannot improve upon your future. If you drop the past completely, your future will be totally different and you will start growing. That is the first care you should take.
The second care that can be taken is to live in the present as totally as possible because it is out of the present that the future grows. And you never bother about the present; you think only of the future. You constantly think of the future. Either you think of the past or you think of the future, and both are foolish. Live in the present. That’s what I mean when I say live dangerously.
I have come across a story. Somebody like you must have invented it because there is no reference about it anywhere – neither in Christian sources nor in non-Christian sources.

Two women are crying and weeping under Jesus’ cross. One says to the other, “I would give everything to be able to take the nail out of his hand!”
After a few minutes, the other replies, “Yes, me too. I would give everything to be able to take the nail out of his hand!”
Jesus looks down and mumbles to himself, “Damn! Those two bitches want me to fall off the cross!”

You become even adjusted to your cross. You don’t even want to fall off your cross. Being on your cross even becomes cozy, comfortable – it is your cross. You start worshipping it, you start bragging about it.
Just watch people, listen to their stories. They are all bragging about their miseries. They go on magnifying their miseries, exaggerating their miseries, as if they are not satisfied with the small miseries that they are suffering; they want bigger ones. They have become adjusted to their cross.
I am telling you: leave your cross behind. Jesus says, “Carry your cross on your own shoulders.” I say drop it, why carry it? Forget all about it! And how can you dance if you are carrying a cross on your shoulders? No wonder Christians say Jesus never laughed. How can you laugh when you are carrying a cross on your shoulders? You can only weep, you cannot laugh.
When I say live dangerously, I say don’t become adjusted to that which is dead because if you become adjusted to that which is dead, you will be dead. Remain alive, moving, growing, flowing, going into the unknown every moment, facing the unknown whatsoever it brings. There is no other way to grow, and even if sometimes it is painful – and it is painful sometimes, it is rough sometimes, it is very rough sometimes, but out of this pain is born great ecstasy. That is the price we pay for the ecstasy.

The fourth question:
Osho,
After yesterday's discourse a couple of women came up to me and asked if we could get together and tell jokes. I had to say no, that I only joke with one person and that I am not joking around. What to do?
That’s a beautiful use of the word joke; it reminded me of a joke.

A young man is driving with his girlfriend on a lonely road and one tire gets punctured. So they jacked and jacked and jacked – and then went out to change the tire.

You are using “joke” in the same sense as “they jacked and jacked and jacked” – inside the car! It is good finding new meanings to old words, but you seem to be a little old-fashioned.
If you joke only with one person then for how long can you keep joking? You will get bored. And think of the other person too: he or she will also get bored. A little bit of joking around is not bad! It keeps the water flowing. And joking is not a one-way affair. When you joke with somebody, somebody jokes with you; you can’t go on joking alone. Or do you think you can do that? That you simply lie down and “I will joke alone.” You will look very silly. The other has to joke also. So instead of just listening to each other’s old jokes it is better to joke around a little so you both will learn a few new jokes. Then come back to the girlfriend or boyfriend and joke in a new way and they will be thrilled! And by that time they must have joked somewhere else, so they will bring some new jokes. And remember, each person jokes in his own way.
Don’t be so old-fashioned – and not in my commune!

It was Easter time and the rooster was curious, hearing all the people talking about Easter eggs.
When the day came he walked into the house to take a look at the famous eggs. To his shock, he saw blue eggs, yellow eggs, green eggs, and a red egg.
Without stopping to think, he went back outside and beat up the peacock!

Now don’t be that kind of traditional rooster! It is good to have all kinds of eggs, all colors, multicolors. Then life is more like a rainbow. Otherwise it becomes a drag and dull.
And joking with one person has created monotony – people call it “monogamy.” And then slowly, slowly they stop joking because what is the point? The same jokes again and again… And the women are very sensitive; the moment you want to joke with them they say they have a headache, or the child is growing teeth and the whole day they have been tired, or the cook has left, or the servant has not turned up, or there has been no electricity in the house the whole day. There are a thousand-and-one problems. Simply the woman is saying, “Please, no more of these jokes. Enough is enough!” She knows you, that you will again joke the same old joke.

A stranger walks into the local pub. The bartender welcomes him and says, “Well, sir, a pint of beer? Or do you prefer a whisky? You are my guest – it is on the house.”
“No, thank you,” replies the stranger. “I don’t drink alcohol. I tried it once and it makes me feel dizzy.”
“Well then, I am sure you will enjoy one of my best cigars,” the cheerful bartender says, offering him the cigar.
“No, thank you. I don’t smoke. I tried it once and it makes me feel sick.”
The bartender, still smiling, continues, “Well, come on then, let us play some poker!”
“No, thank you. I don’t play poker. I tried it once and lost my money,” is the stranger’s dry reply.
At this moment a young man walks into the bar and sits next to the stranger. The stranger turns to the bartender and says, “May I introduce you to my son?”
“Hello,” says the bartender, “I presume that you are his only child are you not?”

Become a little more contemporary. You are living at least two thousand years back. And don’t think this is the way you will ever get into paradise – paradise has completely changed meanwhile; it is utterly modern. You will look like a fool there, you will look so out-of-date. You will not fit. If you cannot fit here with my commune, which is simply representative of paradise on the earth… We are just trying to rehearse for paradise!

Four women arrive in paradise; three of them are English and one is Italian. Saint Peter asks the first one, “Have you been an honest woman?”
“Oh yes, sir,” she replies. “I have been honest all my life.”
So Saint Peter tells an angel, “Take this woman into the pink room!”
The same thing happens to the other two women: they are both sent to the pink room.
Then Saint Peter asks the Italian one, “And you, have you been honest?”
“I never did-a any harm-a to anyone, Peter!” she replies. “I could-a say I was-a honest. I loved love, I loved love more than anything-a else!”
Says Saint Peter to the angel, “Take this one to my room!”

Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
Tao is greater than the mind. Then why do we keep choosing the mind instead of flowing with the Tao?
It is precisely because of that. Tao is so vast that one is afraid to lose one’s identity in it. We are like dewdrops and Tao is like an ocean. The dewdrop is afraid, very frightened to get closer to the ocean – one step in the ocean and he will be lost forever. He wants to cling to his identity; howsoever small, howsoever tiny, howsoever mediocre, but it is his identity, it is his personality. He is only because he is separate from the ocean.
That’s the way of the ego: the ego can exist only in separation. Separation creates misery because you become uprooted from the whole, but one is ready to suffer misery rather than to die and disappear into absolute bliss. People only talk about bliss, nobody really wants to be blissful. They talk about bliss as if they can remain the same and bliss can be added to them as they are. They want bliss also to be a kind of new possession so that their ego can feel more enhanced, more defined, more precious, more enriched.
But as the ego becomes more defined you become smaller. As you become smaller you become miserable because you start feeling suffocated, you start feeling closed from all sides. Your prison cell becomes smaller and smaller – even to exist in it becomes impossible. But people are ready to suffer all kinds of misery, they are ready to sacrifice everything for the ego.
That’s why we cling to the mind. The mind is nothing but the process of the ego, the functioning of the ego. The mind is the boundary between you and the whole. It is a wall, not a bridge – no-mind is the bridge. Hence the emphasis of all the awakened ones to move from the mind to no-mind. The ego can exist only if you remain in constant fight; a continuous struggle is needed because it is a false entity. You have to maintain it. It is not something spontaneous, it is not something natural that can exist on its own. It needs competitiveness, it needs conflict; it needs all kinds of jealousies, possessiveness, hatred, war. It can exist only with all that is wrong.
The ego represents the unhealthy state of our being. It is assertive. To relax is against the ego, to be non-ambitious is against the ego. Just a moment of relaxation is enough and you will have the taste of Tao, because it is always there, it is never really lost. You go on creating walls, but all walls crumble in a split second. Hence, wherever it happens, in whatsoever situation it happens, you become frightened of that situation.
People have become afraid of love for the simple reason that love is the most potential force in existence – when the window in Tao opens on its own accord. Love means the wall disappears, the wall is no more and the bridge arises. Of course it happens only between two persons, but even to let it happen between two persons gives you such joy, such orgasmic glow, such tremendous experience of the splendor of life that the ego is afraid.
The ego has created false substitutes for love. The ego is perfectly ready for marriage, but not for love. Marriage is a legal institution, a social institution produced by the cunning mind, by the cunning priests, by the vested interests. Love is natural. Love is dangerous for the ego. If love is allowed you will start tasting little bits of Tao, but that taste will create in you a longing to have more of it. It is so sweet, it is so exquisite, it is so beautiful! Then you will be ready to sacrifice all nonsense that goes with the ego. You will be ready to disappear into the whole.
It is love that will give you the courage to take the ultimate jump – first with a single person… But once the experience is there you cannot step back, you will have to go ahead; you cannot go back. First it is with a single person, but you cannot stop the process now. It is so ecstatic that if it is so beautiful with one single person, how much will it be with the whole.
A buddha is one who is in an orgasmic relationship with the whole. Tao is the ultimate orgasm, not between two individuals but between the part and the whole, between the dewdrop and the ocean. The dewdrop has to disappear, but it loses nothing.
All our fears are unfounded; they are rooted in ignorance, but the ego exploits the ignorance. Hence all societies have distorted the natural flow of love, because it can open the floodgates and then it will be uncontrollable. It is better to give people a false substitute. Marriage is that substitute and therefore for five thousand years, man has lived with marriage and misery.
You are not allowed to experience beauty. Your minds are from the very beginning distorted, channeled toward utilitarian ends. You are taught mathematics, you are taught geography, history. Now, history is all bunk, utterly useless. Why go on reading about the ancient idiots? For what purpose? It is better to forget all about them. Why bother about Genghis Khan, Tamerlane, Nadir Shah, Alexander, Napoleon? For what? What have these people given to human consciousness? They are like poisons; they have stopped human progress and human evolution in every possible way.
And in your history books you will not find names of Lao Tzu, Chuang Tzu, Lieh Tzu, Ko Hsuan – not even in the footnotes. And these are the people who are the real foundations of human consciousness, these are the people who are the real hope. But you will not find their names even mentioned. On the contrary, historians will always create doubt in you as to whether Jesus ever existed, whether Krishna is a historical person or just a myth, whether Mahavira was a reality or just a fiction; did Buddha really walk on the earth or is he a projection of our dreams, of our desires?
Sigmund Freud said that these people are wish fulfillments. He said that we want that there should have been people like these, but they have not really existed. And even if they have existed, they have not existed the way we have described them. That was the cause of the rift between Freud and his disciple Carl Gustav Jung. The rift was of tremendous significance. Freud is very pragmatic; Jung is far more poetic. Jung has tremendous trust in mythology and has no trust in history. And I absolutely agree with Jung about this.
All the mythologies of the world are closer to the truth than your so-called histories. But we teach our children history, not mythology. We teach them arithmetic, not poetry. And the way we teach a little bit of poetry – we teach it in such a way that they become so fed up and bored with it that once the student leaves the university he will never read Shakespeare again, he will never look at Milton’s works again. The very names of Shakespeare, Milton, Kalidas, Bhavbhuti will create a kind of nausea in him. The professors have tortured him so much with these names that he is finished with poetry forever. His interest has not been encouraged, he has not become more poetic; he has lost all interest in poetry. He has not been supported to be creative, he has not been helped to learn how to poetize.
The scholars are so clever in destroying all that is beautiful by their commentaries, interpretations, by their so-called learning. They make everything so heavy that even poetry with them becomes nonpoetic.

I myself never attended any poetry class in the university. I was called again and again by the head of the department, saying that “You attend other classes, why you don’t come to the poetry classes?”
I said, “Because I want to keep my interest in poetry alive. I love poetry, that’s why. And I know perfectly well that your professors are absolutely unpoetic; they have never known any poetry in their lives. I know them perfectly well. The man who teaches poetry in the university goes for a morning walk with me every day. I have never seen him looking at the trees, listening to the birds, seeing the beautiful sunrise.”
And in the university where I was, the sunrise and the sunset were something tremendously beautiful. The university was on a small hillock surrounded by small hills all around. I have traveled all over this country and I have never come across and seen such beautiful sunsets and sunrises anywhere. For some unknown mysterious reason, Sagar University seems to have a certain situation where clouds become so colorful at the time of sunrise and sunset that even a blind man will become aware that something tremendously beautiful is happening.
But I have never seen the professor who teaches poetry in the university look at the sunset, or even stop for a single moment. And whenever he sees me watching the sunset or the sunrise or the trees or the birds, he asks me, “Why you are sitting here? You have come for a morning walk – do your exercise!”
I told him, “This is not exercise for me. You are doing exercise; with me it is a love affair.”
And when it rains he never came. And whenever it rains I will go and knock at his door and tell him, “Come on!”
He will say, “But it is raining!”
I said, “That’s the most beautiful time to go for a walk because the streets are absolutely empty. And to go for a walk without any umbrella while it is raining is so beautiful, so poetic!”
He thinks I am mad, but a man who has never gone in the rains under the trees cannot understand poetry. I told to the head of the department: “This man is not poetic; he destroys everything. He is so scholarly. And poetry is such an unscholarly phenomenon that there is no meeting ground between the two.”

Universities destroy people’s interest and love for poetry. They destroy your whole idea of how life should be; they make it more and more a commodity. They teach you how to earn more, but they don’t teach you how to live deeply, how to live totally. And these are the ways from where you can get glimpses of Tao. These are the ways from where small doors and windows open into the ultimate. You are told the value of money but not the value of a roseflower. You are told the value of being a prime minister or a president but not the value of being a poet, a painter, a singer, a dancer. Those things are thought to be for crazy people. And they are the ways from where one slips slowly into Tao.
Tao is certainly greater than the mind – Tao is greater than everything. Tao is God, Tao is the whole. But we are very afraid of losing ourselves and we keep on feeding our egos in a thousand and one ways.
We are doing two things in our life: closing all windows and doors to the sun, to the moon, to the stars, to the wind, to the rain, to the birds, to the trees, to love, to beauty, to truth. We are closing all the windows, we are creating a grave around ourselves with no doors and no windows. We are becoming Leibniz monads, windowless capsules. Our life is encapsulated. That is one part that we go on doing. And the second part is to go on making the walls thicker and thicker. That is done by competition, ambition: having more and more. Whether you need it or not is not the point at all. Do you think the richest people in the world need more money now? They have more than they can use, far more. But the desire for more does not stop because it is not a question that they need money; the question is to go on making the walls of the ego thicker and thicker. They are continuously in competition with each other. Competition creates conflict. Conflict keeps your ego alive.

A beatnik was boppin’ down the sidewalk just a-poppin’ his fingers and feeling good, when a Jaguar pulled up at the intersection.
“Hey, daddy cool, wanna drag race?” said the beatnik.
“Sure,” laughed the sports car driver, amused.
The light turned green and off they shot, the beatnik in the lead, running like hell. The driver was amazed! He looked at his speedometer: twenty, thirty, not until forty miles per hour did he finally overtake the beatnik.
Then he looked in his rearview mirror and noticed that the beatnik had suddenly disappeared. Concerned, he went back to find him lying in the ditch all bruised and battered.
“Hey,” said the man, “you were doing great. I could not believe it – what happened?”
“Like man,” groaned the beatnik, “I mean, you ever had a sneaker blow out on you at forty-five miles an hour?”

One has to decide one thing once forever: whether one wants to live the life of the ego, which is more like death than like life, or one wants to live the life of Tao, which is death in a sense and resurrection in another sense. It is both a crucifixion and a resurrection. The dewdrop disappears, but it becomes the ocean. It loses nothing, it only gains.
Sannyas means that you have decided to live the life of Tao, that you will not cling to the mind, that you will let it go, that you will not nourish it anymore, that you will not support it in any possible way, that you will go on finding how you have been supporting it and withdrawing your support. When all supports are withdrawn it falls on its own accord. And the moment the ego falls and disappears is the greatest moment in life. That’s the moment of enlightenment, the moment of awakening, the moment when you become a Christ or a Buddha or a Krishna.

The second question:
Osho,
Are you absolutely against the intellect? Should one never use one's head at all?
I am not absolutely against the intellect. It has its uses but they are very limited and you have to understand the limitations. If you are working as a scientist you will have to use your intellect. It is a beautiful mechanism, but it is beautiful only if it remains a slave and does not become the master. If it becomes the master and overpowers you then it is dangerous. The mind as a slave to consciousness is a beautiful servant. The mind as a master of consciousness is a very dangerous master.
The whole question is of emphasis. I am not absolutely against intellect – I use intellect myself, how I can be against it? Right now, talking to you, I am using it. But I am the master; it is not my master. If I want to use it, I use it. If I don’t want to use it, it has no power over me. But your intellect, your mind, your thinking process continues whether you want or not. It does not bother about you – as if you are nobody at all – it goes on and on; even when you are asleep it goes on working. It does not listen to you at all. It has remained in power for so long that it has forgotten completely that it is only a servant.
When you go for a walk you use your legs. But when you are sitting there is no need to go on moving your legs. People ask me, “Osho, for two hours continuously you go on sitting in the same posture. You don’t even move your legs once.” Why should I move? I am not walking! I know that for you, even if you are sitting on your chair, you are not really sitting. You are moving your legs, changing your position, posture, doing a thousand and one things, tossing and turning – a great restlessness.
The same is true about your mind. If I am talking to you, I am using the mind. The moment I stop talking, my mind stops too, immediately! If I am not talking to you, my mind has no need to go on working, it simply goes into silence. That’s how it should be. It should be natural. While asleep I don’t dream; there is no need. You dream only because so much work was left undone in the day that the mind has to do it. It is overtime work – you have not been able to finish in the day.
And how can you finish anything? You are doing a thousand and one things simultaneously. Nothing is ever finished; everything remains incomplete – and remains incomplete forever. You will die, but nothing will be complete. Your work will not be complete even in a single direction because you are running in all directions, you have become many fragments, you are not integrated. The mind is dragging you into one thing, the heart is dragging you into another, the body wants you to go somewhere else, and you are always at a loss whom to listen to. And the mind is also not one, you have many minds – you are multi-psychic. There is a crowd of minds in you. There is no unity, no harmony. You are not an orchestra – nothing is in tune. Everything is going on its own; nobody listens to anybody else – you simply create noise not music.
The intellect is good if it functions as a servant of the whole. Nothing is bad if it is in its right place and everything is wrong if it is in the wrong place. Your head is perfectly good if it is on your shoulders. If it is somewhere else then it is wrong.
Working as a scientist, the intellect is needed. Working in the marketplace, the intellect is needed. Communicating with words, talking to people, the intellect is needed. But it is a very limited use. There are far greater things where the intellect is not needed at all. And where it is not needed it goes on functioning there, too; that’s the problem. You should be capable…a meditator becomes capable, he becomes very fluid, flexible, he does not become idiotic. He uses his intellect, but he uses his intuition too – he knows that their functions are different. He uses his head and he uses his heart too.

I used to stay in Kolkata in the house of a High Court judge. His wife told me, “You are the only person my husband has any respect for. If you say something he will listen, otherwise he won’t listen to anybody. I have tried my best but I have failed. That’s why I am telling this to you.”
I said, “What is the problem?”
She said, “The problem is becoming bigger and bigger every day. He remains a judge for twenty-four hours a day. Even in the bed with me he is a judge – as if he expects me also to say ‘Your Honor.’ With the children also he behaves as if they are criminals. With everybody! We are tired. He never gets down! He carries this role continuously; he never forgets. It has gone into his head.”
And she was right – I knew her husband.

It is good to be a judge when you are in the court, but by the time you leave the court… It is only a function to be a judge, you are a functionary; you don’t become a judge – that is not your being! But we get confused. It becomes your being.
He carries it home, then he starts behaving the same way with the wife, with the children, with everybody. The wife was afraid of him, the children were afraid of him. The moment he entered the house there was fear everywhere. Just a moment before, the children were happily playing, enjoying. They would suddenly stop, the wife would become serious. The house would immediately turn into a court.
This is the state of millions of people: they remain the same, they carry their office home.
Your intellect is needed, your head has its own function. Existence never gives you anything without any reason. The head has its own beauty, but it should be in its place. There are far greater things which are beyond the reach of the head, and when you are moving into those realms you should put the head aside. You should be capable of that. That is flexibility, that is intelligence. And remember never to get confused between intellect and intelligence.
Intellect is only a part of intelligence. Intelligence is a far bigger phenomenon: it contains much more than intellect because life is not only intellectual, life is intuitive, too. Intelligence contains intuition.
You will be surprised to know that many great discoveries have been done not by intellect but by intuition. In fact, all the great discoveries have been done by intuition.
Something far deeper exists in you. You should not forget it. Intellect is only the periphery, the circumference, it is not the center of your being; the center of your being is intuition.
The word intuition is worth understanding. Intellect needs tuition, it has to be taught. Hence the schools, colleges, universities, they all give you tuition. Intuition needs no tuition, it is your inner world; it is something given by existence as a gift – you bring it with you.
When you put your intellect aside, your head aside, then something deeper inside you starts functioning which is incomprehensible from the periphery. Your center starts functioning, and your center is always in tune with Tao. Your circumference is your ego, your center is in tune with Tao. Your center is not yours, it is not mine; the center is universal. Circumferences are personal – your circumference is your circumference, my circumference is my circumference – but my center and your center are not two things; at the center we all meet and are one.
That’s why religion comes to realize the oneness of existence – because it depends on intuition. Science goes on dividing, splitting. It reaches the minutest particle, called the electron. The world becomes a multiplicity, it is no longer a universe. In fact, scientists should stop using the word universe, they should start using a new word, multiverse. Universe has a religious tone – universe means one. Religion reaches one; that is the experience of the center. But the center can function only when you move from the circumference to the center. It needs a quantum leap.
You say, “Should one never use one’s head at all?” I have not said that. I am talking against the head only because my work is religious.

There was a nymphomaniac whom nobody could satisfy. Men from all over the world did their best, yet failed. When Machista came, the two went into a room for five hours…but when he finally came out he was totally exhausted, an absolute wreck. He had to admit failure.
Tarzan too made an attempt. He was brought all the way from the jungle to try. Lots of people waited outside for hours, thinking that he would surely make it, but when he came out he just muttered, “That woman is a wonder! Nobody can do it!” and disappeared.
More and more ambitious men came with high hopes – still, it did not happen. Then one day this little Jewish tailor, whose shop was on the street corner, passed by. He was curious to know what it was all about, and even though most of the crowd thought such matters were not for him, they told him. To their great surprise he said immediately, “I will do it!” So just for a laugh, they let him go in.
Fifteen minutes later he and the lady came out, hand in hand, beaming, smiling from ear to ear. There was no need to say anything. It was a success.
“What’s the trick, how did you do it?” everyone wanted to know.
“Well, there are situations when you have got to use your head,” he said nonchalantly.

Get it?

The third question:
Osho,
Is Tao a synthesis of the paths of love and awareness?
Tao is not a synthesis in the sense we understand the word. It is not synthesis in the sense Assagioli uses the word psychosynthesis.
The ordinary meaning of the word synthesis is making two opposites meet, creating a certain meeting ground between two opposites. It is not synthesis in that sense. It makes no effort to create that kind of unity. But it is a synthesis in a very different meaning, in a higher sense, in a totally different dimension. It is transcendence of the paths of love and awareness, it is transcendence of the opposites. And whenever the opposites are transcended, synthesis happens on its own accord. But you have to understand the difference.
Assagioli’s synthesis is very poor; it has no depth, it cannot have – it is a mind effort. It is far poorer than Sigmund Freud’s analysis for the simple reason that the mind is very efficient in analyzing things; the mind is incapable of synthesizing things. That’s why, although Assagioli is trying to do something far more important than Sigmund Freud…but he fails. If you study both, Sigmund Freud looks like a genius. Assagioli looks just a pigmy by his side.
And, let me emphasize again, he is trying to do something far bigger, far more important than Sigmund Freud, but Freud succeeds because he is doing the right kind of work that the mind is capable of doing. Assagioli is trying to do the same thing as Tao but through the mind. The mind is not capable of synthesizing. Tao does it from a totally different dimension: it goes beyond the mind, it goes into no-mind. And when you reach no-mind, synthesis happens – not that you have to do anything about it.
Assagioli’s synthesis is man-made, man-manufactured. Hence it is more like a hotchpotch, somehow trying to make two opposites meet, but they are unwilling to meet; forcing them to meet, but basically because they are opposites, they cannot meet. And he is using the mind which cannot create synthesis, which is capable only of analysis.
Tao uses meditation, not the mind. It is not interested in synthesis at all. It simply moves beyond the mind, and then synthesis comes like a shadow. You can see it happening here.
For example… Take a more contemporary example. Just a few years ago, Mahatma Gandhi tried a great experiment of synthesizing all the religions. He utterly failed. It was bound to happen because he was trying to manufacture synthesis, and synthesis cannot be manufactured. He was trying to do it through the mind. He knew nothing of meditation, he never tried meditation. In the name of religion, all that he knew was prayer – and prayer is of the mind; it is not meditation, it is talking to God. Just as you talk with others you can talk to a God, who may be just imaginary, who is in fact imaginary because there is no person there.
Prayer is a dialogue, a dialogue between you and an imaginary God. Meditation is silence – no dialogue, no monologue either.
Gandhi knew nothing of meditation, but he tried hard to create a certain facade of synthesis. What you can do through the intellect?
Basically he was a Hindu and he remained a Hindu all his life, to the very end. He calls the Bhagavadgita his mother, but he never calls the Koran his father – not even an uncle. Although he talks about the teaching being the same, the way he manages it is absolutely political – clever, cunning, but not authentic. It is a mind effort, it cannot be authentic. He does it well. What he does is that whatsoever he finds in the Koran, in the Bible, in the Dhammapada, which is in agreement with the Gita, he immediately picks it up and says, “Look! All the religions teach the same thing.”
But there are many things which go against the Gita in the Bible, which go against the Gita in the Koran, in the Dhammapada. He does not take any note of them, he ignores them; he knows he will not be able to manage, to cope with them, so his synthesis is bogus. In fact, he reads the Gita everywhere; wherever he can find the Gita echoed, he immediately says, “Look! They are saying the same thing.”
But what about the differences? What about the totally opposite standpoints? For example, the Koran does not believe in nonviolence. Mohammed never believed in nonviolence; he himself always carried a sword and he fought many wars. And Gandhi believes in nonviolence. But the Koran is a big book; you can find a few pieces from here, from there which can support love, compassion, kindness, sympathy, and you can use them as if Mohammed is supporting nonviolence.
Mahavira supports nonviolence, Buddha supports nonviolence; but even Krishna in the Gita does not support nonviolence. Then Gandhi does a political trick again. He says the war in which the Gita was spoken for the first time, the great war called Mahabharata, in which Arjuna became aware of the fact that millions of people will die and the whole thing seemed to be useless – just for the power, for treasures, for kingdom, to kill so many people… A great desire to renounce the world arose in him. He wanted to renounce, and he said, “It is better that I should go to the mountains and become a sannyasin,” but Krishna persuaded him to fight because “That is your duty. God wants you to fight. Surrender to God’s will; don’t bring your own will in, don’t bring your mind in. Be in a let-go and let God function through you.”
Arjuna argues in many ways, but finally Krishna wins him over, convinces him of the necessity of war, because, he says, “This is the war of right against wrong, of religion against irreligion, of light against darkness, of divine forces against evil forces.”
Now, Gandhi played a trick. He said that the war is only a metaphor, it never happened in reality, it is not historical. It is really the inner war in man between the forces of evil and the forces of God, it is the inner war between darkness and light. And Krishna is saying to Arjuna, “Don’t escape from the inner war – fight it and win over the darkness.”
Now this is a very cunning strategy. Nobody before Gandhi has ever said that the war between the Pandavas and the Kauravas was just a metaphor. For five thousand years, thousands of commentaries have been written on the Gita; nobody has said that it is a metaphor, it has always been known as a reality. But Gandhi has to call it a metaphor, otherwise he will not be able to synthesize religions. And Jainism and Buddhism are two of the most important religions – they have to be incorporated.
Jesus also creates many troubles for Gandhi, because Jesus goes into the temple of Jerusalem, becomes very angry, takes a whip, hits the money changers, overturns their boards, throws them out of the temple. Now, a nonviolent person cannot be so angry. If Gandhi was asked, he would say, “Go on a fast. Sit in front of the money changers and do a fast unto death unless they stop money changing in the temple. That will be the nonviolent way to transform their hearts.” But taking a whip in your hand and hitting them and overturning their boards and throwing them out of the temple does not seem to be very nonviolent.
Gandhi never talks about it. He drops the whole matter. He only talks about beatitudes: “Blessed are the meek for theirs is the Kingdom of God.” But Jesus does not seem to be so meek. This man is meek who is turning money changers’ boards and throwing them out of the temple? Is he meek? Can you call him meek? He is a warrior. He cannot tolerate such nonsense in the temple. He said, “You have polluted the house of my father. Get out from here!”
Gandhi chooses only pieces and then makes a hotchpotch which he calls a synthesis of all religions. It never happened. Neither the Mohammedans were convinced by him, nor the Hindus. He could not even convince Hindus – he was a Hindu – and he was murdered by a Hindu. He could not convince Hindus. He could not convince Jainas either, because they have continuously believed that Krishna is not a good man.
In Jaina mythology, Krishna is thrown into the seventh hell for the simple reason that he distracted Arjuna, who was going to renounce war. He forced him, persuaded him, convinced him, seduced him by beautiful logic – silenced him somehow – to fight. And millions of people died. Who is responsible for all this violence, for all this blood? Krishna is responsible – more responsible than Arjuna. Jainas have never forgiven him; after Gandhi not even a single Jaina has written a book in which Krishna is forgiven or accepted. What to say of Krishna? Jainas don’t even agree with Buddhists and their nonviolence, Buddhists don’t agree with the nonviolence of the Jainas. They are both nonviolent, but their nonviolences are different.
Jainas say, “Don’t kill. Don’t eat meat.” Buddha has said, “Don’t kill, but you can eat meat if the animal has died of his own accord – then nothing is wrong in eating the meat of the animal.”
Now that is a big problem between Jainas and the Buddhists. And I think that Jainas are right in a way. Logically Buddha is right, that killing is bad – “Don’t kill animals. They have life, as much life as you have and they want to live as long as you want to live. Don’t kill them. But when an animal has died, why waste his meat? It can be used as food. Its skin can be used, its meat can be used, its bones can be used. They should be used. Why waste them?” He seems to be very pragmatic; he was a pragmatic man.
But Jainas are also right. They say once you allow meat eating, then who is going to decide whether the animal has died on his own or not?
And that’s exactly what has happened: in China, in Japan, in Korea, in Burma, in the whole of Asia, Buddhists eat meat. So many animals don’t die every day on their own accord! From where do all the five-star hotels in the whole of Asia get their meat? And if this meat comes from the natural death of the animals, then why do so many butchers and butcheries exist in Buddhist countries? For what reason? Every hotel in a Buddhist country has a signboard saying, “Here only that meat is served which comes from a naturally dead animal – one who has died a natural death.”
Man is so tricky that he will find a way; if you give him just a little loophole he will find a way out. No loophole should be given, that was Mahavira’s emphasis.
Gandhi could not convince anybody, but here you are seeing a synthesis happening on its own accord. And I am not interested in synthesizing anything. I never talk about synthesizing religions – but it is happening. Here you will find people belonging to all the different religions. Nobody bothers who is a Jew, who is a Mohammedan, who is a Hindu, who is a Jaina, who is a Buddhist, who is a Parsi; nobody takes any note of it.
A synthesis is happening. It is not being manufactured; it is happening through meditation not through mentation. This is true synthesis. It is happening through transcendence. When you meditate you go beyond the mind. When you go beyond the mind you are no longer a Christian, no longer a Hindu, no longer a Jaina, no longer a Jew. You are simply a consciousness, a pure consciousness, a mirrorlike clarity. That clarity is true synthesis.
You ask, “Is Tao a synthesis of the paths of love and awareness?”
In a sense, no; in a sense, yes.

The fourth question:
Osho,
I am deeply interested in your works, but still I am afraid of taking sannyas – why?
Bavasimhan, Sir, you have never been here – the question has come by post – what do you know about my works? You have never participated in what is going on here; you don’t have any direct experience. And what is happening here is not an abstract philosophy, it is a very concrete experience. Hence you must be interested in my words, not in my works. You must be reading my words – and my words don’t contain me, or my work. They only contain an invitation to come here, to be here. They are just invitations, nothing else. They cannot carry my truth to you. You have to be here to be with me, to live with me. And you have not come here yet.
I have received many questions from Bavasimhan, many times. This is the first time I am answering him. But all his questions have come by the post – he lives somewhere in Chennai; it is not that far away.
But it must be fear that is preventing you – the fear of being here, the fear that if you are here there is every possibility that you may take the jump into sannyas. It is almost impossible to be here and not to become a sannyasin. Sannyas is bound to happen unless you are absolutely dead, insensitive, dull; unless you have such a mediocre mind that you cannot understand; unless you are so prejudiced already that you have arrived at all the conclusions; unless you are so knowledgeable that you think there is nothing more left to know and learn. That fear is preventing you from coming here.
And in this question the fear has come up. It is good that you have recognized it because in other questions you have been trying to avoid it – not only trying to avoid it, you have been trying to rationalize it. In one question you wrote, “What is the need of an outer sannyas? I am already an inner sannyasin.” Then what is the need of writing an outer letter to me? Just go on writing inner letters, that’s enough. Then what is the need for reading my books? They are very outer things. These are cunning rationalizations.
In another question, Bavasimhan, you had written that you want to take sannyas, but from my own hands. And you wrote that, “I have heard that Indians are now being given sannyas by some of your disciples. I can take sannyas only from you.”
I have been giving sannyas for ten years. You never wrote that before. Hearing that Indians are now receiving sannyas from some disciples, you must have thought, “This is a good strategy, a good protection – to make a condition.” Come here. I will give you sannyas! Don’t be worried about that.
Now you ask – and this is more authentic, that’s why I’m answering – “I am deeply interested in your works,” – read “words” – “but still I am afraid of taking sannyas – why?”
Because words are words, and sannyas means a real transformation. And you must be clever with words. Seeing your many letters and questions, it is very apparent that you are well acquainted with philosophical terminology, with abstract ideas, with esoteric jargon.

Angelo and his buddy Frank were strolling along a Pittsburgh street. After a long silence Angelo said, “Eh, what is eatin’ you?”
“Aah, somethin’ has been botherin’ me for days,” said Frank. “Maybe it ain’t none of my business, but you and me have been buddies for years and I just gotta tell ya.”
“Go ‘head, spill it!” said Angelo.
“Last Saturday night I was in a whorehouse and who do I see there but your wife, Betty. I hate to say it, Angelo, but Betty is a prostitute!”
“Nah! Betty ain’t no prostitute!” answered Angelo. “She’s just a substitute. She’s only there on weekends!”

People who are clever with words get lost in a jungle of words. You seem to be very clever with words.
That’s why people go on reading the Gita, the Vedas, the Bible, the Koran – because now Mohammed is not there so there is no danger; Jesus is not there, so there is no danger of meeting him; Krishna is not there, so you can play around with words at your ease, to your heart’s content – you can manage to put any meaning in them that you want. But I am still here. You cannot go on playing with my words. If you become interested in my words, a desire is bound to arise to come here. And then the fear – the fear that if you are really getting interested in words, who knows, you may get interested in the person himself. And then there is no going back.
It is easy to play with words; it does not disturb your sleep, it does not disturb your unconsciousness, it does not disturb your dreams. But being with a master is a disturbance, a great disturbance.

A drunk staggered into a fairground and went to the rifle range. “Give me ten shots,” he belched.
“That will be twenty pence,” said the attendant, smirking.
The drunk fired and each shot was a perfect bull’s-eye.
The attendant was amazed and gave the man his prize – a large tortoise.
Sometime later the drunk returned again, fired ten shots, each one a bull’s-eye.
“You can have any prize you choose,” said the surprised attendant.
“I will have another one of those crunchy meat pies!” said the drunk.

It is very easy with words – you can befool yourself. But here I am going to hit you hard, I am going to break your skull. And then, naturally, dreams escape. I make windows in people’s skulls, and all dreams escape.

All the inmates of an asylum are going for a swim in their new swimming pool.
“Okay,” says the nurse, “enough for today! Tomorrow we meet again, same time, same place, and then we will do it again with water in the swimming pool!”

You are afraid of the water but in the empty swimming pool, alone with the words, you can enjoy.
Come to your senses! Everybody feels afraid of sannyas because sannyas means commitment, sannyas means a love affair. Sannyas is not of the head, it is of the heart. It is getting into deep waters, and you have become accustomed of sitting on the shore dreaming, thinking, brooding.

Two drunkards are driving along a road at high speed, when suddenly one shouts to the other, “Careful, there is a dangerous curve ahead.”
“Why are you shouting at me?” the other replies. “I thought you were driving!”

I mean business. I am not a philosopher – just the opposite – I am absolutely existential. Hence my emphasis on sannyas, because I know unless you are committed, unless you are involved, unless you risk something, you cannot grow.
You can accumulate words – as many as you like; it is very easy to have great words. And you live, Bavasimhan, in Chennai. Adyar is very close by – just a few minutes’ drive on the outskirts of Chennai. You can go there. Adyar has the most beautiful esoteric library in the whole world because it is the headquarters of the Theosophists – the world headquarters. It contains all kinds of nonsense. You will never find anywhere else with so much nonsense accumulated together in one place.

When I was in Chennai the Adyar people invited me to come, at least for few minutes. I said, “I will come.”
I went there. They showed me around – it is a beautiful place – they showed their beautiful library. And they asked me, “What do you think of our library?”
I said, “This is rare. I have seen many libraries, but no library contains so much nonsense.”
They were shocked. They said, “What…?”
I said, “Yes. Theosophy is the most stupid thing that has happened in this century.”

Bavasimhan, you can go to Adyar – in fact, you must be going – you can find all the old scriptures collected there, you can read beautiful things and you can remain the same. No change is expected of you. But coming here is a totally different thing. I am a no-nonsense man.

The little boy was pissing in the middle of the plaza when a good-humored guard passed by and said, “Don’t pee there, little boy, or I will come by and cut your willie off!”
The little boy ran very fast and when he got to the other side of the plaza, he saw a little girl his age, also pissing. He looked at the girl and exclaimed, “Oh my God! This guard really means business!”

That’s why you are afraid – I really mean business. Come and see, come and have a taste of it. Don’t miss this opportunity. Words will always be available to you, but to be in communion with a living master is a rare opportunity; it happens only once in a while. Don’t just go on writing stupid questions from Chennai, come here. When people can come from Mexico…Chennai is not very far off, not more than one hour’s flight.
The fear is because you have become aware through the words that there is something more to words which is happening here. You are not afraid of me, you are not afraid of sannyas, you are afraid of your own longing – that you may take the jump. You are afraid of your own potential which is hankering to grow, which needs a certain opportunity, which needs a certain climate, which needs a certain energy field. That field is ready now, here. Come, drink out of it and your thirst will be quenched forever. But you will have to pay the price.
Sannyas is simply the price. I know that just by wearing orange clothes you cannot become enlightened, but it is a device. Just wearing orange clothes you will be known as a madman. That’s what I want you all to be known all over the world: my mad people.
God is only for those who are mad enough, only for those who are mad for God. Just as people are mad for money and mad for power, unless you are mad for God there is no hope for you. You are afraid because here something can happen. And you know that there is a great desire and longing in you for that happening. The seed is there, and you know it needs only the right climate and right soil. And once you have the right soil the seed will start growing.
You are afraid of the unknown. Sannyas is a pilgrimage toward the unknown. It is a voyage into the uncharted. God is the unknown – not only the unknown but the unknowable.
Come! Jalaluddin Rumi says, “Come, come, come…” Again and again I say, “Come,” because I may not be here for long.

The fifth question:
Osho,
Do you always tell the truth?
Reverend Banana, yes sir, I always tell the truth, even if I have to lie a little.

The sixth question:
Osho,
I would like to meet a woman who does not flirt, giggle, gossip, smoke, drink, pet or kiss and marry her. Is it possible?
Michael Potato-Singh, Sir, just one question: Why? For what?

The seventh and the last question:
Osho,
Have you really been waiting for me? I have come now. I want to ask you: Can your hugging, kissing sannyasins ever enter heaven?
Michael Tomato, I am happy that you have come. Welcome home. So now the whole trinity is here: Banana, Potato, Tomato. This looks far more delicious than God the father, Jesus the son, and the Holy Ghost. The writings of all three persons are exactly the same. So it is more like a trimurti, the three faces of one God, rather than a trinity, rather than three persons. It is not three persons but one person with three faces. Moreover, the writing is not that of a man but that of a woman, which makes it even more mysterious.
Just this morning I asked Vivek to bring one banana, one tomato, one potato, so I can determine the sex – whether they are men or women. I tried every possible way: Patanjali Yoga, all kinds of yoga postures, standing on my head – which I have not done for twenty-five years. I looked from every possible angle – I even tried a little whirling. But when I started whirling I became even more confused: the banana started looking like a potato, the potato started looking like a tomato, the tomato started looking like a banana… Then I remembered, maybe it is a hangover. Last night Arup’s boyfriend, Niranjan, has come back with some good beer for me, so I had drunk too much.
When nothing worked and I could not decide whether these people are men or women, I became so tired with all this great spiritual effort that I told them to fuck off. At that very moment Vivek came out from the bathroom, shocked. She said to me, “Osho, that is no way to talk to such innocent people like bananas, potatoes and tomatoes. Just tell them to scat and they will fuck off!”

Michael Tomato, you are asking “Can your kissing and hugging sannyasins ever enter heaven?” I think you don’t know anything up-to-date about heaven. You must be having very old ideas. Yes, in the old days it was difficult, but God always remains up-to-date. He is always contemporary. Who else can be more contemporary than God? In fact, now your so-called saints cannot enter heaven, only my sannyasins.

The Pope arrives in New York and wants to meet the Archbishop. He is told the Archbishop is spending the day at the beach, so the Pope, curious, decides to go and meet him there.
He is met by an extremely handsome, muscular man with a beautiful tan, wearing a red bathing suit, who, with a big smile, asks the Pope, “What is the news from Rome?”
While the Pope is too astonished to reply, the Archbishop turns to a beautiful young lady wearing a white bikini and calls to her, “Mary, come and see who’s here!”
The Pope, in consternation, asks, “Who… Who… Who is that lady?”
“Oh,” replied the Archbishop, “she is the Mother Superior of the Sacred Heart Convent!”

Things are changing, Mr. Tomato. Your old idea of heaven just exists in your scriptures, in your head. It has disappeared from existence. I am preparing my people in the latest possible way. They will be the first to enter.

Three nuns die and they meet at the main gate of heaven.
Saint Peter comes out and says, “So girls! Before you come in I must ask you one question: What did you use your pussy for when you were in the world?”
“Only for pissing!” answers the first one.
“Good, and what about you?” he asks the second one.
“Just for pissing,” answers the second nun.
“Good,” he says and he turns to the third one.
“Well…” she starts and then hesitates. “Ahem, well… You know… I met this nice young priest and… He was so nice that… Well, I couldn’t resist, so I gave him my pussy!”
“Okay,” says Saint Peter to the last one, “you can come in. But you two, I’m sorry, you’re not allowed!”
The two nuns, very offended, ask, “Why?” and Saint Peter answers, “Heaven is not a piss house!”

Enough for today.

============================================================

The Venerable Master said:
The unfoldment of man’s mind leads him to this unchanging truth.
In unchanging stillness, unchanging purity and rest are found.
He who attains purity and stillness enters into the immutable Tao.
Having entered into the immutable Tao he is named the possessor of Tao.
Although he is named the possessor of Tao he knows that he does not possess it.
Only when he can transmute all living things can he be truly named the possessor of Tao.
He who is able to understand this can lead others to sacred Tao.
Ko Hsuan’s sutras always begin with this immensely significant statement:
The Venerable Master said…
But it seems the translation is literally true, but not true to the spirit of the sutras. All the Buddhist sutras start in the same way – only with a little difference, but a difference that makes a great difference. The Buddhist sutras begin with: “I have heard the master say…” And you can see the difference. The master may have said it for a different reason, the master may have meant something totally different. The master exists on a different plane; he speaks from the peak, the ultimate peak of consciousness. And the disciple hears from the darkest valley of his existence. By the time the words reach the disciple they are bound to be distorted, they are bound to take many colors which will be imposed and projected by the disciple.
Hence, my feeling is that Ko Hsuan cannot commit this mistake. It must be that the translator has missed the point; the point is very subtle. It seems to the ordinary mind to simply make no difference whether one says, “I have heard the master say,” or “The venerable master said.” But when you say, “The venerable master said,” you are making an absolutely certain statement as if you can report it authentically. It is not possible: you can report only what you have heard.
Now, here you are listening to me, nearabout three thousand sannyasins. Each sannyasin will listen according to his own conditioning, according to his own state of mind, according to his own prejudices, concepts, ideologies, philosophies, according to his own background. If you don’t have any background, if you have transcended all concepts, ideologies, philosophies, religions, if you are no longer in the mind, then you can hear exactly what is said. But then there is no need to hear it; then you yourself know it. Then Ko Hsuan will not say, “The venerable master said,” he can simply state the sutras. Then it will be his own experience. He is very close to the peak and finally he reached the peak, but these notes were made before he himself became an enlightened master. These notes are of a disciple and you should remember it.
Whenever you quote me, always remember that you have heard. You cannot be certain whether it was said exactly the way you have heard or not.

In Italy, on the bus next to the driver there is the following note: “Do not talk to the driver.”
In Germany there is: “It is forbidden to talk to the driver.”
In England: “It is not polite to talk to the driver.”
In Scotland: “What will you gain in talking to the driver?”

The moment a master says something it comes from his innermost core. When you hear it, it is heard on your circumference. By the time it reaches your innermost core – if it reaches at all, if you are fortunate enough to allow it to sink into the very core of your being – then too the meaning will not remain the same. It cannot be; it is not in the nature of things. It would have changed: it may have become distorted, it may have lost something, your mind may have added something to it.
The scientists have very recently discovered… Up until now it was thought that our mind and our senses exist only to allow us to be bridged to the existence that surrounds us. But the latest research is that the senses and the mind have double functions. One function is to connect us with existence, but even far more important than that is the second function: not to allow that which can disturb us. They function as screening agents of our mind, of our attitudes, of our life styles, of our conditionings. Only two percent reality is allowed to enter; ninety-eight percent reality is prevented outside, on the gate, because if all that is available is allowed in, you will go berserk, you will not be able to cope with it.
Only in absolute meditativeness is one capable to relax totally, to allow everything in, to be vulnerable without any conditions, to be available to existence with no strings attached.
I would like to change this statement. I would like to make it exactly as Buddhist sutras begin. They are written by Buddha’s closest disciple, Ananda. He lived with Buddha for forty-two years; not even for a single moment did he leave Buddha. Day in, day out, year in, year out he was with Buddha like a shadow. Even a shadow sometimes leaves you, but he would not leave Buddha at all. He heard everything that Buddha had said and when he was asked to report it after Buddha’s death, he said, “I have heard the Buddha say.” Each sutra starts with that “I have heard…” There is a great insight in it.
Ko Hsuan cannot do this: he cannot say, “The venerable master said.” He can only say, “I have heard…” The translator must have changed it to make it look more certain, to make it more categorical, more emphatic, more clear-cut, more mathematical. But the enlightened masters are mysterious; their words are mysterious, not mathematical. They can have a thousand and one meanings and everyone hears them according to his own capacity.
The egoist will hear the same words but will not hear the same meaning. The egoless person will also hear the same words, but those words will connote a totally different meaning; they will resound in him with a totally different melody. When it rains, it rains on the mountains, it rains in the valleys, it rains everywhere; but the mountains remain as dry as ever – they are already too full. But when it rains into the valleys, the valleys become lakes. They are empty: they can absorb, they can contain. The valleys are feminine; the mountains are too masculine. The mountains are too egoistic; the valleys are humble.
When the master speaks there are many categories of listeners. The first category is that of the curious person, who has come just out of curiosity; he will only hear something very ordinary, something very unessential, something even meaningless, and that will become most important for him. He is there for a wrong reason. He will collect all kinds of data, but they will all belong to the surface.
Then there is the student who has come to gather more knowledge, more information. He will hear a little better than the first person, the curious one, but his interest is still in information. He is not ready to be transformed, to be converted; he is not ready to go that far. He has a certain limit beyond which he won’t move a single inch. He will leave with a little more accumulated knowledge, thinking that he now knows more. He knows nothing; he has simply become more informed – and information is not knowledge. Transformation is the only real knowledge; information is pseudo.
Then there is the disciple who listens in a deeper way than the first two categories. He listens not to gather knowledge; he wants to be changed, but he has a certain idea of what change means. He wants to go into the beyond, but he has a certain direction, a conclusion which he has already decided. He comes with a decision, an a priori conclusion that this is what conversion is. He is not completely open – he is open on one side only, open only in one direction.
There are people here who write to me that “We would like you to speak more on great lovers of God like Meera, Chaitanya, Kabir, because when you speak on them our hearts are moved, our eyes start showering tears of joy, of bliss; we are thrilled to the very core of our being. But when you talk about Buddhist sutras they look dry and logical, they seem to be more appealing to the intelligence than to the world of feelings.” Now, they are open only on one side.
When I speak on Meera, Kabir, Rumi, then there are people who are lovers of Buddha and they start writing letters to me, that “These are beautiful words, but not as profound as the Buddhist sutras. Each sutra has such depth! You can go on digging but you never come to the bottom rock.” They are also open only on one side.
These are disciples. One is open to love, another is open to awareness, but they are not totally open. They will hear, but they will hear with this a priori conclusion. They will hear in a far better way than the student, they will learn deeply, but it will be a partial learning. They will know more than the student, but it cannot be a total knowing.
Then there is the fourth kind, the devotee, who is open from all the sides, who has come with no a priori conclusion, who has come just to be with the master in all the seasons, in all the climates. He makes no conditions, he has no conditions. He will hear more totally, his hearing will be multidimensional, but still he will not hear exactly what the master is saying. He will hear better than all the others, but still he is not on the same plane as the master.
Then there is the fifth category, the nameless category of listener for whom there is no need to even hear… Then there is no need to speak even, no need to hear. One sits with the master and that’s enough. Whether he speaks or not is not the point, just being with the master is enough, just to be with him is enough. And there is some movement between the two centers – invisible, intangible. Something transpires which is unspeakable, inexpressible. Only this fifth type person is capable of reporting, but he will be very conscious in reporting. He will always say, “I have heard…”
And my feeling is Ko Hsuan cannot say, “The venerable master said.” He can only say, “I have heard the venerable master say.”

A veterinarian came to a small Italian farm to give artificial insemination to some cows.
“Lady,” he says, “have you everything ready? A towel, soap, a bucket of hot water?”
“Of course, everything is here, and on this hook you can hang your trousers,” replied the woman.

The teacher asks the class to mention an object round and hairy. A boy raises his hand and says, “The coconut!”
“Very good!” says the teacher.
Then Pierino raises his hand and says, “Billiard’s balls!”
“No, Pierino,” replies the teacher. “Billiard balls are smooth not hairy.”
“No, it is not true – I saw them!” cries Pierino. “Look!” and turning to the boy next to him says, “Billiard, show your balls to the teacher!”

A young officer joining his first regiment is being interviewed by the colonel. The usual conversation concerning family connections is in progress.
“So your name is Fortescue,” says the colonel. “Tell me, young man, was your grandfather Fortescue of the sixty-eighth Leicestershire Rifles?”
“Yes, sir, actually,” replies the young officer.
“Splendid! So your father’s a Fortescue – might I guess Major Fortescue of the ninth Cumberland Infantry Regiment?”
“Why, yes, sir!”
“Are you married?” asks the colonel.
“Yes, sir. But my wife is joining me later – she is in bed with cramps.”
“Not Cramps of the thirty-third?”

A little boy and his father are listening to a speaker.
“Comrades!” starts the speaker.
“What does ‘comrade’ mean, Daddy?” asks the little boy.
“‘Comrade’ indicates all those who think and act alike,” answers the father.
“Our government…” continues the speaker, and again the little boy asks, “What is ‘government,’ Daddy?”
“The ‘government’ is those who are responsible for the well-being of everybody and makes decisions accordingly. At home, for instance, your mum is the government.”
“…and the people…” goes on the speaker.
“What is ‘people’?” asks again the boy.
“The ‘people’ are we who are in need of organization and defense. At home, your baby sister is the people.”
That night the father is awakened by the little boy who whispers, “Listen, comrade, tell the government the people are full of shit up to here!”

Man lives in a state of immaturity; he is childish. He goes on growing physiologically but not psychologically. What to say about his spiritual growth – even his psychological growth is retarded, very retarded.
Only in the First World War, for the first time in human history, did we become aware that the average man’s mental age is not more than thirteen years, because for the first time, people in the army were psychologically tested. It was a shock all over the world. People who think about humanity and its progress were really in a great shock: just thirteen years is the average psychological age?
The person may be seventy years old or eighty years old and his age, his psychological age, is only thirteen. What about his soul? Nothing can be said about his spiritual growth because only when the body and the mind grow together in synchronicity, when the chronological age and the psychological age go together simultaneously, only then is there a possibility of spiritual growth, never before it.
People are immature, people are childish. And they talk about God and they talk about nirvana, enlightenment, and they talk about Tao, dharma, they talk about truth – they talk about great things without being at all aware that their psychological age is that of a child. All they need is toys to play with. And that’s what they have done with their religion: their churches, their temples, their mosques are nothing but big toys. Their popes, their shankaracharyas, their ayatollahs are nothing but people who go on giving them new games to play with. All they need is some new game so they can remain engaged and occupied.
The scientists also go on giving them new gadgets, sometimes absolutely useless gadgets, but people are ready to purchase anything to fill their inner emptiness. And there is great emptiness because of the gap. Thirteen years psychological age and seventy years physiological age – the gap is big. How to fill that gap? How to bridge that gap? On the surface they look very grown up, but just scratch them a little bit and you will find a child inside, and immediately they go through a tantrum.
You see people when they are in anger, and you will not see any difference between them and children. You see people when they are fighting – the husband fighting with the wife, the wife fighting with the husband, throwing pillows and things – you simply watch. You may be doing the same thing yourself, then watch. Once in a while just watch – what are you doing? Is this act that of a grown-up person? You may be growing old, but you are not growing up, and growing old has no value: growing old simply means you are coming closer to death.
Growing up is a totally different phenomenon: it means you are coming closer to immortality, to deathlessness. Growing old means coming closer to your grave and growing up means coming closer to godliness, to Tao, to eternity. They are not synonymous; not only are they not synonymous, they are diametrically opposite to each other.
And when there is a deep rhythm between your body-mind complex, then your soul can start growing for the first time. Your body and mind being in tune becomes the soil in which your soul starts moving upward for the first time. Otherwise you will hang around the body-mind phenomenon; you will never go beyond it.
It is not an accident that the psychologists don’t believe in the soul – for the simple reason that they have no glimpse of the soul. Sigmund Freud himself was very childish in his behavior, utterly childish, very afraid, just like a small child. He was afraid of ghosts, he was afraid of death, darkness – not even the word death was allowed to be uttered in his presence. Twice it had happened in his life that somebody started talking about death and he fainted. Just the talk about death and he fainted! Now, this man becomes a prophet of the twentieth century.
The twentieth century has been dominated by three prophets. One is Friedrich Nietzsche, who was utterly mad. Adolf Hitler and his Nazism and all the fascist ideologies in the world are offshoots of that madman.
The other prophet was Karl Marx, who was absolutely atheist. He never believed in any consciousness, he never believed in any possibility of the growth of consciousness, because he had no glimpse of it. He called it an epiphenomenon – it is nothing but a by-product of matter. Just like a clock functions mechanically, the same is the way that man functions: he is only a machine. He reduced man into a machine.
He himself lived a very mechanical life, an utterly mechanical life. There was no joy in his life, no laughter, no song in his heart. He never came to know any experience of meditativeness; he lived just on the periphery. But he became a prophet. Communism, Joseph Stalin and Mao Zedong, Tito and Fidel Castro – these are his by-products. Joseph Stalin could kill millions of people for the simple reason because “Man is a machine. What is wrong…?” If you kill a bicycle or if you kill a clock or if you kill an electric fan there is no harm; nobody can blame you, that you are a murderer. He could kill millions of people. I think nobody before him has been able to kill so many people without even a prick of the conscience. There was no question of any conscience – there is no consciousness, there is no conscience either. Man is a by-product of matter, so when you kill somebody, matter disappears into matter.
And the third prophet of this century is Sigmund Freud, who himself is pathological, and he has projected his pathology into his philosophy.
Now, these three people have become your background. You may be aware of it, you may not be aware of it, but behind you these three are always standing. These three persons are responsible in many ways for the deterioration of human consciousness in this age. Because of these three persons, buddhas have almost disappeared. People like Lao Tzu are not possible anymore even in China; Communism won’t allow them. Taoist monasteries have been destroyed, converted into schools and hospitals. Taoist meditators have been forced to work in the fields or in the factories. Even old mystics, seventy or eighty years old, have been forced to do ordinary work just because the government cannot allow anybody to live without work; you have the right to get bread only if you work. Buddhists have disappeared.
In Russia, Jesus is no longer possible. And the same thing is going to happen almost everywhere sooner or later.
With this background, whatsoever I say will be interpreted inside you without you ever becoming aware because you are not that watchful; you are almost in a state of drunkenness. Each ideology intoxicates. The really conscious person gets rid of all ideologies, only then does he go beyond intoxication.

One day a guy decided he was an alcoholic. So he went to the doctor and the doctor said to him, “The treatment has to be based on self-control. You go home and try not to drink. If by chance you cannot hold yourself, next day you come to my office and inform me. This is fundamental.”
“Okay,” said the guy.
After some days the guy comes to the doctor’s office already very drunk.
“Doc, I came here to inform you that yesterday I got very drunk.”
“But you are drunk now!” said the doctor.
“Yes,” said the drunkard, “but I will inform you of this tomorrow!”

The drunkard has his own logic and to him it seems to be perfectly right.

Two drunks were walking along a railway line. One said to the other, “I hope these stairs come to an end soon!”
The other replied, “Ya! The height of the handrail is killing my back!”

A Texan travels to Las Vegas to let off some steam Texas style. He starts off at the flashiest casino he can find and soon starts winning at blackjack.
After a while he heads for the roulette table where he resumes his winning streak. Soon a crowd gathers to watch him rake it in while knocking back double bourbons.
Eventually he wins so much money that he and the crowd move off to a penthouse suite to continue the party.
The next day he wakes up with a splitting hangover, lying next to a gorgeous negress who has a serene smile on her face.
“Holy cow!” he exclaims to himself. “That was some party!”
He gently tucks a couple of hundred dollar bills under the pillow and tiptoes out of the room. As he crosses the living room, he stops short as he sees two more gorgeous girls wearing little else than the same serene smile.
“Son of a gun!” he says as he drops a few more bills down beside them.
As one of the bills flutters down it brushes a cheek of the last girl. She slowly opens her eyes and says, “You don’t have to tip the bridesmaids!”

You go on doing things… You will get married, you will move into a profession, you will become educated, you will become Christian, Hindu, Mohammedan – you will do a thousand and one things absolutely in a state of unconsciousness. If by chance you come across a master, you will hear him from your unconsciousness.
Hence, before I begin this last sutra I would like you to remember always: never say what the master has said; always say this is what you have heard him say. And it is not only a mannerism; it has tremendous truth in it.
The unfoldment of man’s mind leads him to this unchanging truth.
The translator goes wrong on many points. And I can understand why he goes wrong, particularly on points which are of very great significance. He can’t help it; he has no understanding of meditation. He says: The unfoldment of man’s mind…
Ko Hsuan must have said: The unfoldment of man’s consciousness, not: …man’s mind. The mind has to be dropped, not unfolded. In fact, the moment you drop the mind, the unfoldment of your consciousness begins. But we believe in the mind – we don’t know anything other than the mind – we are addicted to the mind.
In Western languages there are not many words for the mind, but in Eastern languages there are many words for the mind, for different purposes because the mind can function in many ways. The East has gone very deep into the phenomenon of the mind and beyond it.
It is just like if you look into the languages of the Eskimos you will be surprised: there are one dozen words for ice. No other language has a dozen words for ice. Only Eskimos have a dozen words for ice because they have lived with ice for thousands of years and they have known all its possibilities. They know there are differences, minute differences which are not visible to those who have not lived in the world of an Eskimo. No other language has so many words.
Sanskrit has at least one dozen words for the mind because as you go deeper into the mind, you come upon different layers. They are so different that it is not possible to call them all with the same name; they are qualitatively different. And as you go on moving deeper and deeper, a point comes when the mind is left behind and pure consciousness remains. That consciousness knows unfoldment. The mind cannot unfold; it can only close. The more you become addicted to the mind, the more closed you become. The mind is in fact a prison, and the stronger the mind, the more unfortunate for the person because then it will be very difficult for him to get out of it. And our whole educational system enforces the mind, strengthens the mind.
Hence I can understand the difficulty of the translator; but you have to remember, because you are working on meditation here and you can understand in a far better way.
The unfoldment of man’s consciousness leads him to this unchanging truth. Everything is changing in the world; you cannot find anything in the world which is unchanging unless you go deep within yourself and reach the very center of your being. Only there will you find the center, the center of the cyclone, which remains absolutely unchanging. It is on that very center that the whole change depends, the whole wheel of life and death moves. Without that center, the world will disappear. That center, that unchanging truth is the very foundation of this changing world; it is rooted there. Not to know it is to live a life which is not worth calling life. Not to know it is to have to go on doing foolish things all your life, in order to give a certain fallacy to yourself of the unchanging truth.
For example, why are people more interested in money rather than friendship? If it is a question of choice you will choose money more than friendship. Why? Because money seems to be more unchanging. You can depend on it, it is more reliable. If you have a good bank balance it is far more reliable. Who knows about the friend? Today he is a friend, tomorrow he may become the enemy.
Machiavelli, in his great book, The Prince, writes: “Don’t say anything, even to your friend, which you would not like to be known by your enemy.” Why? Because your friend can become an enemy any day. And he also says: “Don’t say anything against your enemy which you would not like to say against your friend,” because the enemy can become your friend any day. Things go on changing: the friend becomes the enemy, the enemy becomes the friend.
You can depend on money. People love money more than anything else; money seems to be more significant than love. You can purchase love; if not love then at least you can purchase sex. But if you don’t have money you are simply a beggar. With money everything comes. Money seems to have a certain permanence, a certain stability.
People are more interested in things than in people. People die; things don’t die. People go on accumulating things for the simple reason that good furniture, good paintings, and a good house are far more permanent – they may last longer than you – but you cannot say the same about people. You love somebody, and tomorrow the person dies. Then you are left empty, with a great wound which will take years to heal or may not ever heal and it will always hurt.
Hence people are afraid of love, people are afraid of people. People make friends with animals rather than with people. They would like to have a good dog – it is more predictable and more reliable. Whenever you come home he is there to welcome you, wagging his tail. You can hit him, you can shout at him, you can scream at him, you can scold him, but he never changes his loyalty to you, his obedience to you. You can’t do the same with people – people are dangerous. Hence you see more and more people becoming interested in birds, dogs, horses, for the simple reason they give a certain feel of permanence.

Carlo and Elena are in love and want to spend a night together.
“Have you understood, my love?” says Elena. “When my parents are asleep I will throw down a cent and that will be the signal. I will leave the door open and you can come up.”
Carlo waits under the window. Finally Elena throws the cent down, then eagerly lies down in the bed wearing a flimsy nightgown, and waits… And waits… And waits…
After about half an hour she goes to the window and exclaims impatiently, “But, Carlo, are you coming up or not?”
“Yes, my love,” replies Carlo, “as soon as I find the cent.”

On his tenth birthday, Abraham calls his son.
“Now, my son,” he says, “It is time for me to explain the facts of life. We will start from the hands. Be very careful and don’t forget.”
“So, the thumb is used to show that a bargain is good. The index finger is used to show what is the best in a bargain. The middle finger is used to show power. The ring finger is just used for the wedding ring. The little finger is used to clean your ear. Have you understood?”
“Yes, Pa,” replied the son, “but I would like to know the use of the middle – what you call the power finger.”
Abraham leans over his son and whispers, “The power finger, son, you use it at night under the blankets, when you count the money!”

Why are people so interested in money? For the simple reason that they are in a great need to find something permanent in this life where everything goes on changing every moment. They want something to rely upon. Unless they find their own center they will go on finding these stupid things. These are poor substitutes.
The real thing is the unfoldment of consciousness, because that leads you to the unchanging truth.
In unchanging stillness, unchanging purity and rest are found.
And when you have found your innermost core, when your lotus of consciousness has blossomed – the Indian mystics have called it the one thousand petaled lotus – when all the petals have opened and you have found the center of the lotus, there is great stillness, a stillness which is unchanging. There is great purity, great innocence, and deep rest. You have come home. The pilgrimage is over. In finding yourself you have found godliness. In reaching your own center you have reached the center of the whole universe. Now there is no need to go anywhere; you have found the infinite treasure – what Jesus calls the Kingdom of God.
People have tried to create substitutes. You can create a certain stillness by learning some yoga posture. If your body is still you will feel a certain stillness, but that is not the real stillness; it will be disturbed. It can be disturbed very easily by anything – just an ant crawling up your body is enough to disturb it. Anything can distract it: just a bird calling and you will be distracted. A child starts crying, a small girl starts giggling, a dog starts barking, and that’s enough. And the world is full of so many things continuously happening. You cannot remain still for long; sooner or later it will be disturbed. Because of this, people have moved to the monasteries, people have escaped to the mountains, to the caves. But there also something or other will disturb you.
Rather than escaping from the world, escape into yourself. Remain in the world because the world is a great opportunity; it is a constant testing ground. It gives you thousand and one opportunities to see whether you have attained real stillness or it is just an imposed phenomenon that is only skin-deep and can be disturbed by anything.
Your so-called religious people are only superficially still; anything can disturb them. In fact they are disturbed by things more than other people. Even if one person in your house becomes religious he becomes a torture to the whole family – children cannot play because he is doing Transcendental Meditation, he is “doing his TM.” Children cannot play, the wife cannot work – everything has to stop for him. And even then he will be disturbed by any small thing. Just the clock ticking is enough, and the TM disappears, because what he is doing is just imposing a mantra, a constant repetition of a certain sound or word. Anything far more interesting is bound to attract him. If somebody puts on beautiful music or somebody starts playing guitar he will be disturbed, he will be immediately disturbed. The reason is not the guitar, the reason is that what he is doing is boring and the guitar is far more attractive. Naturally the mind moves toward that which is more attractive. He is concentrating on Jesus Christ, and a beautiful woman passes by… Now, looking at a man crucified… Who wants to look at a man on the cross? One wants to avoid such things. And a beautiful woman passing by immediately attracts; that becomes a distraction.
That’s why your so-called saints have always been against women; that simply shows the women have been disturbing their meditations. In fact, it simply shows their meditations were so boring that any woman could have disturbed it.
When one person in the family becomes religious, starts praying or meditating or doing something stupid then the whole family becomes afraid because he is doing something great. In fact, if he is really a meditator there is no question of getting distracted.
You cannot distract my meditators – they will distract you! The whole family will be distracted. Just start doing Dynamic Meditation or Kundalini, and not only the family but the whole neighborhood is distracted: they start phoning the police. This is something! Rather than being distracted by any small thing, they are all distracted by your meditation.
Real rest – real relaxation, real purity and stillness – is not imposed by any artificial means; it is a spontaneous unfoldment. Then how does it happen? It happens through understanding. Tao believes in understanding. Try to understand. Nobody wants to understand – we want to avoid, we want somehow to bypass our problems. You have problems – you go to somebody like Maharishi Mahesh Yogi and you ask him, “I am very worried, anxious, tense. What should I do?”
And he says, “Do TM. Repeat this mantra: ‘Coca-Cola, Coca-Cola, Coca-Cola.’ Go on repeating it fifteen minutes in the morning, fifteen minutes in the evening. It will help.”
It will help you to repress the problem, but only to repress; the problem is not solved. How can the problem be solved by repeating “Coca-Cola”? Or maybe “Om”, which is the same; it makes no difference. In fact, “Coca-Cola” seems to be far sweeter, far more appealing! Both are the same – any word will do. How it is going to solve your problems? Your problems will remain; you will still have to solve them. Sooner or later they will surface again. And repressing them is dangerous because they will gain more energy, and the time that is being lost meanwhile is wasted.
Tao depends on understanding. Now in the world there are only two things prevalent. One is analysis, Freudian analysis, and the many offshoots of it. Analyze the problem, go on analyzing it. It is like peeling an onion: one layer is removed, another layer is there, far fresher. Remove it, another is there. And all the time tears will be coming to your eyes. Some bargain! And your problems are not as small as an onion because sooner or later the onions will be finished, you will come to the very end, the last layer, and then…emptiness in your hand. But your problems are not so easy. Hence psychoanalysis needs seven years, ten years, and still it is never complete.
I have never come across a single person – and I have hundreds of my sannyasins who are psychoanalysts, therapists, well-known therapists – but I have never come across a single person whose analysis is complete. It cannot be complete; it is an unending process. You go on, go on, and each layer will reveal another layer.
Sigmund Freud used to reach your childhood. At the age of three or four you start collecting memories, so he will reach that point. Then Arthur Janov found that this doesn’t help, you have to go beyond that, so Primal Therapy came into existence. Now you have to go beyond that.
Naturally, a two or three year-old child cannot talk about his problems; he can only kick and scream and throw things. So Primal Therapy is just kicking, shouting and screaming. And Janov thought there will be a final scream – the primal scream, the first scream.
When the child is born the first thing he does is scream; that is a physiological necessity. By screaming he cleans his whole breathing system; by screaming he throws his mucus out. That’s why children’s noses go on flowing: when he is in the mother’s womb all his breathing system collects mucus – naturally, he is not breathing; he lives on the mother’s breathing. When he comes out of the womb he has to breathe on his own. The system has never worked and the breathing mechanism is full of mucus; that mucus has to come out. Doctors hang the child upside down; they make him do shirshasana, headstand, so the mucus starts flowing downward because of gravitation. And naturally when you hang somebody upside down he screams, and that very scream helps: the mucus is thrown out and he starts breathing. That is the primal scream.
Janov thought, “If we can reach the primal scream we have come to the very bottom of it. Then, all the problems will be solved.” But now there are other therapists who say, “That won’t help because there is still nine months’ conditioning in the mother’s womb. Now we have to go into that – then, all the problems can be solved.”
But I would like to tell you that all the problems will not be solved then also, because after those nine months you will come across another layer that will be of the previous life. Then start Freudian psychoanalysis again and then Primal Therapy, and so on, and so forth.
Indian mystics who have tried to enter the whole realm of consciousness say there have been at least eighty four million lives before you became man. Now, if you somehow finish analyzing eighty four million lives, then you will find you have to enter the world of the monkeys… So, monkey analysis! And then go on and on… Then finally you will find you have been a fish in the ocean; that is the beginning of life. Then the fish and the problems of the fish… I don’t think there can be any end to psychoanalysis – it is an exercise in utter futility. That is one thing, the Western thing.
And the Eastern approach has been: seeing that this whole thing is too long and will never end, bypass it. Just repeat a mantra and forget all about it. But by forgetting all about it you cannot solve anything.
Tao is absolutely right: neither analysis will help nor forgetting, but only witnessing, understanding, seeing – seeing clearly. It is neither analysis nor a repetition of a mantra. Tao does not believe in either; its approach is totally new. And only then will you find, in that understanding, that a transformation happens. You will find stillness, purity and rest.
He who attains purity and stillness enters into the immutable Tao.
And through that witnessing, through that understanding and awareness, you enter the eternal Tao. Tao means the ultimate law of nature, what Buddha calls aes dhammo sanantano. This is the ultimate law of existence, Tao.
Having entered into the immutable Tao he is named the possessor of Tao.
He is only named, Ko Hsuan says, remember. We have to say something, we have to give that experience a certain name. But he immediately adds:
Although he is named the possessor of Tao he knows that he does not possess it.
Because he is no longer an ego, how can he possess anything? There is nobody inside him, just a mirror, a pure mirror that reflects; the mirror cannot possess anything. Do you think the mirror can possess anything? You look in the mirror: it reflects your face, but it does not possess it. For the moment it appears it possesses, but that is only an appearance. It does not possess you. You move away, the reflection has gone and the mirror remains in its stillness, in its purity. Whether it reflects or not, its purity remains unaffected.
This mirrorlike quality of consciousness cannot be said to possess anything – there is no ego to possess in the first place. Secondly, there is nothing to possess – the very idea of possession divides existence into two: the possessor and the possessed, the subject and the object, the owner and the owned, the observer and the observed. But when you enter ultimate rest, stillness, all duality is transcended; there is only one.
In fact, saying that one possesses Tao… It will be far better and far more true to say one is possessed by Tao. Tao fills you, totally fills you; you become part of it. Not that Tao is in your hands, but that you are in the hands of Tao. But our language is such… Our language is made by people who are interested in possessing things.
Just the other day somebody has asked, “Osho, my whole mind always goes on thinking about how to possess more, bigger things – how to have a big house, a palace, how to have a bigger bank balance, how to have a longer life.”
If you ask Freud, if you ask the Western approach they will say, “This is nothing. This is just the desire to have a bigger sexual organ, that’s all.” Freud reduces everything to sexuality; he seems to be obsessed with it. In fact, it is a revolt against the Christian obsession with sex. Two thousand years of Christianity made people so sex repressive that somebody had to revolt against it, and Sigmund Freud revolted against it. But the revolt went to the other extreme; again everything is colored by sexuality. He thinks people like bigger things – a big house, a big name, fame, a taller body – these are all just substitutes for having a bigger sexual organ. In a way it is true, but only in a way. It is true particularly for the eighteenth-century Western man; the Victorian morality was rooted in it.
But the East has a different approach which is far more true. The East says people are interested in bigger things because they see such hollowness in themselves, such emptiness in themselves that they want to fill it somehow. And they go on putting things into it but they disappear – those things disappear and more and more things are needed. Hence the desire comes to have such big things that somehow the inner emptiness can be filled.
But it cannot be filled: that inner emptiness is your nature. It has to be loved, lived, understood. Once understood, you will start rejoicing in it; there is no need to fill it. It is beautiful, it is tremendously beautiful; there is nothing more beautiful than that inner emptiness. You are just afraid of the word, of the idea of emptiness, and just because of the idea you go on asking for bigger things. In fact, the desire to have a bigger sexual organ may be nothing but to fill the inner emptiness!
Freud was so obsessed with it that he started thinking that women suffer very much from phallic jealousy. That is utterly wrong. If they suffer from phallic jealousy then it should be stated, to keep the balance right, that man suffers from breast jealousy. But Freud never said that; he remains a male chauvinist pig. He would have loved this story:

The Danish king, the Swedish king and Prince Philip, the Duke of Edinburgh, are sitting in a pub having a few beers together. Somehow they end up having a competition to see whose prick is the longest.
The Danish king puts his prick on the table. Twelve inches! Everyone applauds and vigorously sings the Danish national anthem.
Then the Swedish king puts his prick on the table. Sixteen inches! Everyone screams and shouts and jumps around and sings the Swedish national anthem.
Lastly, Prince Philip puts his prick on the table. Twenty-five inches long! And everyone starts singing:
“God save the Queen!”
Only when he can transmute all living things can he be truly named the possessor of Tao.
Who can be called a possessor of Tao? One who knows that he does not possess – that is the first condition to be fulfilled – one who knows that he is possessed by Tao, that he is no more, only Tao is. But what will be the indication? How will we recognize that he possesses the Tao? Ko Hsuan gives a beautiful symbol to recognize the man of Tao. He says: Only when he can transmute all living things can he be truly named the possessor of Tao.
The translation is again a little wrong. Ko Hsuan must have meant all living beings, not living things. Things are not living, that’s why they are called things. Living beings… But why say living beings? – because beings are naturally living. But things are complicated: all living beings are neither living nor beings. Many living beings are dead – apparently living, only apparently, not really living.

Mrs. Carrot had a very bad car accident and was hospitalized.
Her concerned husband, Mr. Carrot, asked the doctor what her fate would be.
The doctor reassuringly said, “Do not worry, she will live, but she will probably be a vegetable for the rest of her life!”

Many people are just vegetating… And you know three are here: Banana, Potato, Tomato! These people cannot be called living. And even if people are living they don’t have beings. Being is only when you have reached the unfoldment of your consciousness. Being means when becoming is finished, when becoming is no longer needed, when you have arrived home.
The man of Tao is one whose touch transmutes people into living, first, and then into being. That’s the miracle of a master. If you allow him to touch you, if you become available to him, he can stir life in you and, finally, he can make you aware of your own being.
The only proof of somebody being a man of Tao is that in his proximity people start living on a totally different plane, become more and more lively, start attaining a certain crystallization of being. The man of Tao is one who can impart his Tao to others, who can function like a catalytic agent, so that if you fall in tune with him you go through a transformation, a mutation.
He who is able to understand this can lead others to sacred Tao.
One who understands the alchemy of how to transform the dead into the living and how to help the becoming into being, who knows this art of alchemy, can lead people to the sacred Tao.
The word sacred is used only in the last sutra. This is very significant because when you use the words sacred Tao it becomes synonymous to God. But Ko Hsuan has not mentioned it before because to mention it before will make you worshippers. And all worshippers have gone wrong: they have become Christians, Hindus, Mohammedans; they are not transmuted. Hence he has kept this beautiful word sacred for the very end; this is his last word: sacred Tao. This can be said only when you have understood all the sutras; now you will not become a worshipper.
Worshipping is not going to help, praying is not going to help – only meditation, only understanding, only awareness. And calling Tao sacred means everything is sacred, because Tao fills everything. The whole existence is the manifestation of Tao. There is no other God than the universe. There is no other God than this very life. There is no other God than this moment, this now, this here.
Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
Please say a few words about Sanjay Gandhi and his death. He respected and loved you and had said to Laxmi just a week before his death that soon he will be coming to visit the ashram and to see you.
Sanjay Gandhi was a beautiful person, a man of immense integrity, individuality, adventure. He lived adventurously and he died adventurously. In fact, that’s how one should live and one should die. He lived dangerously. The only way to live is to live in danger, because it is only in moments of tremendous danger that one transcends lower planes of being.
It has been reported in the newspapers and when Vivek read it she asked me how it was possible – because dying in a plane crash, his whole body was just a mess. All his bones were broken, his skull was broken, his brain had come out of the skull – but on his face there was great peace. She was puzzled. After such a horrible death, how can one’s face be peaceful?
But there is a secret in it worth understanding. When one dies on a deathbed after a prolonged disease, continuously thinking and worrying about death, the face cannot be calm and quiet; the worry, the tension, the clinging to life will be there. But when one dies suddenly, when death comes like a surprise, suddenly the mind stops.
I have been in many accidents myself and the people who have been with me in those accidents have all experienced that in the moment when the accident is actually happening the mind disappears, because the mind cannot think about it. There is nothing to think about it, there is no way to think about it. The mind stops because the mind can only move in the vicious circle of the known, and the unknown has entered so suddenly that the mind is absolutely incapable of figuring it out, what is happening. In a deep shock the mind stops; for a moment there is a glimpse of no-mind.
Sanjay Gandhi died a better death than millions of people who die in their beds after a long, long disease, because they cannot use the opportunity of death. He may not have experienced meditation while he was alive, but he must have tasted just a drop of the nectar of meditation while he was dying. Death came with such immediacy, giving no time for the mind to think about it. Such a death is a beautiful death.
Many questions have been asked to me for the past week, since he died. I had not answered them for the simple reason that people who have not meditated, people who have not been here, who have not been my sannyasins will not be able to understand what I am saying.
Vinoba Bhave said on Sanjay Gandhi’s death that he died an immature death. That is absolutely wrong. He was far more mature than Morarji Desai. Chronologically he was very young, only thirty-three, but chronological age is not the real age. He had far more perceptiveness, he had far more intelligence, he had far more clarity. He lived totally, he lived each moment of his life. And it was a very natural death to him; it belonged to his very style of life.
That’s why I have kept complete silence about it. Now that all the people who had to say something have had their say, I can say my words, which are going to be absolutely different. I don’t feel sad about his death. Yes, the country will miss him, but as far as he is concerned he died beautifully. The country has lost a great opportunity in him because he was a promise, a great hope because he had the guts to go against the traditional, orthodox mind of this country. He was a man of steel – he could have fought against conventions, and he was learning how to fight. And he was succeeding. Slowly, slowly his grip on events was getting better every day.
The country has certainly lost an immense opportunity of becoming contemporary. He was a contemporary man; he had no hangovers from the past, he did not believe in the past. But as far as he himself is concerned he could not have died in a better way. This death is a logical conclusion to his whole life.
If dying at the age of thirty-three inevitably means an immature death, then Adi Shankaracharya also died an immature death – he was exactly thirty-three. Then Jesus also died an immature death – he was exactly thirty-three. Then Vivekananda also died an immature death – he was also exactly thirty-three. Just living a long life means nothing; length has no meaning. Meaning comes from intensity. It is not a question of quantity but of quality. How long you live makes no difference. How you live, how deeply, how totally, how intensely, how passionately – everything depends on that. And he certainly lived totally, intensely, passionately – and he risked everything for it; he was not in any way a coward.
People like Sanjay Gandhi are bound to die in some strange way. This country needs more people like Sanjay Gandhi. For centuries this country has been a cowardly country. The Himalayas belong to this country – the greatest mountains in the world – and for one hundred years continuously people have come from all over the world to climb the virgin peaks of the Himalayas. But no Indian has bothered: Indians believe in security, comfort – why take the risk? Many others have died trying to climb Everest.
And when Edmund Hillary came he was asked, “Are you people mad? Why do you bother? What are you going to gain out of it? Even if you reach the top of Everest there is nothing! Why have so many people from all over the world tried to climb the mountain?”
Hillary said, “Just because it is there. It is a great challenge. Standing there, unconquered, it is a challenge to the human spirit. It has to be conquered – it is not a question of gaining anything. It is just a challenge to the spirit of man.”
Indians can’t understand this. That’s why they have lived for two thousand years in slavery. They will not climb the mountains, they will not swim in the ocean, they will not glide in the sky. They will move very mathematically, very calculatingly.
Sanjay Gandhi was a good beginning; he was a pioneer in this way. He was always interested in adventure. He could not fit in any school, he could not fit in any conventional pattern of life. I loved the man.
We need many more people who can die in adventures. Their death raises the spirit of the people. If they live, they bring a new quality, a new perfume to people’s life; if they die, their death also brings a new fragrance. Hence I am not sad about him but I am certainly sad about the country. It is really a misfortune for the country, a great calamity, far greater than the death of Jawaharlal Nehru, Sanjay Gandhi’s grandfather, because Jawaharlal had lived his life, he had done whatsoever he wanted to do. There was nothing else that he could have done even if he had lived ten years more; he had blossomed. He was a poet, not a politician; he was also adventurous. Something of him has entered Indira Gandhi, his daughter, and something of him was very much in the bones, the blood, and the marrow of Sanjay Gandhi.
Sanjay Gandhi’s death is a far bigger calamity to the country because he had yet to contribute much. He had just begun to open his petals; he had yet to become a flower. He was still a potential. Certainly he would have been a great prime minister of the country if he had lived – he may have proved the greatest prime minister this country has known up until now – he was showing every indication of that.
Hence, as far as the country is concerned, it was a calamity. But as far as he himself is concerned he lived beautifully, he died beautifully. And the peace that was on his face must have looked miraculous to everybody – not only to Vivek but to everybody. Whosoever had seen his face must have wondered why he looked so calm, quiet and serene.
You have to understand the psychology of such accidents. The mind is very clever about day-to-day affairs; it continues its chattering. It stops only when there is some shock, something which is not digestible, which the mind cannot take in. In fact that is the attraction of adventure. People who go mountain climbing know what is really the attraction. The attraction is not just climbing beautiful mountains with a scenic panorama surrounding it – that is not the point, there is a far deeper psychology behind it. When you are climbing a mountain there are a thousand and one dangers. When you are surrounded with danger your mind stops. You become suddenly aware. There is a great alertness and serenity. You have to take each step very carefully, consciously. That is really what meditation is all about.
In my childhood days I used to take my friends to the river. There was a small path by the side of the river. To walk on that edge was very dangerous; just one step taken in unconsciousness and you will fall into the river, and that was the place where the river was the deepest. Nobody used to go there, but that was the spot I loved most and I would ask all my friends to come along with me moving on that narrow edge. Very few were ever ready to go along with me, but those few had a really beautiful experience. They all reported, “This is strange, how the mind stops!”
I would take my friends to the railway bridge to jump from the bridge into the river. It was certainly dangerous and it was prohibited. There was always a policeman standing on the railway bridge because that was the place from where people used to commit suicide. We had to bribe the policeman: “We are not committing suicide, we have just come to enjoy the jump!” And slowly, slowly he became aware that “These are the same people – they don’t die or anything, they come again and again and they are not interested in suicide.” In fact, he started loving us and stopped taking bribes. He said, “You can jump – I will not look at that side. You can come whenever you want.”
It was dangerous. The bridge was very high and to jump from there… And before you would reach the river there was a time between – the gap between the bridge and the river – when the mind would suddenly stop.
Those were my first glimpses of meditation; that’s how I became more and more interested in meditation. I started inquiring how those moments can be made available without going to the mountains, to the river, to the bridges; how one can allow oneself to move into these spaces without going anywhere, just by closing one’s eyes. Once you have tasted, it is not difficult.
Sanjay Gandhi died beautifully. He will be born on a far higher plane because he died in a moment when the mind was no longer functioning. He died the death of a meditator without knowing what is happening. Of course it was not a conscious meditation, but still there was something of meditativeness in it. His next life will be of a higher quality. Maybe his next life will become more concerned with the inner adventure; this life was more concerned with the outer adventure. He was an extrovert.
He wanted to come here. Many times I had been informed that he wants to come, and this time he had seen all the photos of the ashram. For two hours he was with Laxmi, with Indira, talking, inquiring, was very interested and wanted to come.
But my feeling was that in this life he was more of an extrovert. This sudden death will bring a transformation to him: he will become an introvert in his next life, and that is something of immense value.
Indira Gandhi must be in great pain. She cannot understand how we celebrate death here. She also wants to come, has been thinking for many days to come. She had settled that in August she would be coming, but now the death of Sanjay may again postpone her coming. She is interested in meditation, but she is, obviously, too occupied with the world, with the problems. And this country has so many problems, almost insoluble.
This country is in such a situation that if you solve one problem you create ten others immediately. It is a mess! If you really want to solve the problems, people go against you. She told Laxmi, “I perfectly agree with Osho that the population has to be reduced, and it can only be reduced forcibly. But we have tried and that does not work because the country is a democratic country: people become enemies, and then you can’t come back into power again.” And whatsoever Indira and Sanjay did together in five years, Morarji Desai undid within three years. Now the problems are again the same – or even far worse.
China now has the greatest population in the world, but by the end of this century, India will have the greatest population because China is not a democracy and they are using every possible way to prevent the growth of population. And they are succeeding.
By the end of this century, India will be the most populated country in the world and, of course, it will have the greatest problems – almost impossible to solve. They can be solved right now, but to solve them means you have to fight with the people for their own sake. They will be against you. They are against me for the simple reason that whatsoever I say can be of help, but it goes against their traditions, against their conventions, against their orthodox mind.
Sanjay created more enemies in the country than friends for the simple reason that he really wanted to help the country. He was far more interested in the well-being of the country than becoming a popular leader. If you want to be a popular leader you have to be a follower of your followers; you have just to say what they want to hear. He created more enemies than friends, he was the most hated person, for the simple reason that he had great dreams to help the country. He had a clear vision – and he was on the right track.
All the idiots of the country deep down will be feeling very happy: “It is good that he is gone!” Now they can continue living their old stupidities and superstitions.
I was shocked to know that at his funeral they were chanting Vedic mantras; that is not right. He would not have liked that at all. He was not a believer in any religion. He certainly believed in service and he believed that to serve is the only way to come closer to God – and he was right. At the funeral they were doing all kinds of foolish things, but Indira was dazed and in such a state of shock that she simply looked on and didn’t say anything when the Indian priests, the Indian priesthood, immediately took over the chants.
And the people who were against him are now praising him. People are so stupid, so unconscious, so mechanical; they don’t know what they go on doing. If they had supported this young man, he would have been a blessing to the country. But they tried in every possible way to prevent him. There were at least hundred cases against him in the courts. He was running from one court to another. For the last three years he was harassed as much as anybody can be, but he faced all that harassment without any strain, without any tension; he accepted it as part of his life.
If you want to change people, if you want to bring a radical change in their life, if you want to bring a revolution, you have to accept all these things as your destiny; they are inevitable.
We need more people like him, particularly in this country. More young men should die climbing mountains, flying in the sky, diving deep in the ocean, exploring the unknown – first outwardly and then inwardly too.
My work is totally different – it is inner – but on the fundamentals, Sanjay Gandhi would have absolutely agreed with me. I believe in adventure. Of course I am not interested that my sannyasins should go climbing the mountains because I know of far bigger mountains that are waiting inside you. And I would not encourage you to fly in the sky because there is a far bigger sky within you, far more unknown, far more unexplored, unmapped, uncharted. But the fundamental is the same.
The quality of adventure to me is a religious quality, it is a spiritual quality. Whether you use it outwardly or inwardly, it doesn’t matter. But I love all adventurous people, and I love all those who are courageous enough to live in insecurity – and he lived in insecurity – and of course, in insecurity you are always living with death. That’s what insecurity means: that each moment of life is also a moment of death.
You ask me to say few words on Sanjay Gandhi and his death.
Death is an illusion, death never happens – only the form changes. And because we become too much identified with the form, that’s why we feel so miserable. To know that you are not the body, not the mind, is to know there is no death, that you are eternal. Everybody is part of eternity.
There are only two illusions in the world, and they are not really two but two aspects of the same illusion. One is ego, which is false; it gives you the false idea, “I am separate from existence.” And out of this illusion arises the second illusion – the illusion of death. You are not separate from existence, hence how can you die? The wave is not separate from the ocean; it cannot die either. Yes, sometimes it manifests and sometimes it rests and goes into unmanifestation.
There is no death, remember. But I am not saying to believe me; I would like you to experience it. There is no death. There is only life and life eternal.

The second question:
Osho,
I was born a Christian but became convinced that Hinduism is the right religion, so I became a Hindu. I was initiated into Hinduism by the founder of the Krishna Consciousness Movement himself and given a new name. But listening to you I have become very confused. Please guide me as to what should I do now.
There are many things to be understood. The first thing: nobody is born as a Christian, a Hindu, or a Mohammedan. You are simply born as pure consciousness with no adjective attached to you. You are brought up as a Hindu, a Christian or a Mohammedan. That is another matter. That has nothing to do with your birth; that is conditioning by your parents.
And it always happens that whenever you are conditioned by others you feel a deep resistance against it. That is natural; nothing is wrong in it, not at all, because that child wants to remain free and by making him a Christian or a Jew or a Hindu the parents are drawing a small circle around him. They are making him defined; he was born undefined. He was born infinite; now they are making him finite. He was born open, open like a lotus flower. Now the parents, the society, the educational system, the church, are all trying to close him, to make him a prison cell. Nobody likes it – nobody can like it – it is against nature, against Tao.
Freedom is our natural love, hence the child starts resisting. He has to repress his resistance; he cannot assert it because he has to depend on the parents. He is utterly helpless; he cannot live without their support. It is a question of survival for him, hence he has to compromise; he compromises with the parents just to survive. By the time he is capable of standing on his own feet he is already conditioned. Now the walls are too thick around him, and living within those walls for twenty-five years, which is almost one-third of one’s life, and the most important one-third, one becomes attached to the walls. One starts accepting them, one starts even becoming attached. But that resistance somewhere in the unconscious continues. If some opportunity arises to go against your conditioning, you will not miss the opportunity.
That is what happened to you.
You say, “I was born a Christian…” Nobody is born a Christian – you were brought up as a Christian and you must have carried a deep resistance to it. Coming in contact with Hinduism you became convinced of its rightness. What type of contact was this? It was only intellectual. And of course, the Eastern religions are far more appealing intellectually than the Western religions for the simple reason that the East has explored consciousness for a longer time than the West. Eastern science is childish, so is Western religion. Eastern religion is very mature; Western religion is very childish.
The greatest religions were born in India – Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism; they contain the highest flights of human consciousness. Mohammedanism, Judaism, Christianity are far behind; intellectually they cannot be very convincing. They will look very primitive compared to Buddhism, Hinduism, Jainism.
You must have become intellectually convinced. But intellectual conviction is not real conversion; it remains in the head. You simply change from one prison into another – maybe a little bigger, a little better, with more facilities, but the prison is still a prison. If you are really rebellious you will not change one prison for another, you will simply get out of all prisons.
That’s why you are becoming very confused here, because I am not here to convert you into another religion – for that, you would be very willing. My sannyasins don’t belong to any religion at all; they have a kind of religiousness. They are religious without any religion.
Religion is for me a quality – not a philosophy, not a theology. I am against people moving from Christianity to Hinduism or from Hinduism to Christianity. I am against all these conversions; they are simply stupid.

A Polish captain called all his men to the barracks.
“Right, men! Today we are changing underwear. Kozlowski, you change with Zabriski. Pilsudski, you change…”

Now finally the Polacks have decided to change the underwear, but now they are changing among themselves, so what kind of change is this? It was far better to keep your own underwear – at least it had your own dirt! Now you will be carrying somebody else’s dirt.
Are you a Polack?

A Polish man walks into a doctor’s office with third-degree burns on both sides of his face. The doctor, in amazement and concern, asks what happened. The Polack explains that he was at home ironing clothes when the telephone rang. Without thinking he put the iron to his ear instead of the phone.
“But how did the other side of your face get burned?” asked the doctor.
The Polack answered, “He called me back!”

It was enough that you were a Christian – only one side of the face was burned – now what kind of nonsense is this, that you became a Hindu?
And I know this man who initiated you, the founder of the Krishna Consciousness Movement, Prabhupada. He certainly had some talent in attracting stupid people all over the world. He must have been a Polack himself for many lives! I have never come across any Hare Krishna Movement person who has any kind of intelligence. Now from Christianity you fell into another ditch.

Two Polacks arrived late at a concert where pianists of many nationalities were playing. Since they did not have a copy of the program they could not tell which pianist was from what country.
Suddenly one of the Polacks said, “That is the Polack pianist.”
“How do you know?” asked the other.
“Simple. He does everything like the others, but instead of pushing the stool closer to the piano, he sits and pulls the piano closer to himself!”

And do you know what happened to the Polack parachutist? He missed the ground!

It is good that you are now feeling a little confused. That shows the beginning of intelligence because unless you have some intelligence you cannot be confused. You cannot confuse a rock: confusion means some indication of intelligence. Don’t be worried – you are still a little bit alive. A fragment of you is still intelligent, and that is enough. We will take hold of that fragment and from there we will start changing you – not converting you into another religion but simply making you aware that religion has nothing to do with beliefs, Hindu, Christian, Mohammedan.
Religion is a revolution – a revolution from the mind to no-mind, from darkness to light, from death to immortality. Religion is a radical change of your inner gestalt. What you did was just substituting your old beliefs with new beliefs. But I don’t think that makes any difference. You worshipped Jesus Christ, now you will be worshipping Krishna; but the worshipper is the same, the worship is the same. You have not changed – you cannot change this way. You can go to the church, you can go to the temple, but you are the same person. Just by changing from the church to the temple, do you think there will be any transformation of your consciousness? It’s not so cheap. It needs tremendous inner work, it needs great awareness. It is not a question of replacing one belief with another, one image with another, finding substitutes.
The basic question is how to get unidentified with the body, with the mind, to know that you are just a watcher, a watcher on the hills, above the clouds, unidentified with any cloud, totally beyond, beyond the beyond.
My sannyasins don’t belong to any religion although all religions belong to them. They are vast enough: they can absorb whatsoever is beautiful in Jesus and they can absorb whatsoever is beautiful in Krishna. Why replace Jesus with Krishna? Jesus has something beautiful which Krishna has not got, and Krishna has something else which is beautiful and which is missing in Jesus. You will be far more complete if Jesus, Krishna, Mohammed, Moses, Zarathustra, Lao Tzu, Ko Hsuan, Kabir, Bahauddin, all become part of your inner being. There is no need to be so miserly. Your consciousness is so vast it can contain the whole universe, it can contain the whole sky. Even the sky is not the limit.
That’s my whole effort here: to make you more and more available to all aspects of religiousness. Krishna has something beautiful – the flute, the song, the celebration – which is missing in Jesus. But Jesus also has something immensely significant – the cross, the sacrifice, the readiness to die so willingly, with a prayer on his lips, “Forgive, father, all these people because they know not what they are doing,” with such compassion, with such forgiveness. There is no need to drop Jesus. Why not make space enough so they all can be part of you? They are aspects. And you will be missing Buddha – the serenity, the calmness. And you will be missing Bodhidharma – the laughter. And you will be missing Meera – the dance.
Why choose? Why be this or that? Why not love all that is beautiful? You can love the roses, you can love the lotuses, you can love all kinds of flowers. These are all flowerings of God.
You will feel a little confused because you would like me to give you another substitute, and I don’t give you another substitute. I make you spacious, I make you open to all possibilities.
A religious consciousness can contain all that has happened up until now, that is happening now, and that will ever happen in the future. That vastness is the real change that brings you into the shrine of godliness. And godliness has many doors – Jesus says, “My God’s mansion has many rooms” – he can contain contradictions.
You are worried because you will see many contradictions here. When I am speaking on Meera I will be speaking for love. When I am speaking on Buddha I will be speaking for meditation. When I am speaking on Tao I will be speaking on the transcendence of both love and meditation. And you will be confused, you will think that I am contradictory. I am not contradictory, I am simply vast enough – I can contain contradictions. And my whole effort is to make you also capable of containing all contradictions in such a deep synchronicity that the opposites become complementaries. Then your inner noise disappears and a melody arises. That melody, that harmony is prayer.

The third question:
Osho,
What is the hardest work that you ever do?
I do my hardest work before breakfast. That is getting up!

Have you heard about the guy whose name was Will Knott, but who was so lazy he signed his name, Won’t?
I belong to the same category. I am a lazy man’s guide to enlightenment!

The fourth question:
Osho,
Cannot people learn by imitating others?
That’s how people learn, but that’s how people remain stupid, too. The only way practiced hitherto is that of imitating others. That makes you knowledgeable but it does not make you intelligent. It makes you more informed but it does not release your wisdom. It will make you efficient as far as the outer world is concerned – you will become a better mechanic, a better technician – but as far as the inner dimension is concerned you will become more and more stupid if you imitate.
There are things which are learned by imitation: for example, you have to learn language by imitation, otherwise you won’t know any language. Science has to be learned through others. But the inner world is totally different; it follows a totally different law where imitation is a barrier and a wall, not a bridge. In the inner world you have to learn on your own.
But people go on doing the same kind of imitation in the inner world too, so they start imitating Buddha, they start imitating Jesus, they start imitating Mahavira, and they end up by being only carbon copies. They become more and more stupid. They cannot find their original face.
You can sit like a buddha, you can close your eyes like a buddha, you can use the same posture, you can sit under the same kind of tree, you can eat the same kind of food in the same quantity, you can sleep the way buddha used to sleep, get up at the time buddha used to get up – you can do everything in the minutest detail exactly like a buddha, but it will all be acting; it won’t make you an awakened one.

A little rabbit is ready to become an adult, so his daddy says, “Today I will show you how to behave with the ladies!” So they go and find six beautiful female rabbits in the garden.
“Look at me,” says daddy rabbit. “Watch! Be aware!”
“Hello, madam,” says daddy as he jumps on the first female. And then some time after his jerking is over he says, “Goodbye, madam!”
Then he jumps on the second one with a very polite, “Hello madam,” then, “Goodbye madam!”
And so on and so forth, very, very slowly…
When he is finished he goes to his son. The little rabbit seems very feverish. “Did you get it?” asks his father.
“Oh yes, yes, yes!” says the young one. And running at full speed without a single stop he goes on jumping, “Hello madam, goodbye madam, hello madam, goodbye madam, hello madam, goodbye madam, hello madam, goodbye madam…hello daddy, goodbye daddy!”

Imitation will make you very stupid, unintelligent. It is the way of the mediocre. Beware of it. In the inner world – and that is the world I am concerned with and that is the world you are here for – imitation won’t help at all. You have to drop imitating completely, totally, entirely, because each individual is unique, so unique that if he imitates anybody else he will miss his uniqueness, and in that uniqueness is his spirit, is his very being. In his uniqueness is hidden his godliness.
Cannot you observe that Jesus happened only once? And for two thousand years, how many people have tried to imitate him? Millions. And how many have become Jesus Christ? Not a single one. The same is true about Zarathustra, about Lao Tzu, about Buddha, about Mahavira, about Krishna. Not even a single person has been able to repeat them, and it is not that people have not tried; people have tried in every possible way. Millions of people have tried to be like Buddha – who would not like to be like Buddha? – but they have all failed, utterly failed. Is it not a great lesson to be learned?
Just open your eyes and see that God never creates two persons exactly similar; he does not repeat. He is really a creator.
It happened once…

A man purchased a Picasso painting. It was very costly, one million dollars, but he knew perfectly well that it was authentic – he knew it because he was an eyewitness when Picasso was painting it. When he had purchased it he was so happy – he was a friend of Picasso – he went to show him the painting and to tell him, “I have purchased one of your paintings. Of course it has cost me a fortune, but I am immensely happy that I have now got one of your original paintings.”
Picasso looked at the painting and said, “This is not original – this is a copy.”
The man was shocked – then he had been robbed of one million dollars! He said, “But what are you saying? I have seen you paint this with my own eyes! I was staying with you in the days when you were painting this!”
And the woman who used to live in those days with Picasso also said, “You must be joking because I also remember. You have done this painting yourself and your friend was staying with us.”
Picasso said, “I know perfectly well that I have painted it, but it is still not an original because I have painted the same painting before too. Whether I have made the copy or somebody else has made the copy, it makes no difference; it is a copy, it is not original. Yes, I have painted it, but it is a repetition. I will not call it original.”

Existence is not repetitive; it is always original.
Rejoice in the fact that it has created you as an original being. You are not supposed to be anybody else but yourself. It is disrespectful toward existence, it is ungrateful toward existence – even the effort, even the desire to be somebody else. Feel thankful and grateful that it has never created anybody like you and it will never create anybody like you. Don’t miss this opportunity by imitating.
And why do people imitate? – because they don’t trust their own intelligence. They are afraid that if they move on their own they may commit some mistake, so it is better to follow somebody who knows. That is the greatest mistake in life, to follow somebody who knows, because then you will never mature. One grows by committing many mistakes.
Commit as many mistakes as possible. Commit new mistakes every day – be inventive, be creative about mistakes. Just remember one thing: don’t create the same mistake again; that is not intelligent. But if you commit a mistake for the first time it is beautiful, it is great because that will help you to grow. It will help you to find out who you are. Just following somebody, even if you reach heaven it will not be worth reaching. You will reach like a child; you will not be able to enjoy it, and you will remain foolish even there, and you will go on doing your foolish things even in heaven. It is better to fall into hell but remain unique, remain yourself; then even hell can be transformed into a heaven.

After thirty years of happy marriage, Sadie was on her deathbed. The doctor had given up all hope.
Her loving husband, Saul, cried out tearfully, “Oh Sadie, oh Sadie, just tell me if there is anything I can do!”
From her deathbed Sadie whispered, “Ah Saul, ah Saul, my loving husband. I want you to do something for me you have never done in all these years.”
“Ah yes, Sadie!” cried Saul. “I will do anything for you, my Sadie!”
“Saul, I want you to kiss me here between my legs.”
“Ah Sadie, I can’t do that!”
“Ah, but Saul, you said you would do anything!”
So bravely Saul said okay and proceeded to kiss her between her legs.
All of a sudden a great rosy glow came over Sadie. She became completely well and jumped up out of bed crying, “Ah wonderful Saul!”
But Saul slumped back on the floor crying and beating his breast. Sadie asked, “What is wrong, Saul?”
Saul said through his tears, “Ah, but I could have saved my mother and my sister too!”

Be a little more intelligent. In the outer world, imitate, or whatsoever you want to, do. But in the inner remain original, remain authentically your own self.
I would like to see each of my sannyasin a unique peak, incomparable to anybody else. That’s why I don’t give you any discipline: I want you to discover it. I will help you to become more conscious, but I will not tell you what to do; that has to come out of your own consciousness. I will not give you ten commandments, I will not make rules and regulations for you. You all hanker for rules and regulations because that is easy. If I tell you, “Do this, don’t do that,” you need not use your own intelligence. It is perfectly good: you trust me and you go on doing whatsoever I say, but that will be only control, repression; it will not be freedom, it will not be consciousness.
And in the world of freedom, the first step is the last step too. You have to begin from the first step. If the first step is taken in slavery, the last step will also be part of it. The first step has to be taken in tremendous freedom.
If you are here, you are here on your own accord. If you are sannyasins it is your surrender, it is your own decision, it is your own commitment. I don’t make any conditions on you and I don’t want you to make any conditions on me from your side.
Just the other day I received a letter… The person asked for sannyas in such an aggressive way, as if he is doing some favor to me. And the way he writes the letter is not at all that of a man who wants to surrender, it is that of demand – each word is violent. He says, “Give me sannyas today. I cannot wait. Either say yes or no. I don’t want to follow Arup’s suggestions; I don’t want to do anything told by somebody else. You simply tell me whether you are going to give me sannyas today or not. I want the answer this afternoon!”
Now is this a way to be a sannyasin? This is the first time in my life that I have said no to any person – the first time! I have given sannyas to one hundred and fifty thousand people and this is the first time that I had to say no. Sadly I had to say no because this is not the way. If you make conditions, if you demand that “Today I want enlightenment, this very afternoon!”… Today it is sannyas, after sannyas there will be other things.
I don’t make any demands on you; please remember not to make any demands on me. I am here just out of my joy; you are here out of your joy. We have met for no other reason. You are not here because of me, I am not here because of you. You are here because of you, I am here because of me. And it is beautiful that we have met – it is a coincidence that we have met.
We can share. I can share whatsoever I have, but it is not an imposition on you. You are not to follow it, you have only to understand it. And if out of your understanding something starts happening in you, then you are the source of that happening, I am not the source of that happening. You need not even be grateful to me.

The fifth question:
Osho,
The Transcendental Meditators have an advanced siddhi course where they learn to fly, as they call it. I have seen photographs of them hovering above the ground. How they do it?
Mandira, go to the photographic department here and learn a little bit about trick photography – and there is nothing more in it. Krishna Bharti, Champa, they will be of immense help to you. Or if you want really a crazy man then go to Sarjano; he will teach you trick photography. It is all trick photography, nothing else – no siddhi, no flying, nothing else.
But stupid people become very interested in such sheer nonsense. If the Transcendental Meditators can fly, what is the need for Maharishi Mahesh Yogi to have an airplane? There is no need at all! We have met – I have met Maharishi Mahesh Yogi just by accident. I was having a camp in Pahalgam in Kashmir and he was also having a camp in Pahalgam. His disciples became very interested and they wanted me to come to them and to talk to them, so I went there. We met. The man is simply ordinary, nothing special. And what he is teaching in the West is a very traditional thing in India; any stupid person knows about it.
Just by repeating a mantra you can create a false sense of serenity. It is just autohypnosis and nothing else. You need not go to anybody, you need not learn any Sanskrit mantra, you can just repeat your own name. Your name is Mandira – you can simply go on repeating “Mandira, Mandira, Mandira, Mandira…” Go on repeating. If you repeat it for fifteen minutes you will feel a tranquilizing effect; it is a nonmedicinal tranquilizer. It is good as far as tranquilizers go, but it has nothing to do with meditation. Transcendental Meditation is neither meditation nor transcendental. But now it is flopping, and because it is flopping, something new has to be invented. Now they have invented siddhis and this is nothing but trick photography.

The last question:
Osho,
I am continuously worried what others are thinking about me because I have a very long nose. How can I stop worrying about others' opinions?
I don’t think anybody has taken any note about your nose – nobody has reported it to me. In fact, when I gave you sannyas I didn’t notice it either. I started thinking, reading your question, “What nose is she talking about?” People are worried about themselves – why should they be worried about you?
Sant Maharaj has written to me, “Osho, you are talking about Prince Philip having a twenty-five inch long prick, and my prick is getting smaller every day, and I am worried! Am I becoming a child again?” Now, if Sant comes to see you, will he be concerned about his own problem or about your nose?
Everybody has so many problems. Even a person like me who has no problems did not notice your nose, then what to say about others? Simply forget about it!

In an old ladies’ home, things were pretty boring, so one of the inmates decided to create some interest by running naked through the common room. After she had done it one old lady looked up from her knitting and said, “Was that Millie?”
“Yes,” said the old lady next to her. “What was she wearing?”
“I don’t know,” said the first, “but it really needs ironing!”

And you don’t know about long noses…

The platoon is ready for inspection by the general. The captain walks up and down to check that everything is in order. Suddenly he turns to the corporal and says, “Couldn’t that soldier with the long nose be put in the second row?”
“He is in the third row, captain!” replies the corporal.

Don’t be worried about people. And a long nose has its own beauty. It shows intelligence! You see the Jews – from where does their intelligence come? Long noses and small pricks! Now Sant should be worried because as the prick becomes smaller the nose will become longer – because somewhere it has to show! You being a woman, don’t be worried at all. Be as assertive as the liberated women all over the world say. Just exhibit your nose everywhere. Don’t be worried. What is wrong in having a long nose? Just you can do better pranyam. You can have better and stronger lungs, you will live longer. Nothing is wrong in it.

A sex maniac walks up to the reception desk of a hotel. He is carrying a chicken under his arms.
“Do you have a room for the night?” he asks.
“Yes, sir,” replies the clerk.
“Then make it a double, please!”

You missed it!
This is assertiveness. Why bother about people? If you love the chicken, you love the chicken!
It is your nose and existence has made it long. There must be some hidden purpose behind it. Enjoy it. Don’t try to hide it: exhibit it. And next time when you come, please inform me before you come so I can see it also. I enjoy all kinds of unique things!
Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
What is wrong with me that I cannot see what you are showing to me?
There is only one thing wrong with everybody, not only with you. That is a universal problem; it has nothing to do with individuals. It is the mind – the mind keeps your vision closed. The mind means your past, your memories, your prejudices, your conditionings; whatsoever you have been told, taught, educated – all that functions as a barrier. It does not allow you to see clearly, it does not allow you even to listen to what is being said. The moment you hear something, immediately it turns into something else; passing through your mind it is distorted. Unless you put your mind aside you cannot see. And that is a universal problem: it cannot be avoided.
Each society has to give a certain mind to the children. The children cannot be left without minds, otherwise they will not be able to cope with life, they will not be able to survive. It is absolutely necessary that a certain kind of education should be given to them, but whatsoever education is given to them becomes a barrier to their inner vision. It is a necessary evil.
The function of religion is to undo what the society has to do out of sheer necessity.
I am not telling you to not use your mind. Use it when it is needed, but remain capable of putting it aside when it is not needed. Being here with me as a sannyasin in this buddhafield, you can put the mind aside, you can face me in total nudity. Only then is there a possibility to hear that which is said and to see that which is shown to you.
It is difficult, arduous, because we have become so identified with the mind; we are so close to the mind there seems to be no space between us and the mind. We don’t know what is what, where our consciousness begins and the mind ends. They have got mixed into each other, intertwined, intermingled; their boundaries have become confused. There is no definite, clear-cut separation between the consciousness and the mind.
Learning to watch your thought processes will help you to create the space. Watching creates distance from your mind. The watcher becomes slowly, slowly distant from the watched; the observer and the observed start moving farther and farther away from each other. Soon the watcher is on the hilltop and the watched is in the dark valley far below, and the distinction is so clear, then there is no problem at all.
Education is an unavoidable necessity, the mind is an unavoidable necessity. But there comes a moment in your life when something higher than the mind is needed, when you need to transcend the mind, when you go beyond it. That is the whole process of meditation.
Listening to me through the mind is bound to create more problems for you than solving them, because whatsoever I say will be heard with so many prejudices that by the time it reaches you, it is no longer what was said.

A little boy and his father are in front of the lion’s cage at the zoo. Suddenly the little boy comes too close to the cage and the lion is almost on the boy.
A man standing by grabs the boy with a swift movement and saves him.
A journalist happens to be among the crowd, so he decides to write an article about it. Among other questions he asks the man, “What party do you belong to?”
“I am a Nazi,” replies the man.
The next day the newspaper carries the following headline: “A dirty Nazi snatches the lunch of a hungry African immigrant.”

That’s how prejudices function. Prejudices create immediate interpretations in you, and they are so quick, they don’t give you any time to ponder over. You understand only that which you can understand, but that is not understanding at all; you are moving in circles.
What I am saying to you is something that you have never known before, is something absolutely unknown to you. It is something mysterious; you cannot figure it out by your own calculations. You have to be more aware so that your prejudices don’t interfere, so that your old ideas don’t come in, otherwise you will immediately jump upon conclusions.
And the mind is very stupid, it is never intelligent. The mind is never original – it cannot be by its very nature – it only goes on and on repeating the old junk that it knows already. It cannot see anything new. If you come across something absolutely new you will simply miss it; you will not be able to see it or you will see something which is not there at all.

Gilliardi arrived in the United States and after a few weeks found he had great need of a woman. He tried flirting with a few at a nearby bar but was unsuccessful because he spoke very little English. Finally one night he picked up a streetwalker and she took him to her apartment. They were in bed making violent love when suddenly Gilliardi realized that he had not spoken a single word to her.
“Miss-a,” he said, “I come-a from-a the other side.”
“Ah?” said the girl. “This I gotta see!”

You will have to forget your language if you want to understand my language. You will have to forget yourself if you want to be in tune with me. That much risk you will have to take.
That’s why when people who are very knowledgeable come here, they are absolutely incapable of understanding anything, not because they are ignorant but because they are knowledgeable. The Hindu comes here to listen to me quote the Vedas; instead I quote a joke. He is shocked. He wanted to hear richas to be repeated from the Vedas and the Upanishads: that’s what he was expecting. His expectation is so much that he cannot understand what is happening here. If I had quoted from the scriptures he would have relaxed, he would have felt that he has understood, simply because he would have thought that I am supporting his ideas. He comes here not to understand something new, he comes here to be strengthened, supported, nourished in his own beliefs. He will leave here very happy if I am supporting his ideas. And one thing is absolutely certain: his ideas have not helped him at all, otherwise there was no need to come here. To come here and still hanker to be supported simply shows stupidity.
If your ideas are right you need not come here; you live your ideas, you practice them. You have lived according to your ideas and you have reached nowhere. Your Vedas have failed. Your Upanishads have become just a parrotlike phenomenon in you. You go on repeating beautiful words. If you have come here to get some support, some props for your falling ego, for your disintegrating ego, then you have come to a wrong place. Then listening to me you will be shocked; you will immediately close yourself. You will become almost blind and deaf.
Jesus says again and again to his disciples, “If you have ears, listen. If you have eyes, see.” Was he talking to blind people and deaf people? He was just talking to ordinary people like you who were able to see and hear perfectly well. So what does he mean? He simply means your ears are so full of noise and your eyes are already so full of ideas that it is impossible to reach you, to touch your heart, to move your heart.
Every day I receive many letters, many questions from Christians, from Mohammedans, from Hindus, from all kinds of people who have come with a certain idea. If by chance they feel that I am saying things according to their ideas they are immensely happy and they write me great letters of thankfulness and gratitude. And all that is nonsense; it is neither gratitude nor thankfulness, because in their letters it is very clear: they are not agreeing with me, they are happy they are finding me agreeing with them. But that is just a coincidence.
Now, here there are three thousand people – I am bound to say something which will support somebody’s idea. And the next day the same person writes an angry letter – because once I receive somebody’s letter of gratitude I know what has been the cause; immediately the next day I am bound to say something specially for him. And without fail he writes an angry letter, that “I used to think that you are enlightened, but you are not! I am sorry to say, but I have to say the truth.” Just the other day the truth was totally different. Truth changes so easily; if it fits with you it is absolutely okay.
I am not here to support you, I am here to dismantle your mind. You need hammering in many ways.
A follower of Gurdjieff – Nirvana’s father, an old man – was here a few months before. He had come with great love and respect. He has been writing letters to me that “I want to come before I die, I want to see you. I could not see Gurdjieff; at least I don’t want to miss this opportunity of seeing you.” And then he found an opportunity – some money came by and he immediately rushed… And he was very happy because whatsoever I was saying was fulfilling his expectations.
And then Pradeepa disturbed him. She asked a question to me about him: “Why he is not taking sannyas? When he is so in tune with you, why he is not taking sannyas?” And I said just a few words and all his joy disappeared. The next day he left in anger – he immediately wrote a letter, “I am very disillusioned. I had never expected that you would say such things.”
If I was saying nice things about Gurdjieff or things which were fitting with his idea of Gurdjieff – they may fit with Gurdjieff or not, that was not the point – if they were fitting with his idea of Gurdjieff… He had never been to Gurdjieff. If he had been to Gurdjieff the same would have happened there – he would have left angry. If he had not come here he would have remained loving and respectful toward me his whole life; he would have died with great love toward me. But what kind of love is this? This is not true love.
True love has courage enough. It is ready even to die, what to say about dropping a few prejudices? But people cling to their prejudices as if they are carrying a great treasure. Knowledgeable people are the most ignorant people in the world; the ignorant people are not so ignorant.
You must be carrying some knowledge within you – drop your knowledge. This is not a place to carry your knowledge. This is not a place where you can gather more information, where you can become more learned. This is a place to become more innocent, and then things will start happening very easily. If you are carrying some subtle ideas deep down in your unconscious, then you are always looking – maybe not consciously, maybe not very deliberately, but always looking – to be supported, nourished. And if something is not supporting, it hurts, it wounds, and immediately you shrink back, you withdraw from me.
And this thing goes on happening every day. People come close to me, they withdraw; they come close to me, they withdraw again. This game goes on happening until finally they realize the whole stupidity and wastage of time.

An aboriginal, working at a sheep station in the outback of Australia, rides into the homestead on his horse, obviously upset, dismounts and runs over to the boss. “Hey boss, my wife – she just hadum one plenty white baby!”
“Hold on there, Jacky,” replies the cocky, “these things happen. You know we have hundreds of white sheep and occasionally we get a black one. It’s just one of those things.”
Jacky considers thoughtfully for a moment and then says, “Okay, boss, I won’t make trouble for you about the white picaninny and you don’t say nothing about them black sheep!”

You ask me, “What’s wrong with me that I cannot see what you are showing to me?” Nothing is especially wrong with you, just the same human problem: the problem of the mind. If you are intelligent you can put it aside immediately, right now. All that is needed is an intelligent grasp, just a single moment’s glimpse, and you are out of it – because the mind is not holding you, you are holding the mind.
It happened…

A man came to Sheik Farid, a Sufi mystic, a great Sufi mystic and a very strange man. The man said, “How can I get out of my chains, my attachment, my ideas, my prejudices?”
Farid had his own way of answering things. Rather than answering the person he simply ran to a pillar which was nearby, clung to the pillar and started shouting, “Save me from the pillar!”
The man could not believe what is happening – is Farid mad or something? And he was shouting so loudly that people started coming in from the street. A crowd gathered and they asked, “What is the matter with you? Have you gone crazy? You are holding the pillar, the pillar is not holding you. You can leave it!”
And the man also said, “I had thought that Farid is a man of great understanding but he seems to be just a madman! I had asked a very subtle question, a very spiritual question which has always been asked by seekers: how to get out of my attachments to ideas, to things and to people? And rather than answering me he simply jumped and clung to the pillar and started shouting, ‘Save me from the pillar!’”
Farid looked at the man and he said, “If you can understand this, then you don’t need any answer. Go home and ponder over it. If the pillar is not holding me, neither your chains are holding you – you are holding them. I can leave the pillar – look I am leaving the pillar and I am saved. You also leave…”
The man must have been really intelligent – he understood. There was a shock for a moment, the way the question was answered, but in that very shock he could see the point. It penetrated his very heart.
He touched the feet of Farid and said, “It is finished! I have asked the same question to many mahatmas, to many saints, and they gave me great discourses on it, and nothing happened. And your mad effort to answer me has immediately transformed something in me. Now I am not going back to my old world, I am going to be with you. I have found the man for whom I was searching all my life. I needed a man like you who can hit me so hard, who could show me my stupidity.”

You can drop your mind this very moment because the mind cannot hold you. The mind is just a mechanism, a machine; you can get out of it any moment. But you have invested so much in it that you cling to it, and then you go on asking how to get out of it. The doors are open; there is nobody preventing you. You can come out of it! But rather than coming out of it you simply go on asking, “How to come out of it?” There is no question of how.
Whenever anybody asked Gautam Buddha, “How to come out of my misery?” he always used to say, “If your house is on fire, will you ask anybody how to come out of it? Will you wait for some learned answer? Will you consult scriptures or you will jump? If the door is not open, if the door is also aflame, you will jump from the window. You will not even bother that jumping out from the window will look a little odd. If you are in your bathroom taking a bath and you are naked, you will not even bother to wrap a towel around yourself; you will simply run out naked. And you will not think that this is not mannerly, against etiquette, running out naked; you won’t bother at all. If you understand that the house is on fire you will find the way. But you are simply talking, talking about how to get out of misery; you are not aware of the misery.”
If one is really aware of the misery, nobody can prevent you. And there is no need to postpone. Postponement means that you have a very mediocre mind. The intelligent person acts immediately because who knows about the next moment? Tomorrow never comes.

The second question:
Osho,
What is wrong with marriage? Why do you always speak against it?
Marriage is a great institution. Without marriage, life will be very empty. Without marriage, you will all be buddhas! It is marriage that keeps the world going on; it keeps things running. It keeps all kinds of things moving, alive. In fact, without marriage there will be no religion at all.
Religion exists not because of God or for God; it is because of marriage. Marriage creates so much misery that one has to meditate; meditation is a by-product. Without marriage, who will bother to meditate? For what? You will be already blissful! Without marriage there will be no renunciation, Buddha would not have left the world – for what? His wife, Yashodhara, must have created the situation. Mahavira would not have escaped to the mountains. Without marriage there would have been no Buddha, no Mahavira. Just think: history would have been very flat, without any salt, tasteless. Marriage keeps this whole “sorry-go-round” on and on. People call it a “merry-go-round”…
I am not against marriage – without marriage, ninety-nine percent of jokes will disappear from the world. How I can be against marriage? I am all for it.
Marriage makes many things possible.

Marriage is the process of finding what kind of man your wife would have preferred!

It is a mirror.

Drinking in a bar, two friends are chatting about life.
“Who introduced you to your wife?” asks one.
The other says, “We met casually. I can’t blame anyone else.”

Two women are chatting at the hairdresser.
One says, “My husband travels a lot. He spent one month at home out of the whole year.”
“One month?” exclaims the other. “That must be very annoying to you.”
“No, a month goes by fast!”

The doctor and his wife are walking down the street when they are passed by an incredibly beautiful woman. She has big tits, a nice body, and a beautiful face. She seems a little self-conscious of her beauty and as she passes by the doctor she smiles a familiar smile.
“Who is that lady?” asks the wife.
A little shy, the doctor answers, “A client.”
“I know,” the wife replies, “but is she your client or are you hers?”

In a small city in the interior of Brazil, a couple is sitting on a bench outside the house enjoying the moonlight. Maria turns to Ze and says, “Ze, do you know something? Tomorrow it is going to be twenty-five years that we have been married!”
And Ze answers, “Eh!”
“Twenty-five years. Oh! Ze, it is a lot!”
“Eh!”
“Look, Ze, why don’t we catch some of the chickens in the yard and kill them for tomorrow?”
“Why, Maria? Poor chickens, it is not their fault!”

“Hey!” cried Satan to the arrival. “You act as if you own the place.”
“I do,” came the reply. “My wife gave it to me before I died.”

Now, without marriage all these jokes will disappear. Without marriage there will be no misery – and no laughter either. There will be so much silence; it will be nirvana on the earth! Marriage keeps thousands of things going on: religion, the state, nations, wars, literature, movies, science; everything, in fact, depends on the institution of marriage.
I am not against marriage; I simply want you to be aware that there is a possibility of going beyond it too. But that possibility also opens up only because marriage creates so much misery for you, so much anguish and anxiety for you, that you have to learn how to transcend it. It is a great push for transcendence. Marriage is not unnecessary; it is needed to bring you to your senses, to bring you to your sanity. Marriage is necessary and yet there comes a point when you have to transcend it too. It is like a ladder. You go up the ladder, it takes you up, but there comes a moment when you have to leave the ladder behind. If you go on clinging to the ladder, then there is danger.
Learn something from marriage. Marriage represents the whole world in a miniature form: it teaches you many things. It is only the mediocre ones who learn nothing. Otherwise it will teach you that you don’t know what love is, that you don’t know how to relate, that you don’t know how to communicate, that you don’t know how to commune, that you don’t know how to live with another. It is a mirror: it shows your face to you in all its different aspects. And it is all needed for your maturity. But a person who remains clinging to it forever remains immature. One has to go beyond it too.
Marriage basically means that you are not yet able to be alone; you need the other. Without the other you feel meaningless and with the other you feel miserable. Marriage is really a dilemma! If you are alone you are miserable; if you are together you are miserable. It teaches you your reality, that something deep inside you needs transformation so that you can be blissful alone and you can be blissful together. Then marriage is no longer marriage because then it is no longer bondage. Then it is sharing, then it is love. Then it gives you freedom and you give the freedom needed for the other’s growth.
The ordinary marriage is an unconscious bondage: you cannot live alone so you become dependent on the other. The other cannot live alone so he or she becomes dependent on you. And we hate the person on which we are dependent; nobody likes to depend on anybody. Our deepest desire is to have freedom, total freedom – and dependence is against freedom. Everybody hates dependence, and that’s why couples are continuously fighting, not knowing why they are fighting. They have to meditate over it, they have to contemplate over it, why they are fighting. Everything is just an excuse to fight. If you change one excuse, another excuse will be found; if no excuse is left then excuses will be invented, but somehow the fight has to be there.
The fight has a fundamental reason which has nothing to do with anything else. The fundamental reason is that you hate the person you have to depend upon. You don’t want to recognize it – you don’t want to recognize the fact that you hate the person you believe you love. You hate simply because it is the other that hinders, defines your territories, keeps you confined, makes you feel limited from every side. Your freedom is crippled and paralyzed. How can you love the other person? And you are doing the same to the other. How can the other person love you?
Marriage is a great teaching; it is an opportunity to learn that dependence is not love, to learn that to depend means conflict, anger, rage, hatred, jealousy, possessiveness, domination. And one has to learn not to depend. But for that you will need great meditativeness so that you can be so blissful on your own that you don’t need the other. When you don’t need the other, the dependence disappears. Once you don’t need the other you can share your joy – and sharing is beautiful.
I would like a different kind of relationship in the world. I call it relating, just to make it different from your old kind of relationship. I would like a different kind of marriage in the world. I will not call it marriage because that word has become poisoned. I would like to call it just a friendship; no legal bondage, just a loving togetherness. No promise for tomorrow – this moment is enough. And if you love each other in this moment and if you enjoy each other in this moment, if you can share with each other in this moment, the next moment will be born out of it. It will become more and more enriched. As time passes by, your love will become deeper, it will start having new dimensions, but it will not create any bondage.
Hence my vision of a new humanity does not have any place for the old kind of marriage or the old kind of family because we have suffered enough. I know perfectly well that man and woman will need to be together; not out of need, but out of overflowing joy; not out of poverty but out of richness – because they have so much that they have to give. Just like when a flower opens, its fragrance is released to the winds because it is so full of fragrance it has to release it. Or when a cloud comes in the sky it showers; it has to shower – it is so full of rain water it has to share.
Up until now we have not helped man to know what love is; on the contrary we have been forcing him to get married: “Marriage has to be the first thing and then love will come on its own accord.” That whole idea has proved totally wrong. Man has lived in hell for centuries. He has become accustomed to this, it is true – in fact so accustomed that the very idea of a world without marriage shocks him.
Just the other day I received a letter saying, “If marriage disappears and the family disappears, what will happen to children?” What has happened to children with marriage and with the family? All children are born so beautiful, so innocent, so intelligent, and the family and the marriage destroy them. They start seeing their mothers and fathers continuously quarreling, nagging. They become accustomed of it and they will repeat the same pattern in their life.
I would like marriage to be replaced by relating and the family to be replaced by small communes. For example, this commune: a few hundred people living together, working together, producing together, creating together. The children will not be confined to the small families, the children will belong to the whole commune. Not that they will not get affection from their father and mother – they will get more affection from their father and mother, because the father and mother will also not feel burdened with the children – and they will also get affection from everybody else.
This whole idea of “my child” is also egoistic. Children should belong to the commune and it should decide how many children are needed. It cannot be left now to individual families, otherwise the world will become more and more of a hell. And the commune should also decide who are the right people to give birth to children. It will decide scientifically which man can become a father and which woman can become a mother. All men need not be fathers, all women need not be mothers, but they can mother the children of the whole commune, they can father the children of the whole commune.
If we use a little science, which is available now, then we can have better children – healthier, more intelligent, more talented, more beautiful. Now, going on producing like animals is very primitive, it is absolutely absurd. And also, there is no need that two persons who are in love should produce a child because now there are scientific ways. If you can get your son to be as intelligent as Albert Einstein then why should you bother to give birth from your own chromosomes? Why should he not be given birth through Albert Einstein’s cells? Just as dying people donate their eyes they can donate their chromosomes, which will be beautiful. Those chromosomes can be preserved for thousands of years; there is no problem in it. And we can go on improving the human race. We are doing this as far as animals are concerned and you can see the difference.
In India, look at the cows: the foolish Indians think they respect the cows – they just call them mothers, that’s all. Otherwise the Indian cows are the poorest cows in the world: starving, ill, giving so little milk that it is absolutely uneconomical to preserve them. But all over the world wherever science has entered, better cows, better bulls, better dogs, better animals have become available.
The same is possible with man. There is no need to go on hanging onto old ideas. We can stop people like Adolf Hitler, Genghis Khan, Nadir Shah from being born because the first cell of the father is decisive, the egg of the mother is decisive. Now it can be decided what kind of child will be born. Will he be an Adolf Hitler or an Albert Einstein? His whole future can be read – it can almost be predicted.
Only one thing will remain unpredictable forever and that is his enlightenment; that will remain unpredictable. Otherwise everything will be predictable. But we can give birth to people who are more intelligent, more healthy. Of course then there is more possibility of their becoming enlightened, of their becoming buddhas.
We have to change the whole structure of humanity from the very roots. The way marriage has existed up until now has to go and a totally new concept has to be introduced. Only then can a new man be born on the earth.

The third question:
Osho,
Do you know the Italian language?
Michael Potato, I don’t know much of the Italian language, but the little bit that I do know is so beautiful that I would like to know more. But I am a lazy person – I cannot learn anything. In fact, whatsoever I am, I am because I have learned only one thing: how to go on unlearning. Whatsoever I am, I am through the process of unlearning. I would have loved to know Italian language; it seems to be beautiful. But now there is no possibility. Just a little bit – which is not much…

An old Italian and a young Italian are sitting in an outdoor cafe watching the women go by.
The old Italian asks the young one, “Hey, Giuseppe, you like big-a fat-a ass-a?”
The young man answers, “No, I like nice small-a ass-a!”
Some time goes by and the old Italian asks, “You like big-a saggy tits-a?”
“No,” answers the young Italian, “I like nice little tits-a.”
Some time passes again and the old man asks, “You like garlic-a breath-a?”
“No, I like nice sweet-a breath-a.”
Then the old Italian says, “If you don’t-a like-a big-a, fat-a ass-a, you don’t-a like-a big-a saggy tits-a, and you don’t-a like-a garlic-a breath-a, then how come you keep-a fucking my wife-a?”

This much Italian – not more than that! But that is enough for my purposes.

The fourth question:
Osho,
What you are saying and doing here does not seem to be philosophy or religion to me at all.
Reverend Banana, once, for a change, you are right, sir. It is not philosophy, it is not religion, it is a totally different phenomenon. I am not interested in philosophy at all because philosophy has not done any service to humanity, it has only filled people’s minds with unnecessary chattering and noise. It has not given man any radical transformation, it gives you only a false feeling of knowing. It is a pseudo phenomenon and it prevents you from searching for the real truth because you become so addicted to words that you totally forget that truth is not a word, that God is not a word, that love is not a word. The philosopher becomes more and more wordy. He becomes so full of words, he forgets completely his being. He is surrounded with crowds of words, clouds of theories, hypotheses, which all pretend to be conclusive, but none of them is conclusive.
Philosophy has not reached any conclusion and it will never reach – it is an exercise in utter futility. It is a good game if you want to play an intellectual game, intellectual gymnastics; it is hair splitting. But I am not interested in it at all – and I know it from the inside. I have been a student of philosophy and a professor of philosophy too. I know it as an insider that philosophy is the most useless activity in the world, the most uncreative, the most pretentious – but very ego-fulfilling, gives you great ideas of knowledgeability without making you wise at all.
When P. D. Ouspensky met George Gurdjieff for the first time, he was already a world-famous philosopher, a mathematician. He had written his most important book, Tertium Organum. The book is really tremendously beautiful; if you are interested in philosophy, then it is unique. If man who is interested in philosophy has missed P. D. Ouspensky’s Tertium Organum, he has missed something very significant.
Ouspensky presented his book, Tertium Organum, to Gurdjieff. Gurdjieff just looked for five minutes here and there, threw the book and said to Ouspensky, “Take this piece of paper and go in the other room. On one side, write exactly what you know and on the other side, exactly what you don’t know. If you know God, write it on one side; if you don’t know God, write it on the other side. And so on about truth, love, enlightenment, immortality.”
Ouspensky was a little puzzled, a little shocked, offended too, because his great book was thrown as if it was just disgusting. And I can understand: he must have felt very wounded. But now that he had come to see this strange man he wanted to try what he was asking. He went into the other room with a pencil and the paper. For the first time in his life, he says, “I became aware that I don’t know anything at all.” It was a cold Russian night; snow was falling outside. Even inside the room it was below zero, but he started perspiring. A world-famous man could not write a single word – love, enlightenment, truth, God – on the side that Gurdjieff had said, “Write on this side if you know” Not a single word!
After one hour he came out with the empty paper, gave it back to Gurdjieff and said, “I am sorry, but you are really a strange man! You have already done a miracle. It is for the first time that I realize I know nothing.”
Gurdjieff started laughing and he said, “How have you been writing such beautiful books? It is easy to write a beautiful book, it is easy to philosophize; it is far easier if you don’t know. If you know, it becomes more difficult.”

Ouspensky became a disciple of Gurdjieff, accepting his ignorance.
Gurdjieff said that is the first condition to be fulfilled by a disciple: that he should accept his ignorance. Only then can things be done, only then is there any possibility of inner growth. The false has to be known as false; only then can the real be understood as real.
I am not a philosopher. My people here are not philosophers either. Yes, once in a while we joke about philosophy, that’s all…

A man walked into a pub, crossed the room, walked up the far wall, then across the ceiling, back down the wall by the door, and left again without saying a word.
“Did you see that? It was incredible!” said the stupefied bartender to a local philosopher.
“Sure, I saw it – it was really horrible!” said the philosopher. “He was wearing yellow shoes with pink socks!”

The corporal calls his soldiers to attention and asks for a volunteer to accomplish a dangerous mission.
After a few moments he goes up to a soldier and says, “Congratulations, my brave man! I have heard about you, that you are a great philosopher. You are the only one who has stepped forward! Now you have proved your courage and your mettle to me.”
The philosopher-soldier looks around in surprise, then answers, “Well, the truth is – the others have all taken a step backward!”

Philosophers live in a kind of deep sleep, a slumber. He was not aware that everybody had moved back. He must not have been there; he must have been somewhere else.

Wendell Holmes, a Justice of the Supreme Court of America, was very well known in America for his philosophic attitude toward life. One day he left his courtroom and made his way to the railway station where he boarded an express train. An hour later, as the train crossed the Maryland countryside, the ticket inspector entered his compartment and asked to see his ticket. Holmes searched through all his pockets and his wallet, but was unable to find the ticket. A look of anxiety passed across his face.
The ticket inspector, who had recognized Holmes from newspaper reports, said, “Well, there is no need to worry about the ticket, Mr. Holmes. I am sure you forgot to buy one at the station. I can issue you one now.”
Holmes’ look of worry had deepened. In a perplexed voice he said, “It is not the ticket that worries me. I just realized I don’t know where I am going.”

Philosophers have never known where they are going.
Reverend Banana, I can understand your concern that things here don’t seem to be philosophical – they are not. It is an existential commune. We trust in existence, not in philosophy.
And you also say it does not seem to be religion. That too is true. It is not religion in the sense Christianity is, in the sense Hinduism is, in the sense Mohammedanism is. It is not fanaticism: there is no dogma, there is no belief. It is religion in the sense Buddha is religious. It is religion in the sense Jesus is religious. It is religion in the sense Ko Hsuan is religious. It is not religion but a religiousness; it is not a question of belief but a question of living.
To me, religion is not ritual. If you are looking for ritual it does not exist here. To me religion is an insight, an insight into the beauty of existence, an insight into the tremendous mystery that surrounds us, an insight into your own being and into the beings of others. It has nothing to do with any dogma, any belief, any creed, any cult – it is not a cult at all – it is just a totally different phenomenon.
We are trying to live a meditative life, working in the ordinary way but working with a different quality.
People are working in the kitchen, cleaning the toilets, or in the carpentry shop or in the boutique or in the bakery or in the garden – just ordinary kinds of activities, but with a different quality: with joy, with silence, with love, with bliss, with a dance in their heart, with celebration.
To me, that is true religion: to be able to celebrate life is religion. In that very celebration you come close to God. If one is able to celebrate, God is not far away; if one is not able to celebrate life, then God does not exist for him. God appears only in deep celebration, when you are so full of joy that all misery has left you, all darkness has left you. When you are so full that there is no emptiness in you, that you have started feeling the significance of the ordinary, day-to-day existence, when moment to moment you live totally, intensely, passionately, then God is available.
God is not a person but just an experience, an experience of overwhelming mystery, unfathomable mystery. It is not philosophy in the ordinary sense, it is not religion in the ordinary sense either. It is philosophy in the truest sense of the word – philosophy means love for wisdom; then it is philosophy. Religion, the word, the very word, means to be in tune. It comes from religere: to be in deep harmony with the whole, to be married with the whole, to be related with the whole, to forget your ego and your separation. Then it is religion.

The last question:
Osho,
Please tell us a few jokes about Jesus Christ which are only recorded in the Akashic records.
Okay.

It is a little known fact that Jesus Christ was nearly called Manny shortly after his birth. Just before he was, however, someone walking past the stable peeked a look inside to see what was going on. Hitting his toe on a sharp stone he cried out, “Jesus!”
“Oh, that’s a good name,” said Mary. “We will call him that.”

Jesus walks into a hotel, throws some nails onto the counter and says, “Can you put me up for the night?”

Jesus was resting on the shores of Lake Galilee. A group of children nearby were laughing, throwing water at him, and making a lot of noise.
Peter, annoyed, shouted at them, but Jesus stopped him and said, “Let the children come to me…”
The noise, the throwing of water, etcetera, continued even more than before. Finally, Peter, tired and very annoyed, tried to shove them away, but again Jesus stopped him and said, “Peter, I told you to let the children come close to me – so that I can kick them in the ass!”

Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
I wish you would say something about the Eastern indifference to what you are doing, and the Western attraction.
It is a very natural phenomenon. Religion is the ultimate luxury.
Man lives on three planes. If his bodily needs are fulfilled, only then psychological needs become significant; otherwise not. A hungry man will not be interested in the music of Beethoven, Mozart, Wagner. He will not be interested in the paintings of Michelangelo, Vincent van Gogh, Picasso. It is natural. His first, basic, needs are not fulfilled. Once his bodily needs are fulfilled, immediately his consciousness shifts from the physical plane to the psychological. Consciousness remains attached to the plane where it is most needed. You also know it in ordinary day-to-day existence. If your leg is hurting you forget the whole body, your consciousness becomes focused on the leg. If you have a headache, only then do you become aware of the existence of the head; otherwise, you remain absolutely unaware of its existence. It goes on functioning silently, your attention is not needed.
The body is the foundation and the East is suffering from physical needs that are so tremendous that whatsoever goes on in the name of religion is not really religion; it cannot be – it is something else.
People gather around Satya Sai Baba, or persons like him, not for spiritual needs, but for physical needs. Somebody is ill and would like a miracle to happen so that he can be cured. Somebody is blind, somebody has no children, somebody has no employment, and they are hoping that by going to the saints, by the blessings of the saints, or by praying in the churches, in the temples, in the mosques, in the gurdwaras, their needs will be fulfilled. This is hoping in vain, but the poor man cannot help it. He goes on hanging around these illusions. It is a vicious circle: he hangs around illusions in the hope that his needs will be fulfilled, and because he hangs around illusions he does not make any real effort to fulfill his needs. Those needs go on growing bigger and bigger. Then he goes on moving more and more into the illusory. His religion is more of a wish-fulfillment – not of growth, not of maturity, not of spiritual flight, but of dreaming, hallucinating.
Go alone on a long fast and you will start fantasizing about food – in twenty-four hours you will fantasize about food. You will go into loneliness and after the third week you will start talking to yourself. The need is such that you will start living in an illusion, as if there is somebody with whom you are having a dialogue.
The poor man creates a poor God, a God which is nothing but his imagination, a God that exists nowhere. In the past the East has known true religion, now only footprints are left. Buddha knew true religion, Mahavira knew true religion, Krishna knew true religion. They had touched the ultimate peaks of consciousness, but now there are only echoes in the atmosphere. The reality has disappeared long ago and we are worshipping the footprints.
People in the East become interested in a kind of religion which I call pseudo, false, basically illusory – and not only that, positively harmful because it prevents scientific growth.
If you are hungry you need better technology, not better prayers, not yagnas – not offerings to the fire god – that is utter stupidity. You are already poor and you are wasting money, food, purified butter in the fire, in the hope that the gods will bless you. How long you have been hoping this way? Those gods have not heard you at all. And how long are you going to be deceived by yourself? But just as I said, it is a vicious circle. The hungrier, the more starving, the more undernourished, the more crowded you become – the more your problems become unmanageable – the more you start hoping, wishing, imagining, dreaming, the more you start going to some stupid people in the hope that miracles will be done. They have never been done and they will never be done. Miracles don’t exist.
Miracles are absolutely nonexistential, but the poor man’s religion remains focused on the possibility of a miracle.

Have you heard about the latest miracle performed by the Polack Pope? He has made a blind man deaf.

Once, a couple was thinking about having a baby, one evening after an especially good session of lovemaking.
The woman joyfully exclaimed, “Ah, dear, I think that did it! Ah, I am so happy. What will we call it?”
The husband smiled, removing the unnoticed condom from himself, and said, “We will call him Houdini.”

A madman went to the local Jewish tailor who was a kind of philosopher, to try on his new uniform. He dressed in the uniform and went to look in the mirror.
“Wow!” he shouted, “Look at that, Mr. Tailor! You made me a jumpsuit with three sleeves.”
“Well,” said the tailor, “you never told me how many you wanted.”

Mad people going to mad people.
But these mad people are known as mahatmas in the East. The East is full of mahatmas: when you get tired of one mahatma there are other mahatmas, and you go on moving from one shop to another shop. And life is short, you can go on remaining in illusion.
The poor man’s religion is that of miracles, that’s why Christianity has a deep attraction for the Eastern man. You can see it happening.
Buddhism has great appeal in the West. Hundreds of Buddhist monasteries are opening up in America, in Europe, in Holland, in Germany… And in India, thousands of people are converting themselves every day into Christianity. What is the mathematics of this? Why is it happening? – for the simple reason that the religion of Gautam the Buddha appeals only to those who have all their needs fulfilled. It is the highest quality of religion, it is like an Everest.
Jesus has appeal – not because people understand Jesus; he has appeal only because of his miracles. Take the miracles away and people will stop getting into Christianity, they will lose all interest. Hence the Christian theologians, the Christian missionaries go on emphasizing the miracle part, which is just a mythology, which is not true, which is absolutely false and which is not new. It has been in the air for a long time, for the simple reason that Jesus was also working with poor people. He was a poor man’s son. All of his friends and his followers were poor people. They can only understand a language which appeals to their needs. All his followers were either farmers, gardeners, fishermen, carpenters, or people like these – uneducated, uncultured, unsophisticated. They must have created these stories about him, otherwise they would not have remained with him. These miracle stories function like glue. And for two thousand years that has been the appeal of Christianity; it always appeals to the poor.
In India you will also not see Jainas being converted to Christianity, although they are rich enough for that. You will not see brahmins being converted to Christianity although they are rich enough for that. Then who are the people who are being converted to Christianity? The very poor people, the oppressed, the downtrodden, the aboriginals, the untouchables, the hungry, the starving, the crippled, the paralyzed, the blind, the deaf, the ill, the orphans – these are the people who become interested in Christianity.
Now what do they have to do with meditation? They need miracles; they don’t want any inward eye, they don’t want any spiritual nourishment. This is the first and the most important reason why people are not interested in my vision, particularly in the East. But about that too, one condition has to be remembered.
In the East too, the Japanese are interested in me; because Japan is the only country which is rich. You will find hundreds of Japanese here. Many of my meditation centers are opening in Japan, many books are being published in Japan. There is a great stir in Japan, and I have been really surprised. Whenever people come to me I ask, “How long are you going to stay?” Germans almost always stay for three months, four months. Japanese always stay for six months, nine months, twelve months, two years. Japan is the only Eastern country which has come to a rich level of affluence, and their needs are now totally different. They will not go to Satya Sai Baba, they will not be interested there at all.
India is too poor to understand me, to be interested in me. Indians come here to stay for one day, two days – at the most three days. Even when they come here for only one day they want to be treated like others. They feel very shocked when they come to know that I will not be initiating them myself, that some of my disciples will initiate them. They feel very shocked: “Why is this treatment given to us?” But they are staying here only one day. In the morning they come, they want sannyas in the evening, and tomorrow they are gone. And the people who have been here for six months meditating, going through dozens of growth groups, working hard, these Indians want that they should be treated exactly like them. They should stay the same time and go through the same processes, and risk as much – but for that they are not ready. They feel offended that they are not given the same treatment.
Again and again the Indians write to me, “Westerners are sitting in front of you and we are told to sit at the back.” You should be happy that you are even allowed to sit at the back. Soon there will be no space at the back. You have to earn it. The people who are sitting in front of me have been here for six years, seven years. There are people who have come once and have never left. They deserve it, they have earned it.
This is the first reason that I am talking about the highest form of religion: because I am talking about the whole world. To me, nations don’t mean anything, races don’t mean anything, colors don’t mean anything. I am talking about a New Man, who is going to be born, who has become almost an absolute necessity because without the New Man, humanity cannot survive anymore. The old is rotten, and we have to get rid of it, but before we get rid of the old the new has to be brought onto the scene. My work here consists in giving birth to the New Man, to a new humanity.
The second reason why the Indians are afraid is that they already think they know, but they know nothing. They are simply carrying a dead heritage. They are very knowledgeable, they can recite the Gita and the Vedas and the Upanishads, parrotlike, not knowing what they are saying. They have not experienced those truths, but they can recite them like gramophone records. And because of this, they think they know what religion is. Why they should come here?
The West in that way is innocent, is not knowledgeable. It has a tremendous inquiry, but no blocks. It is ready to explore. The knowledgeable person is never willing to explore; he is always afraid because something may go against his knowledge. He would like truth to be according to him, not vice versa. He is not ready to be according to the truth – which needs guts, which needs an open mind.
In the East, particularly in India, people don’t have an open mind at all. They have very closed minds. They are so full of holy cow dung there is no space inside.
I can appeal only to those who are explorers, adventurers, inquirers, who are in a way innocent.
And the third reason is concerned with those people who are neither poor nor knowledgeable. Why they are not coming here? There are rich people in this country. This is a country of contrasts: ninety-eight percent of people are very poor and two percent of people are very rich. Those two percent of rich people are afraid to come for the simple reason that just to be associated with my name is a danger. They write to me, “We would like to come, but we are afraid.” Just to be associated with my name is dangerous. People will start saying to them, “So you have also become a victim? So you are also hypnotized? We had never thought that you are so mad, so crazy!”
And then, coming to listen to me does not mean just listening, as it means when you go to listen to Krishnamurti. You can listen and go home. Here listening means slowly, slowly getting committed. It is involvement, and involvement means your whole life will change with it. Your family life, your personal life, your social life, your business life – everything will be affected by it. You can go and listen to Krishnamurti and there is no problem in it, you remain without any commitment. With me, you become committed.
To listen to me is dangerous for two reasons. Firstly, the fear that you may get involved in it – and then where it will lead? Secondly, you will be condemned and criticized by everybody. That keeps people holding themselves back. They read, they listen to the tapes – thousands of people listen to the tapes, thousands of people read the books, and millions of people talk and discuss about me, for and against. In fact, anybody who has any intelligence is already divided by me: either for me or against me.
But to come here, to enter the gate needs some courage which Indians have lost long ago; otherwise they would not have been slaves for two thousand years. They don’t have any courage, their backbones are missing, they have no spine. How they manage to walk and live is a miracle.
And there are people who are not knowledgeable either, who cannot say they are scholars or pundits or that they know anything of the Vedas or the Upanishads, but their craze is to imitate the West. Their whole craze is… They have the money, they have the opportunity, they go on rushing to the West. They go for world tours, they want to have all kinds of gadgets the West is enjoying. They are not interested in religion, in spirituality. They may show lip service to religion and spirituality because that is a traditional thing, conventional. But it is only lip service; their hearts are for absolute materialistic values.
These are the reasons why the Eastern people, particularly Indians, are not interested in coming here. But the whole world is interested.
And the Indians are also imitators. Just wait a little. When more and more people from all over the world will be coming here, they will start following them. They are imitators. They are carbon copies. They have always been imitating for two thousand years. They cannot take any step on their own. If they see the West is coming, they will come; but I don’t pay any respect to such people. I don’t have any place in my heart for such people who are imitators.
You can see it happen everywhere here. Rabindranath Tagore got the Nobel Prize for his book Gitanjali. The book had already been published for years, but nobody in India had praised it. Once he got the Nobel Prize, the whole of India was praising him, and he could see that. He refused the invitation of Kolkata Corporation. They wanted to honor him. He said, “I won’t come. I refuse this honor because the book has been published for many years in the original, and you have never honored me.” In fact, no notice was taken of his book, and it is one of the greatest books ever written. On the contrary, people were criticizing it, criticizing it because it was not according to the old pattern of Indian poetry. It has something original, and the Indian mind cannot understand anything original; it needs repetitive things, then it praises. But when the whole West started praising him, the whole of India was ready to praise him. He became a great “son of the country”; otherwise nobody was bothering about him.
Just now you have seen it happen again. Mother Teresa was here her whole life, working. Nobody was bothering, nobody has really ever heard of her name. Once she got the Nobel Prize, the whole of India is agog.
These are imitators. These people don’t have any intelligence of their own. They are ready to do anything, whatsoever is being done by the whole world – they will be ready to do any stupid thing.
So just wait. Let more and more people come – and they are coming, they are on the way. My invitation has reached the farthest corners of the world, I have stirred millions of hearts and they will be coming. And they are my people, because their bodily needs are fulfilled, so they don’t come here asking for some stupid miracle. They don’t come here for any psychological needs either. If they have any psychological needs I have got one hundred therapies going on here, so those needs can be fulfilled. My work starts only when your bodily and psychological needs are fulfilled. Only then can you look a little beyond, to the spiritual realm.
So whosoever is able to look beyond the body-mind complex belongs to me. Whether he is born in the East or in the West, is black or white, does not matter at all. Whether he is man or woman does not matter at all. I am creating world citizens. And I am not creating a religion. It is only a religiousness, a diffused kind of religiousness, not very tangible. You cannot make a creed out of it, you cannot make a church out of it – impossible! I am not leaving a single Bible or Koran or Gita so you can make a church out of it. When I leave this world I will leave at least one thousand books, so contradictory to each other that anybody trying to make any dogma out of them will go crazy.
It is impossible to make any dogma out of my ideas, but you can transform your being through them. Forget about this East and West business; don’t waste my time about these things again and again.

The second question:
Osho,
If an enlightened person cannot lose his buddhahood, how does a baby born as a buddha lose his?
Each child is born a buddha, but cannot remain a buddha for long. That is part of growth: he has to lose it.
Unless he loses it, he will never be able to understand its value. It is like a fish in the ocean… The fish is born in the ocean, lives in the ocean; but knows nothing of the ocean, cannot know. There is no separation, there is no space, there is no gap between the two. Fetch the fish out of the ocean, throw it on the shore, and immediately there is great understanding in the fish. Now the fish knows for the first time the beauty of the ocean, the joy of the ocean. Now the fish longs for it. Let the fish slip back into the ocean again and see its rejoicing, see its joy.
That’s exactly the meaning of the biblical story. Adam and Eve have to leave paradise just to regain it – that’s the only way to regain it. Paradise has to be lost. Only then is there awareness. Innocence is one thing – every child is innocent – but to be aware of innocence is a totally different thing. Only a buddha is aware of innocence; hence the buddha cannot lose it because he is aware. The child has to lose it, he is not aware – he cannot be in the very nature of things; he has never lost it.

One morning little Johnny comes down in tears. “Mommy, Mommy,” sobs Johnny, “I got so frightened. I woke up, ran to your bed and you were not there. Then I ran to Dad’s bed and he was not there. Then I ran into my bed and I was not there!”

This experience is needed. Everything has to be lost. Suddenly there is only emptiness, meaninglessness, darkness, and the search starts again for that which is lost.
Meditation is only a way back home. It is not a search for something new; it is a search for something that was intrinsically our own, but we were bound to be unaware of it.

On the first day of kindergarten, Tommy was nervous and upset and wanted to talk to his mother. A teacher helped him place a telephone call to his home, but when the mother answered, Tommy was too nervous to speak right away.
“Hello,” the mother said, “who is this?”
“This is your son,” said Tommy, bursting into tears. “Have you forgotten me already?”

Children are innocent, but their innocence is not the innocence of a buddha. The difference is tremendous. It is unconscious innocence, and because it is unconscious it has no virtue. That’s why Jesus says, “Unless you are like small children” – note the word: unless you are like the small children – “you shall not enter the Kingdom of God.” He is not saying unless you are children; he cannot say that, otherwise every child will enter the Kingdom of God. He is saying unless you are like the small children. The difference is great. To be like the small children certainly means you are not children, and yet you are like the children. There is some similarity and some dissimilarity – something common between the two, and something not common.

Little Jeffrey was sad when he found his pet turtle lying on its back on the bank of the pond.
“Never mind,” said his father, “We will have a fine funeral for him. I will make a little coffin for him and mother will wrap him in silk. We will buy a white picket fence to put around his grave. After we bury him we will go down to Häagen-Dazs and I will buy a big ice-cream cone.”
Suddenly the turtle turned over and headed for the water.
“Jeff, look!” shouted his father. “Your turtle is not dead after all.”
“Daddy, let’s kill it!”

This is innocence, but not buddhalike. Now the child has become so interested in the grave and the white fence and the ice-cream, that who cares for the turtle now? Now all that ceremony…
But there is no sin either. There is no virtue, no sin; he is simply unaware. You cannot say he is violent or murderous, no, not at all. He is simply unconscious.
Innocence plus consciousness is equal to buddhahood. Innocence minus consciousness is equal to childishness. And how can one be conscious? The only way – and let me emphasize – the only way is to lose it and gain it again.
You ask me, “If an enlightened person cannot lose his buddhahood, how does a baby born as a buddha lose his?” The enlightened person has lost it and found it. The baby has not lost it, and has not yet found it; he is born with it, oblivious of it. Hence you will see in the eyes of small children something of the saints, something of the same beauty; but also a deep ignorance. The innocence is there but full of ignorance. The saint is innocent but full of awareness, full of knowing. His innocence is not mixed with ignorance; it is wisdom.
And children are bound to lose their innocence. The sooner the better. The more intelligent children will lose it sooner; the stupid children will lose it a little later; the retarded children may not lose it ever. The more intelligent a child is, the quicker he will lose his innocence because he will start inquiring, exploring. He would like to know more and more, he will be very curious, he will ask a thousand and one questions – questions which even his father, his mother, his teachers can’t answer.

A child was walking with his father, and he asked, “Why are roses red?”
And the father said, “I don’t know.”
A little afterward, he asked, “Why does the river always flows downward? Why not upward?”
The father said, “Shut up! I don’t know. Don’t bother me.”
After few seconds, again he asked, “Where are the stars in the daytime?”
And the father said, “I don’t know.” And the father mumbled to himself, “What would have happened if I had asked all these questions to my father?”
The child said, “Then you would have been able to answer me.” But then the child remained silent.
The silence was so long the father became worried. It was so rare because he was constantly asking – a very intelligent child he must have been – that he asked, “Why are you not asking anything?”
The child said, “What is the point?”
And the father said, “Then how are you going to learn?”

We want children to ask, we want children to inquire although we don’t have answers ourselves. We want them to become knowledgeable and informed because it will be needed in their lives, but we are not very authentic, very true. Even with our small children we are false. A really loving father, a loving mother, a loving teacher, will always say what he knows and what he does not know. He will not pretend.
If the child asks, “Who made the world?” he will not say, “God” because he does not know. He will say, “I have been inquiring, I have not found the answer yet. You also inquire. If you find out before me, tell me. If I find out before you I will tell you. But I have not found.” And there will arise a great friendship and a great understanding between the child and the father. And the child will respect such a father his whole life. Otherwise sooner or later he will discover that all your answers were just bullshit. You were pretending that you know, but you know nothing. Then all his respect will disappear.

Two boys were talking about their dogs. “I can’t figure it out,” complained one. “How can you teach your dog all those tricks? And I can’t teach my dog anything!”
“Well,” said the other boy, “to begin with you have to know more than your dog.”

Naturally, children have to learn, and learning means conditioning. From whom are they going to learn? From people who are not buddhas, from people who have not arrived, from people who are themselves groping in the dark, from people whose inner being is a dark continent, from people who have no light of their own. They will learn things from these people and they will become just like these people. They will be lost in the jungle of the world, unless one day they are intelligent enough to see what has happened – how they have lost those beautiful, wonderful, awe-inspiring days, how they have lost the purity, the innocence of their childhood – and they start searching for it again. That is the moment when meditation begins. That is the moment when religion is born.
Religion is not Christianity, Hinduism, Mohammedanism. Religion is the beginning of going back to your original source, trying to find your innermost core that you had brought from the unknown, and that is still there wrapped around with information, knowledge – all kinds of things. You will have to peel it like an onion. You will have to go on peeling because there are layers and layers, and you have learned so many lies. You have been told to learn lies, you have been brought up in lies – Christian lies, Hindu lies, Mohammedan lies. Beautiful lies – very appealing, but they are not true. Truth has to be discovered within one’s own being.

A brother and sister are making love…
It must have happened in France; it cannot happen anywhere else!
The brother says, “Mm, you are better than Mum.”
“Yes,” answers the sister. “Daddy told me this morning.”

Now, these children will be corrupted by you. They are corrupted; in a thousand and one ways we corrupt them. We are also helpless because we have been corrupted by others; that’s our heritage – corruption. That’s what is passed from one generation to another, and we go on handing to the new generation.
But the intelligent child sooner or later will discover all this corruption and all this deception, and will be able to get out of it. That’s my definition of sannyas: getting out of all that has been told, taught, that has been given to you by others, discarding it all in total, so that you can regain your innocence. Then one becomes a buddha. Now you cannot lose it because this is your achievement. Now you are fully aware of it. Now nobody can destroy it because there is nothing more valuable than this.
The child was unaware; it was bound to happen. So the child cannot be protected, the child cannot be prevented. All that loving parents can do is to go on making him aware, “Whatsoever is being told to you, taught to you, is only hypothetical; it is not truth. Remember. It is utilitarian, it is the best lie that we have discovered up until now, but it is not the truth. You will have to discover truth on your own, you will have to discover it within your own being. You will have to become a light unto yourself.”

The third question:
Osho,
I am homosexual. What should I do about it?
It is good that you have confessed it. It is good that you are truthful about it. It is good that you are not hiding it because whenever you expose yourself in totality, it is the beginning of a transformation. Don’t be worried. One has to go beyond sex one day, whether it is homosexuality or heterosexuality or bisexuality – it does not matter much. Sex is sex. These are only preferences, differences of liking. Don’t feel guilty about it, this is not your fault.
Homosexuality has come into existence because of repressive measures, because of repressive moralities, because of thousands of years of separating man and woman into separate camps. In the colleges, in the schools, in the army, in the monasteries – everywhere men and women are kept apart. The natural outcome is going to be homosexuality, lesbianism, because the natural energy will try to find some outlet.
Homosexuality is a by-product of your so-called religions. The first homosexual must have been born in a monastery, that is almost certain. We don’t know his name, but a memorial should be made dedicated to the unknown – the first homosexual. He must have been a monk.
It is a well-known fact that Christian and Buddhist monasteries have been full of homosexuality. It was bound to happen because you don’t give them the science of transcending sex, and you simply tell them to repress the energy. Now the energy starts moving into perverted ways.
And don’t take offense at the word perversion. It simply means unnatural, it simply means not as it was prescribed by the biology. The biological route is heterosexual. If you prevent it… It is like a small stream is flowing: you put a rock in its way, it will start flowing from some other side, it will bypass the rock, it will become two streams instead of one. You can go on preventing it and it will go on splitting into many streams. It will find some way. It has a source of water that has to be taken to the ocean.
Don’t be worried about it because worrying won’t help. Accept it. Just as repression has created it, a deep acceptance can dissolve it. Accept it. You are a victim of thousands of years of conditioning.

Friendship is born at the moment when one person says to another, “What! You too? I thought I was the only one.”

People go on hiding it, but sooner or later you have to find somebody else, and there are ways homosexuals indicate their sexuality to others. They walk differently – they may not say anything, but they walk differently. They look differently, they talk differently, their gestures are different, and other homosexuals immediately understand the language.
And it is not a small minority, remember. Ten percent of people all over the world are homosexuals. Out of ten, one person is a homosexual; it is a big number. And it is increasing every day because the women’s liberation movement is creating lesbianism. “Why even depend on men for love? Sisterhood is beautiful. Love your sisters.” The natural outcome will be that many brothers will be left alone.

The new bride, frustrated by her groom’s indifference, could not contain herself anymore. “Listen,” she said, “if you are gonna keep on reading these newspapers, I am going downtown to get myself a man.”
“Far out!” he said. “Would you get me one too?”

A homo and a hetero went into the desert.
“Ah,” said the horny hetero, “even if there was a fly here, I could screw it.”
“Z-z-z-z,” replied the homo.

In a bar, two homosexuals are drinking their martinis with chips and olives. Suddenly one of them pricks his lip with the toothpick. At the sight of the blood he exclaims, “Ah, my, I have got my period.”

A little bit perverted, but so what. Nothing to be worried about. Accept it.

My fundamental principle is acceptance – tathata. Whatsoever is the situation, you accept it. From there things can begin. Don’t reject it. It is out of rejection the problem has arisen, so only with acceptance… Relax into it and you will be surprised. If you can accept it without any guilt, slowly, slowly your homosexuality will turn into heterosexuality again. Why? – because guilt is also a religious phenomenon, and homosexuality too. They are joined together, they are tied together. If you go on feeling guilty, you will remain homosexual. Drop the guilt, accept it. Nothing is wrong, it is just that you are carrying the whole ugly past of humanity. What can you do? You have come a little late, people have come before and they have dirtied the whole beach, so we have to clean it.
But what is the point of crying and weeping and feeling guilty? There is no need to waste energy in that. Accept it with no guilt at all. And with the disappearance of the guilt you will be surprised: if you are a Christian your Christianity disappears; if you are a Jew your Judaism disappears; if you are a Hindu your Hinduism disappears. This is really a miracle: when the guilt is dropped your religions disappear. And when religions disappear you become a far more natural being. You can start seeing things clearly. In fact, what you are seeking in the other man, you cannot find in him. There will be frustration. What the other man is trying to find in you, he cannot find; there will be frustration.
Friendship is possible, but love is not possible, and friendship and love are different dimensions. Friendship has its own beauty. Love needs polar opposites, only then is there attraction, only then is there tension enough. Love needs a subtle dialectics, it is a process of dialectics. The man and woman relationship is a dialectical process full of hazards, adventures, fights. It is a kind of intimate enmity. In the morning the fight, in the evening the love, in the morning again the fight, and it goes on moving from one polarity to the other.
But this is how it keeps itself alive. It is Hegelian dialectics: thesis, antithesis, synthesis, and again synthesis becomes thesis. Just the other night you had reached a treaty, a peaceful state, and in the morning it disappears. And you were thinking, “Now things are going smoothly.” But from the same point, in the morning the argument starts, and by the evening the same point leads you to lovemaking.
In fact, unless you fight beforehand, you will not be able to make love really, tremendously. A good fight before making love gives you zest, gusto – just a good fight and you become hot; otherwise, civilized people have become cool. Just a good fight – shouting, throwing things, pillow fighting, and then relaxing into the warmth of each other. The fight creates the distance. The farther away you are – it is a kind of mini-divorce, then comes a mini-honeymoon.
It can’t happen in a homosexual relationship. That’s why homosexuals are called gay; there is no dialectics, they are always smiling. But their smile seems to be shallow; it cannot be very deep. They are smiling because there is no possibility of tears, and they understand each other. They are both men or both women, so they understand each other. With understanding there is no fight. A man and woman never understand each other, they cannot. If they understand, immediately all is finished, they have both become buddhas.

The fourth question:
Osho,
Can't I wait a little before taking the jump into sannyas? I don't feel fully ready yet.
I know you are a mathematician and a Jew and also an Italian. It is a rare combination. The mathematician is always calculating, but he can never take the jump. Calculation will not allow you to take the jump, it is impossible for the calculating mind. And you will never be fully ready. How will you be fully ready? There are things you become ready for only when you have entered them.
No two lovers are fully ready before they enter a love relationship. If they want to be fully ready then a love relationship will never happen. Where are they going to get ready for it? And why this readiness? Is it not out of fear? Something may go wrong…
But your whole life, what have you done? You have been calculating, calculating, living in a very businesslike way. What have you achieved? Sometimes taking risks has a beauty of its own. In fact, all great radical changes happen only when you move into some dimension without any calculations.
Sannyas is a love affair; it is not mathematics.

A mathematician passing through the security check at an airport is discovered to have a bomb in his hand luggage.
“You are arrested,” said the security officer.
“Arrested? What for? I am not a hijacker, I am a mathematician.”
“Then what is this bomb doing in your bag?”
“Why, it is a matter of security.”
“I don’t understand,” replied the security officer.
“Well, my man, consider. If the possibility of one bomb being on board the plane is removed, then the possibility of two bombs being on board the same plane is practically nonexistent.”

This is calculation. He is going very mathematically.
Sannyas will never happen to you. It is not mathematics; it is poetry, it is music, it is dance, it is celebration. It is a mad, mad love affair. And you are a Jew too. Maybe it is because of your Jewishness that you have become a mathematician. The Jews are good mathematicians. It is no wonder that Albert Einstein proved to be the greatest mathematician of the world. Who else can be the greatest mathematician than a Jew?

Aaron Silberstein called his little son Moise, gave him a ruble and said, “Moise, go to the grocer and get two pounds of butter.”
Moise went off, taking the little dog of the Silberstein family along. On the way to the grocer’s he decided to make better use of his father’s money. Instead of getting two pounds of butter, he bought two pounds of sweets from the grocer. After he had hidden the sweets in the barn, Moise put on a sad face and went in to meet his father.
“What happened?” asked the father. “Where is the butter?”
“The dog,” said little Moise, “the fucking beast snatched the butter away from me and ate it all up.”
Silberstein grabbed the little dog and put it on the scale. The scale indicated exactly two pounds. He turned to his son and said, “Okay, son. This is the butter, now where is the dog?”

Take a jump out of your Jewishness, out of your mathematics. I say you are fully ready; I can certify.
Do you think all of my sannyasins were fully ready before they took the jump? They dared! And it is not a question of being fully ready. How you are going to measure and weigh at what point you are fully ready? What is the criterion? You can ask me.
The very question says that a deep desire has arisen in you, but your mind is holding you back. Your spirit wants to take the jump, but your mind is not willing. The mind says, “First get ready,” because the mind knows perfectly well one is never ready.

The great mathematician was getting old and his health was deteriorating every day. He went to his physician. After a complete check the doctor took a deep breath and began.
“Dear sir, in a case like this it is better to be frank and tell you the whole truth.”
“Tell me, doctor, whatever it is.”
“It is difficult.”
“Tell me the truth, doctor. How long do I have to live? A year?”
“Less.”
“Less? Well, better I should know. Six months, then?”
“Less.”
“Okay, okay. I can take it. One month?”
“I am sorry to have to say it but…”
“It is okay, doctor, I accept.” So saying he left the room. The doctor was very impressed at the way the man had taken the news, and he went to the window to take a last look at him.
He was standing on the pavement about to cross the road. Just then a hearse passed by, at which he raised his hand and shouted, “Taxi! Taxi!”

Tomorrow is not certain. Who knows? – tomorrow may come, may not come. If you are feeling an urge, a deep longing, then take the jump and don’t be so afraid. Gather a little courage. Sannyas has to be a discontinuity with your past. If it is not a discontinuity with the past, it is not sannyas at all. And if you are fully ready it will not be a discontinuity; it will be continuous. You were ready and will come out of that readiness, it will remain part of your past.
Sannyas has to be a discontinuous thing. The past simply disappears as if it had never existed. You start anew, fresh.
And you are burdened with problems, I can see: mathematician, and a Jew, living in Italy…

It is Christmas Eve in a concentration camp, and the general calls all the prisoners into the courtyard and lines them in three rows.
“Christmas makes me feel good,” says the general, “and I want to ease your sufferings. The first row one step forward.” The first row does as it is told. The general shouts, “Fire!” and they are all killed. The same happens with the second row. Then again the general shouts, “One step forward, the third row.” All the prisoners step forward except two; they are Italians.
They look at each other and then one says, “Ah well, let us step forward, otherwise he gets pissed off.”

You ask me, “Can’t I wait a little before taking the jump into sannyas?”

You can wait as long as you want, but how long it will take? And death can always end the game. Even the next moment is not certain. All that is certain is this moment, and I can feel a longing. Whenever I see the longing that is enough proof that one is prepared. Don’t ask for perfection. Nobody is ever perfect. Don’t be a perfectionist. Perfectionists are all neurotics. Become a sannyasin the way you are, as you are. Don’t wait any more. You have waited enough. You have been here for at least six or seven weeks, asking me again and again. Now I think it is time.
And this longing is not going to leave you. It will become stronger and stronger. If you leave without becoming a sannyasin, you will have to come back. It will haunt you wherever you are. I will follow you.

The boss calls for the Jewish accountant, and the secretary says, “He went out, boss. He went to play the sports lottery.”
The next day at the same time the boss calls for the accountant again. “He went out, boss. He went to play the horses,” answers the secretary.
The third day the boss calls for the accountant again. The secretary explains, “He went out, boss. He went to play the lottery again.”
“What is this?” exclaims the boss. “Is he mad? Every day he is going out to play during work time.”
The secretary said, “It is the last chance he has to balance the books this month.”

That’s all I can say to you. This is the last chance. I may not meet you again. You may not find a madman like me again. Buddhas will always be there, but rarely a buddha like me who will accept all kinds of crazy people.

Gautam Buddha was very particular. You had to go through a long initiation process. There were many steps to be fulfilled. But once a man came to him – his name was Sariputta – who became one of his greatest disciples. Sariputta touched Buddha’s feet and said, “Please initiate me.”
Buddha said, “First you have to fulfill many other things.”
Sariputta said, “I will fulfill everything afterward, but first initiate me.”
Buddha said, “You have not even fulfilled the ordinary formality” – of going three times around Buddha, touching his feet three times, and asking three times, “Lord, initiate me.”
Sariputta said, “If I die doing all of this ritual, will you be responsible for me? If I miss this opportunity, will you be responsible for me? Then I am ready. I will do three hundred rounds around you, I will touch your feet three hundred times – or as many times as you want. But are you ready to take responsibility for me? Because who knows – I may not be here, you may not be here…”
Buddha looked at Sariputta, smiled, and Sariputta was the first disciple who was initiated without fulfilling any requirements. His other disciples were angry and they said, “We had to go through years of training. What has this man done?”
Buddha said, “I looked into his eyes. I saw his longing – a pure flame. I can agree with him, he can fulfill all these things later on; these are formalities, these are for fools. But he is not a foolish man, he has tremendous intelligence.”

Bodhidharma, one of Buddha’s greatest inheritors, went around this country but could not find a single man to initiate because nobody was able to fulfill his conditions. His conditions were impossible; hence, he had to go to China in search of a disciple. And there too, thousands came but he refused. He sat facing a wall for nine years and said that “Unless the right person turns up, I am not going to look at his face.” Hundreds and thousands came and went away – and he would not look back.
Then a disciple came: cut off his own hand, threw it before Bodhidharma, and said, “Turn toward me! Otherwise I will cut off my head!”
Bodhidharma had to turn immediately, a hundred and eighty degree turn, and he said, “Wait, don’t be in such a hurry. I have been waiting for you.” He initiated only four persons in China.

There are different kinds of buddhas. You will not find a man like me again – it is very rare. It has never happened before and I don’t think there is ever going to be a man like me again.
So, I don’t think it is good, wise, Jewish to miss.

The last question:
Osho,
Why are you called the Master of Masters?
Reverend Banana, Michael Potato Singh, Michael Tomato; dear gentlemen or ladies as the case may be… Because nobody has yet been able to decide whether these fellows are gentlemen or ladies.
It is a difficult question. I had to look in the Akashic records, and not in the past Akashic records – because it is not recorded there – but in the future Akashic records. This is a future story. Listen carefully.

It happened in Moksha, the ultimate resting place of the awakened ones. A journalist for the local newspaper, The Nirvana Timeless, was desperately seeking material to fill up the center page of the next edition which was due to appear in twenty-five hundred years. There was not much news around in Moksha, and soon he realized that he would have to make something up himself if the center page was not to be left empty again, as it had been for countless ages.
Finally, he hit on the idea of choosing which of the many buddhas, arhats, bodhisattvas, christs, qutubs and other enlightened beings abounding in the lotus paradise was the master of masters – in short, a spiritual Mr. Universe competition.
He summoned all the enlightened ones together and asked them to encapsulate in a short phrase the essence of their teaching, which would entitle them to the title of master of masters. There was, as usual, a deep silence which lasted a few hundred years. Finally a Zen master stood forward and hit the journalist hard on the head. This was considered to be well deserved, but not very original.
Another hundred years passed and then a Sufi stood up and began to whirl. Unfortunately he was out of training, and after a couple of months he fell flat on his face, causing some merriment among the Hasidic masters, who had been surreptitiously pouring oil on the floor to bring the uppity Arab down.
After some goading by Manjushree and Subhuti, Buddha slowly stood up and addressed the gathering in the following way: “There is no teaching and no one to be taught. There is no master and nothing to master. Nothing can be said; there is no one to hear it.” Then he held up a flower and Mahakashyap giggled as usual. Many applauded the Buddha, but to the journalist it did not appear like the kind of news which would help him sell his paper.
One after another the enlightened ones came forward to make their bid for the title. Moses gave a few new commandments. Bodhidharma stared at a wall for ninety years. Jesus made a mountain out of a molehill, and delivered a sermon from it. Diogenes displayed his suntan. Shiva and Parvati ran through one hundred and twelve new positions they had invented. Gurdjieff drank twenty bottles of brandy, then walked on his hands on a tightrope over the plenum void, smiling with the left side of his face and grimacing with the right. Lao Tzu had a good belly laugh at all these antics. Mansoor would not stop shouting, “Ana’l haq! Ana’l haq!” and finally had to be put in a straitjacket and given a couple of Valium. Vatsyayana gave himself a blow job to demonstrate existentially that sex and samadhi were manifestations of the same energy – and so on.
It proved impossible to choose which of the awakened ones was the master of masters, since even the journalist had attained choiceless awareness long ago. But the day seemed saved when Teertha, a relative newcomer from England, stood up and declared with typical British diplomacy, “The greatest master is the one who has yet to come.”
Suddenly an Indian mahatma jumped to his feet and cried triumphantly, “Then that must be me – for I have been celibate for eighty-four million lives.”
By unanimous agreement the awakened ones decided the mahatma’s samadhi was not yet “seedless,” and he was dispelled back to samsara to spill his seed once and for all.
Just as the mahatma disappeared from sight, Osho came out of his room, where he had been sitting all this time, and made his way toward a small marble podium in the corner of the hall. A deathly hush gripped the audience, and even Mansoor shut up. If a look of dread could be said to cloud those tranquil eyes, this is what happened to the gathering.
As Osho sat down and leaned toward the microphone, a cry arose from Mahavira, “Wait! Wait! We proclaim you master of masters! Now please go back to your room.”
Osho smiled innocently and left the hall. There was a sigh of relief.
The journalist turned to Mahavira in consternation: “I don’t understand. Why did he get the title? What did he do?”
“Nothing,” said Mahavira, “but last time he spoke here it took us seven hundred years to get him to stop, and send him to Pune!”

Enough for today.