---
title: Tao The Pathless Path Vol 2 01
series: Tao The Pathless Path Vol 2 01-14
talk_number: 1
url: https://oshoworld.com/tao-the-pathless-path-vol-2-01
language: English
duration: 01:44:59
author: TAO
scraped_at: 2026-01-03T09:22:20.538554+00:00
---
Hui Ang visited King K’ang of Sung. The king stamped his foot, coughed and said fiercely, “What pleases me is courage and strength. I take no pleasure in men who preach morality. What have you to teach me?”

“Suppose that I have a way to make anyone, however brave and strong, miss when he stabs or strikes at you. Wouldn’t Your Majesty be interested?”

“Excellent! This is the sort of thing I like to hear.”

“But even if a stab or blow misses, it is still humiliating for you. Suppose that I have a way to prevent anyone, however brave and strong, from daring to stab or strike you. But a man who does not dare to harm you may still have the will to harm you. Suppose that I have a way to ensure that men have absolutely no will to harm you. But a man who has no will to harm you may still have no thought of loving or benefiting you. Suppose that I have a way to make every single man and woman in the world joyfully desire to love and benefit you. This is three degrees better than courage and strength. Isn’t Your Majesty interested?”

“This is the sort of way I should like to find.”

“The teaching of Confucius and Mo Tzu is what I have in mind. Confucius and Mo Tzu became princes without owning territory, became leaders without holding office. Every man and woman in the world craned his neck and stood on tiptoe in his eagerness for their safety and benefit. Now Your Majesty is the Lord of ten thousand chariots. If you were indeed to share the aims of these two men, everyone within your four borders would enjoy the benefit. You would be far greater than Confucius and Mo Tzu.”

Hui Ang hurried out. And the king said to his courtiers, “Clever, the way he talked me round with his argument!”
Tao means transcendence – transcendence of all duality, transcendence of all polarity, transcendence of all opposites. Tao is the ultimate synthesis – the synthesis of man and woman, of positive and negative, life and death, day and night, summer and winter.
How does this synthesis become possible? How may one grow into that ultimate synthesis? A few things have to be understood.
First, the principle of yin, the principle of femininity, is like a ladder – a ladder between hell and heaven. You can go to hell through it, and you can go to heaven through it. The direction will differ but the ladder will be the same. That ladder is the principle of yin, the principle of femininity. Nothing happens without the woman. The energy of the woman is the ladder of the lowest and of the highest, of the darkest valley and of the brightest peak. This is one of the fundamental principles of Tao. It must be understood in detail. Once it gets rooted in your heart, things will become very simple.
It will be good to go into the symbol of Adam and Eve.
The world does not start with Adam, it starts with Eve. It is through Eve that the serpent persuades Adam to disobey. The serpent could not persuade Adam directly – it is as if there is no direct way to man. If you want to reach man you have to go through woman. The woman functioned as a medium for evil.
Then again, when Christ is born, he is born of the Virgin Mary. The Christ child was born out of virgin femininity, out of virgin yin. The highest enters through the woman.
The lowest and the highest have both been through the woman.
Adam stands for earth, clay – red earth, to be exact. God made Adam out of red earth. Adam represents the principle of dust unto dust. Man is the outer principle, the principle of extraversion: man is the physical body.
Try to understand these symbols. Man is the physical body and God created Eve out of man’s physical body. She was something higher. First man had to be created, then woman. She was something subtler, something more refined – something of a greater synthesis. Eve was created out of a rib; Eve could not be created directly from the earth.
For example: you cannot eat mud but you can eat apples; apples are on a higher plane. They come out of the mud. The tree grows out of the mud, so the apple is nothing but earth transformed. You can eat the apple and you can digest it, but if you try to eat the earth, you will die. The apple is from the earth but it is a superior synthesis – better, more digestible.
God created Adam and mankind has taken it as though, because God created man first, he is primary. No, man was created first because he was very close to the earth. Then woman was created – she was not as close to the earth; she was created out of Adam, she was a higher synthesis.
The name of Eve is also very significant. It means the heart. Adam means the earth and Eve means the heart. God told Adam to name things, so he named everything. When he came to name Eve he simply said loudly, “She is my heart, Eve.” That became Eve’s name. Eva or Eve means the heart. Translated into the modern idiom it means the psyche. Man is the body principle, woman is the psyche. Man is body, woman is mind. Everything happens through the mind.
To do bad things, your mind must be convinced of it first; to do good, your mind must be convinced of it first. Everything happens first as an idea then it can be actualized. Your body cannot be persuaded to do something unless your mind is ready. Even if illness enters your body, it enters through the mind. Anything that ever happens, happens through the mind. That is the meaning of the parable: the serpent persuaded Eve. Only the mind can be persuaded, convinced, seduced, and then the mind can persuade the body very easily. In fact, the body follows the mind like a shadow. Once your mind has a thought, it is bound to be translated into actuality.
Through Eve, Adam fell. Through Eve, he was expelled from the garden of God. Through Eve came this great adventure we call the world. Through Eve, he disobeyed.
I have heard…

A man was brought to a court and the policeman said, “Either he is mad or he is completely drunk, because he was just standing in the middle of the road. I told him many times to move but he would not. I was surprised because I didn’t think that he was drunk and I didn’t think that he was mad. He seemed to be sane in every way and I smelled his breath and he had not been drinking. But he would not move from the middle of the road.”
The magistrate said, “Tell me. Why were you standing there? Why didn’t you move when the policeman was telling you to again and again?”
The man was a very tiny man, very weak and thin. He said, “Sir, I had to choose between the law of the government and the law of my wife.”
The magistrate said, “What do you mean?”
He said, “My wife told me to meet her at exactly that spot at twelve o’clock. So I had to choose. Naturally I chose the law of my wife.”
The magistrate laughed, “That has always been the case. You go home. If that is the problem, then one has to choose the law of the wife.”

Since Adam it has been so. The woman is the principle of the inner – not, certainly, of the innermost, but of the inner. She is just in the middle. The innermost you call the soul, the outermost you call the body, and just between the two is the psyche, the mind.
Adam followed Eve on this adventure into the world.
Then again, the parable about Jesus is the same. Jesus is born of the Virgin Mary. Why virgin? Because if you understand rightly, virgin means a mind which is absolutely pure, uncontaminated by thought. Thoughts are represented by the serpent because the ways of thoughts are very serpentine. If you watch your thoughts, you will understand why they have been represented by the serpent. Their ways are very serpentine, they walk without legs just like serpents; they wriggle within you. They are very cunning and very clever and very deceptive – like the serpent. They hide in dark holes in your unconscious, and whenever they have an opportunity, they jump upon you. In the night, in the dark night, they come out; in the daylight they hide. When you are a little alert those thoughts disappear; when you are not so alert they come out, they start influencing you.
The Virgin Mary means a mind in meditation; Eve means a mind full of thoughts, full of serpents. Jesus enters the world through the Virgin Mary, through purity, through innocence. Thought is cunning; thoughtless consciousness is innocent.
If you understand these beautiful parables, you will be surprised. We have not done justice to them. They are not historical facts; they are great metaphors of the inner being of man. Through Eve, Adam fell, and through the Virgin Mary, Jesus rose and again entered the world of God.
One thing more. It is said that the sin of Adam was disobedience. God had said not to eat the fruit of a certain tree, the Tree of Knowledge – but the serpent persuaded Eve, and Eve persuaded Adam. It was disobedience.
You will be surprised to know that the Hebrew meaning of the name Mary is rebellion. The Hebrew word is mariam. It means rebellion. Through disobedience Adam fell and through rebellion Jesus rose. Disobedience means a reaction, going against, against God; rebellion means negating the negative, going against the world, going against the serpents. Eve listened to the serpents and went against God; Jesus rebelled against the serpents and listened to God.
Disobedience is political; rebellion is religious. Disobedience only brings disorder; rebellion, real rebellion, brings a radical change in your being – a hundred-and-eighty-degree turn, a conversion.
But both Adam and Jesus happened through the feminine principle. In Taoist language the feminine principle is called yin and the male principle is called yang. Yang is ambition, yang is aggression, yang is desire and projection, yang is political. Yin is religious. Whenever you are ambitious it is impossible for you to be religious; whenever you are religious it is impossible for you to be political. They don’t go together. They don’t mix. They cannot mix. Their very nature is like trying to mix water and oil.
Ambition and meditation never mix, they cannot mix. The politician functions through the male principle and the sage functions through the feminine principle. That’s why the sages become so soft, so feminine, so round, so beautiful. A certain grace surrounds them. And the beauty is certainly not only of the body – sometimes it happens that the body may not be beautiful at all.
In early Christianity there was a principle that Jesus was the ugliest person in the world. By and by Christians dropped that idea, they didn’t like it. But it had something beautiful in it. It said that the body was ugly but still, when you came across Jesus, you would be suddenly surprised, overtaken, possessed, overwhelmed by his beauty. His body was ugly. If you saw a picture, you would see only his ugliness. But if you went to him, entered his actual presence, you would forget all about his ugliness because so much beauty was flowing, so much beauty was pouring out, raining. You would not even remember that he was ugly. So those who had not seen him used to think that he was ugly and those who had seen him used to say that he was the most beautiful person.
The body is not the question. The sage does not live in the body or as the body – he lives through the body. The politician is nothing but the body, the extrovert. The body is extrovert, the psyche is introvert, and when you transcend both, Tao arises. When you are neither extrovert nor introvert, when you are not going into the outer nor into the inner, when you are not going anywhere, there is tremendous stillness – no movement because there is no motivation. Your inner flame is no longer wavering because there is no direction to go; there is no purpose to fulfill. There is nowhere to be and nobody else to be, you are absolutely content with the moment. Then you have transcended man and woman and the polarity. In that transcendence is Tao.
This transcendence has been taught in different ways all over the world in different terms. I would like to explain one term to you because it will help. The term is Israel. It is not the name of a certain race – certainly not of the Jews – and it is not a name of a certain individual. “Israel” is exactly what Tao is.
Try to understand. The word Israel is made of three symbols: is-ra-el. Is means the feminine principle. Is comes from the Egyptian word isis. Isis means the moon goddess; the moon is the feminine principle. Remember the word moon because in Hindu metaphors the moon is also the symbol of the feminine.
In Yoga they say there are three passages in the human being: the moon, the sun, and the transcendental. Through one nostril you breathe the moon energy; through another nostril you breathe the sun energy. And deep inside, when both breathings stop, then you transcend. That is called sushumna ida, pingala, sushumna.
Israel is made of three symbols. Is comes from Isis the Egyptian goddess of the moon or the Babylonian goddess Ishtar who is also the moon goddess. This is the principle of yin, the feminine. Ra comes from the Egyptian sun god. It represents the masculine principle, yang. And el comes from elohim which is the same root from which the Mohammedans derive Allah. The Hebrew word for God is elohim; el comes from there. It represents the meeting of the feminine and the masculine and their transcendence too. Israel exactly means Tao.
If you are dominated by the sun, you will be aggressive, madly aggressive, ambitious, political, hot, burning will, desire and passion. If you are dominated by the moon, you will be cool, non-ambitious, non-aggressive, receptive, peaceful, silent. Both have to be transcended because both are lopsided. One has to come to a moment when one can say, “I am neither man nor woman.” That’s when a man becomes a Buddha or a man becomes a Christ or a man becomes a Krishna: when he is neither man nor woman, neither moon nor sun, neither “is” nor “ra,” neither yin nor yang. He simply is, purely is. All formulations have disappeared.
But this only happens by and by. First you have to drop the principle of “ra” – the principle of the sun, the male energy – and you have to move into the feminine, into the female. And from there you have to move into the beyond.
Everything happens through the feminine principle – remember it, always remember it. It is the middle principle, so whether you are going beyond or you are going below makes no difference – it is the ladder.
With the body, with the sun energy, with the male, you become a rapist, you rape life. You are not a lover. Science comes out of sun energy; science is male-oriented. That’s why the East could not develop it. The East has lived through the moon principle – passive, silent, easygoing, not trying to conquer, in deep love with nature, not trying to fight. The East has never been a rapist, the West has raped nature. Hence the problem of ecology has arisen: all nature is being destroyed.
With the feminine principle, with the moon principle, there is love. You love but you don’t rape. Sometimes the physical act may look the same, but the innermost quality is different.

I have heard about a woman who was bringing a complaint against a man in the court. The magistrate asked, “You say that this man raped you again and again. When did he rape you?”
And the woman said, “When? January, February, March, April, May, June, July, August, September, October, November, December. The whole year – rape and rape and rape and nothing else.”
The magistrate was surprised. He said, “How could he rape you the whole year?”
The woman said, “He is my husband.”
“But then why do you call it rape? Legally it is not rape.”
The woman said, “It is still rape. He did not love me.”

You can rape even your wife if you don’t love her. The physical act of making love to or raping a woman may be the same, but the inner quality differs.
With the sun energy, science is born: it is the rape of nature. With the moon energy, poetry, art, painting, dance, music are born: it is love playing with nature. The East has lived through art, through music, dance, drama. The West has been trying to use male energy too much. The West has lost balance, but so has the East; no society has yet evolved which can be called “Israel,” which can be called Tao, which has transcended both or synthesized both in such harmony that the antagonism has disappeared.
Tao is the goal: to create a human being who is fully integrated, totally integrated, and also to create a human society which is totally integrated.
Now this story. These few things I have told you will help you to understand it.
Hui Ang visited King K’ang of Sung. The king stamped his foot, coughed and said fiercely, “What pleases me is courage and strength. I take no pleasure in men who preach morality. What have you to teach me?”
Now look at the attitude. This is not an attitude of somebody who wants to learn – it is the attitude of the rapist who wants to snatch. The king stamped his foot, coughed and said fiercely, “What pleases me is courage and strength. I take no pleasure in men who preach morality. What have you to teach me?” This is no way to learn. This is insulting. No master would agree to teach this man. In fact, no master would visit the palace of such a man. This man is unworthy even of being talked to.
But this Hui Ang is a Confucian. Disciples of Confucius used to go to the courts. Their whole effort was to persuade the politicians, the ministers, the kings, the princes. They thought that if you could persuade the king, you could change the whole society. It is the oldest illusion, the ancientmost illusion – that if you can persuade the politician, it will be easy to change the society; or, if you can change the politician, it will be easy to change the society; or, if you change the ruling party, it will be easy to change the society. It has never happened.
You can change the politician; you can even convince the politician about beautiful things, but deep down the politician remains the politician. He understands only one language: the language of ambition, the language of greed, the language of the world. He is outgoing, extrovert.
He coughed, stamped his foot and said fiercely, “What pleases me is courage and strength.” The moment you say that, you have some prejudice. The moment you say that this pleases you and that does not please you, you can never learn what truth is because truth has no need to fit with your pleasure. Truth has no obligation to fit with what pleases you and what does not please you. You have to fit with truth; truth does not to fit with you.
It is said that there are two categories of men in the world: one who would like truth to stand by their side and the other who would like to stand by the side of truth. The first category is that of the politician – the aggressive, the sun-energy, the ambitious. The second category is that of the religious, the moon principle, the non-aggressive, the receptive. Remember this: never want truth to stand by your side because whatsoever stands by your side, whatsoever is ready to stand by your side, cannot be truth. It will be a lie. Only lies are ready to stand by your side, truth never. You will have to stand by the side of truth. If you have that much courage – courage to drop your old prejudices, likes and dislikes – only then can you go into truth, otherwise not.
Now what does this man say? Look at his gesture. He stamped his foot, coughed and said fiercely, “What pleases me is courage and strength. I take no pleasure in men who preach morality.” Yes, how can a politician take any interest in morality? Morality comes from the feminine principle. Look, all the great teachers in the world have created more femininity in the world – Buddha, Christ, Krishna. They have all created more and more of the feminine, the soft.
Friedrich Nietzsche criticized both Buddha and Jesus; he said they were not real men. And he was right. He said that they have destroyed manliness. And he was right – right for the wrong reasons, but still right. Buddha, Mahavira, Christ, certainly have taught something which will make you less aggressive, which will make you less violent. And if you listen to them totally, you will become absolutely nonviolent.
Naturally Nietzsche could not like it. He said that the most beautiful thing in the world was the soldier and the greatest music was war music. He said, “In my whole life’s experience, the moment that I remember again and again, the moment I call the most beautiful moment, was when a group of soldiers were marching on the road – their legs, their feet falling in tune, their boots making a rhythmic noise, their swords shining in the sun, erect, powerful, aggressive, ambitious. When I saw this group of soldiers marching in the sun it was the greatest moment of beauty that I know.”
If such a man comes across Buddha, he will wonder how Buddha can be beautiful. Sitting under the tree he is so silent that you can almost forget about him. He is almost absent. His music is that of silence. His music is that of receptivity. He is just a cool phenomenon – no heat, no passion, no desire. Sitting there silently he is almost like a tree; flowering there he is almost like a tree. And in the East, particularly in India, we have thought of a buddha as a lotus which has bloomed fully – a one-thousand-petaled lotus. Yes, he is almost like a tree.
For five hundred years in India, no statue of Buddha was made. Instead of a statue of Buddha, people worshipped a tree. Many statues were made of the tree, many pictures were made of the tree, many paintings were made of the tree, many temples were built, but there was no statue of Buddha, just the bodhi tree. Because Buddha was almost absent – he had become formless, he had become as if he were not. His music is that of silence. Nietzsche would not recognize the beauty of it; no politician would recognize the beauty of it.
This king said: “I take no pleasure in men who preach morality.” The basis of all morality is to love and the basis of all politics is to hate. The moralist says, “Love even your enemy,” and the politician says, “Hate even your friend.” If you want to see a contrast you can read Jesus and Machiavelli. Or, the Indian parallel, you can read Buddha and Chanakya. It is not just a coincidence that the part of Delhi where Indian politicians live is called Chanakyapuri – it is named after Chanakya, the Indian Machiavelli. Machiavelli says, “Don’t even trust your friend. Don’t say anything to your friend which you would not like to say to your enemy.” Why? “Because,” he says, “who knows? Your friend may become your enemy tomorrow. So don’t say anything that you would not like to say to an enemy.”
Look at Jesus. He says, “Even if somebody slaps you on one cheek, give him the other one too. Love your enemy as yourself.”
Naturally politicians cannot be ready to listen to the teachings of morality. Morality means love and politics means hate, hatred. Politicians may smile but hidden behind that smile is a horrible face. They may show a beautiful face but behind it they are preparing for hell. They may talk about peace but they prepare for war. Their whole life depends on destruction. Love is creation; hate is destruction.
Naturally the king was not interested in any kind of morality. He said: “What pleases me is courage and strength.” Why courage and strength? Why strength?
Jesus says, “Blessed are the meek,” not “Blessed are the strong,” no. “Blessed are the meek, blessed are the humble, blessed are the poor in spirit.” Not the strong, not the strong-headed but those who have soft hearts; not people like rocks but people like flowers – they are blessed.
Jesus is right, but no politician will want to listen to this. This is nonsense. The politician cannot understand this language. He has his own language: the language of cunningness, calculation, hatred, domination, destruction. The politician lives on evil. How can he listen to morality?
Remember, the language of politics is not the language of religion and the language of religion is not the language of politics. In fact, they are so far apart that they cannot even be translated into each other. Impossible. They are not only two languages, they are two different planes, two different worlds, two separate realities.
In a way the king is sincere, he is showing his real face. The king stamped his foot, coughed and said fiercely, “What pleases me is courage and strength.” Why courage? Why have people talked so much about courage – to kill people and to be killed? Why has strength been praised so much? Because without strength it is difficult to rape nature, it is difficult to rape other people, it is difficult to conquer, to dominate – it is difficult to destroy.
When a religious person talks of courage, his courage has a different meaning, remember. And when he talks of strength, his strength has a totally different meaning, remember. When a religious person calls something courageous he does not mean the same thing as the politician. For the religious, courage means to be creative; courage means to be oneself; courage means to be sincere, authentic. Courage means not to yield to lies; courage means not to allow corruption to set in in one’s own being; courage means to resist all temptations of going astray. Courage does not mean the capability to kill and be killed, no. Courage means the capacity to live and to live your own life according to your own heart.
And strength does not mean the capacity of violence, strength means the capacity to understand, the capacity to know, the capacity to love, the capacity to be open. When somebody hits you it is not strength to hit him back; that is very simple, anybody can do it. Even a child can do it. But when somebody hits you and you don’t hit back, it is strength.
When Jesus was crucified and he prayed to God, “Father, forgive these people because they don’t know what they are doing,” it was strength – the strength of the meek, the power of the humble.
Remember, the same word, if used by different people, becomes different. In fact, there should be different dictionaries: religious dictionaries, political dictionaries. There should be different dictionaries. In a better world there will be – because the same words cannot mean the same.

A diner in a restaurant rushed over to a man who was standing just near the door. “I’ve been robbed!” he screamed. “I turned my head and someone stole my brown topcoat. It had buttons on the sleeves and a fur collar!”
“Hmmmmmmm,” murmured the stranger who was standing at the door. “Come to think of it, I saw a man walking out of here just a few minutes ago wearing that very coat!”
“Quick, quick!” demanded the customer. “What did the guy look like?”
“Terrible,” the man sighed. “The sleeves were much too short for him!”
Then seeing the surprised look on the robbed man’s face he added immediately, “You see, I’m a tailor.”

Your language is your language. The words have no meaning in themselves, the meaning is brought by the person who uses them.

A rancher applied for a loan at a bank.
“How much do you want to borrow?” asked the loan officer.
“Twenty-five thousand dollars.”
“All right, but you’ll have to show security. How many bulls do you have on your ranch?”
“Two hundred.”
“That should be enough security. The loan is approved.”
Several months later the rancher returned to the bank to repay the loan.
“Here’s your money,” he declared, peeling off bills from a huge bankroll.
“Well, sir, let me congratulate you on your sudden prosperity,” said the officer, eyeing the bankroll. And for safety’s sake, may I suggest you deposit that extra money in our bank?”
Staring at him coldly, the rancher asked, “How many bulls do you have?’

Everybody has his own language. The politician has a very subtle language, a definite language and morality is certainly not part of it. By any means or methods, deception, immorality, one has to fulfill one’s ambition. So even if a politician uses morality, he uses it only as a means. Sometimes a politician may look very moral if it fulfills his purpose.
Mahatma Gandhi was a politician, not a religious man at all. When India was fighting with the British, nonviolence was fulfilling a purpose. When India became free the ideology of nonviolence became defunct, then it was not of much use. Even Gandhi approved of an Indian military army. And when it was getting ready to attack Pakistan he blessed it. When he saw airplanes flying over Delhi toward Pakistan he said, “Good. With my blessings.”
Now what had happened? This was the same man who was against all violence, but then violence was not possible, India was not in a situation to fight the British violently. So nonviolence was in favor, and Gandhi used it. But when India became independent, he forgot all his talk about nonviolence. He did not then say, “Dissolve the army now. Dissolve the police force. Let the country be ruled by love.” He forgot all about nonviolence.
That’s why I say he was a politician. If he had been a religious person then this was a real opportunity to be nonviolent. The country has become free, he should have dissolved the military, the army, the police force. In fact, he should have dropped government itself because a government is a violent organization. But he kept mum.
A politician can use morality when it serves his purpose. He can say, “Honesty is the best policy,” but remember, it is a policy. It serves his purpose. Policy means politics. And when dishonesty is the best policy, then? When it serves the purpose, then it is perfectly okay. A politician is like a whore. He can change. He is opportunistic. Whatsoever serves his purpose becomes his ideal and his principle. Deep down there is only one principle: that is his ambition must be fulfilled.
The king was in a way sincere.
“I take no pleasure in men who preach morality. What have you to teach me?”

“Suppose,” said Hui Ang, “that I have a way to make anyone, however brave and strong, miss when he stabs or strikes at you. Wouldn’t Your Majesty be interested?”
Now, no Taoist would do this. First, the Taoist would not go to the king, the king would have to come to the Taoist. And even then the Taoist may not see him because he knows that the politician is the worst man possible.
In Buddhist classifications they have divided man into three categories. The first they call adampurush, the lowest, the worst man. The second they call madhyampurush, the middle man, and the third they call mahapurush, the great man. Mahapurush is one who lives naturally, religiously, without any ambition and without any mind. He is just a part of this cosmos, not fighting, not struggling. He is just floating with it, flowing with it. He is in a deep let-go. That is mahapurush, the great man.
Then next to him comes the middle man who is not totally in the flow but sometimes there are moments when he flows. Sometimes there are moments when he freezes, sometimes he starts fighting, and sometimes he relaxes. He has a double bind. He is in the middle. Sometimes he moves to the lower, sometimes to the higher. He is still wavering. He has not yet become decisive. His integration is not complete yet.
And then comes the third category, the lowest, adampurush, the worst. He is settled at the lowest level and he does not want to move from there.
The politician is adampurush, the worst; the artist is the madhyampurush, the middle man; and the religious man is the mahapurush, the great man. And beyond the three is the fourth, turiya – one who has gone beyond all categories, the non-categorized. He is in Tao. He is beyond politics, he is beyond art, he is even beyond religion. He is simply beyond.
No Taoist will go to teach a king. That is foolish, stupid. The disciple has to come to the master. Why? Because, unless the disciple comes and seeks truth, he is not ready to learn.
The disciple must be humble. If a disciple stamps his foot, coughs and says fiercely, “What do you have to teach me?” then it is better not to teach him. He is incurable.
But there is the difference between the Confucian and the Taoist. Confucius and his followers were constantly going to the kings and the ministers and the powerful people and trying to convert them, trying to convince them. They thought that that seemed to be the easiest way to change the world. It has always been thought that if you want to change humanity, the best way is to go to the capital. No, it has proved to be wrong, absolutely wrong.
For five thousand years at least, we know well that the way to transform man does not go through the capital; it goes through the heart not the capital. You can only change a person who is ready to be changed, who is willing to be changed, who is cooperative, who is ready to learn and bow down and surrender – to receive.
But Hui Ang tried. He said: “Suppose that I have a way to make anyone, however brave and strong, miss when he stabs or strikes at you. Wouldn’t Your Majesty be interested?” Now he is trying to persuade the king in his own language. Never do that, because when you bring religion to the level of the worst man, religion is destroyed.
Tao cannot be translated into the language of greed although this is what Hui Ang is doing. He is trying to translate desirelessness into greed.
The king became interested. He said: “Excellent!” Look at the change. Just a moment before he was stamping his foot, coughing and was saying fiercely, “What do you have to teach me? I don’t want to listen to anything about morality.”
“Excellent!” he said. “This is the sort of thing I like to hear.”
Now this comes close. It is not going to change him because religion has come down to adjust to him; he has not gone up to adjust to religion. This is very irreligious. To do such a thing is irreligious. This man, Hui Ang, is falling into the trap of the politician rather than helping the politician to come out of his imprisonment. He himself is falling into the trap – to persuade the king he is bringing truth almost to the level of a lie.
What does he say? He says he can make someone: “…however brave and strong, miss when he stabs or strikes at you.” This seems good to the ego, the greedy ego, because if this can be done, then it will become unconquerable. This is worth something. Now this comes close to ambition. This becomes a policy, this becomes a strategy.
“Excellent! This is the sort of thing I like to hear.” Remember always, the sort of thing that you like to hear is always wrong because being the sort of man you are, how can you like to hear the right thing? It is very difficult to be ready to hear the truth. It shatters, it confuses, it uproots, it shocks, it dismantles, it destroys your prejudices – it hits you hard. In fact, it tries to kill you as you have existed up to now. That’s why very rare people are ready to hear the truth.
If I were to talk in terms of lies, you would find millions of people around here. I used to talk to thousands and thousands of people – great crowds used to gather. But then, by and by, I recognized the fact that they gathered not to hear what I had to say; they gathered to hear what they wanted to hear. They were not there to be transformed, they were there to be consoled, they were there to be convinced. Wherever they were and whatsoever they were, they wanted to know that they were right. The moment I started saying the truth they started disappearing. Now only rarely will a few people be coming to me because I don’t make any compromise. I will say only that which is true. If you want to agree with it, good, but if you want it to agree with you then this is not the place for you.
“But even if a stab or blow misses, it is still humiliating for you.”
Now he persuades further. He says, “I can teach a certain art so that nobody can stab you, or, even if he tries, he will miss.” Now he sees that the king is ready, persuaded. The king says: “Excellent! This is the sort of thing I like to hear.” Now Hui Ang moves ahead. He says: “But even if a stab or blow misses, it is still humiliating for you. If somebody tries to kill you, even though he misses, the effort on your life is humiliating. I can do something for that too.”
“Suppose that I have a way to prevent anyone, however brave and strong, from daring to stab or strike you.”
“I can do something more. I can create such a situation that he will not even dare to stab or make an effort on your life. What about it, sir?”
“But a man who does not dare to harm you may still have the will to harm you.”
“He may not dare to harm you but he has the idea, it is humiliating that somebody even thinks of destroying you.”
Hui Ang continues:
“Suppose that I have a way to ensure that men have absolutely no will to harm you. But a man who has no will to harm you may still have no thought of loving or benefiting you.”
“A man may have no thought of harming you, but that does not make sure that he wants to benefit you or has a loving attitude toward you.”
“Suppose that I have a way to make every single man and woman in the world joyfully desire to love and benefit you. This is three degrees better than courage and strength. Isn’t Your Majesty interested?”

“This is the sort of way I should like to find,”
…said the king. Now truth is brought to the level of the adampurush, the lowest man. In bringing truth to the lowest man, truth loses its quality of being true. It becomes a falsehood. Now it is a lie. Now it is clever argument. It is no longer a statement of truth, it is a cunning device. It is sophistry. Yes, that is exactly the word for it. This man is not a sage, he is a sophist.
You must have heard about sophists. They existed in Athens, in Greece. Before Socrates there was great power in the hands of the sophists. They traveled all over the country. They convinced everybody; they were greatest arguers but they had no principles. They would convince you of whatsoever you wanted to be convinced about. It was a sort of prostitution. They were paid and they became very affluent because they were ready to support anything. “Just tell me what you want to be convinced of” they would say, and they would convince you, they would give you beautiful arguments. They had schools to teach people argumentation.
They disappeared from the world because of Socrates. He had a great impact on the Greek mind and he destroyed that whole prostitution.
Bertrand Russell used to tell a small story again and again. I don’t know where he got it from but the story is beautiful so there is no need to worry about it.

He used to say again and again that one day a sophist came to see Socrates. He had a beautiful dog with him and Socrates looked at him and asked, “Is this your dog?”
And the sophist said, “Yes.”
Socrates said, “Is the dog male or female?”
And the sophist said, “A female.”
Socrates asked, “Is the dog a mother or not yet a mother?”
And the sophist said, “Yes, the dog is a mother.”
Socrates laughed and said, “You are the son of it, you son of a bitch.”

I don’t know where Bertrand Russell got it from but sophists were that type of people. They had no principles, they had no truth, they were opportunists. And they were ready to argue for anything. Wrong or right was not the question, they simply enjoyed argumentation. They were like lawyers. You go to the lawyer and it does not matter whether you are wrong or right, he is ready to support you, he is ready to fight for you.

Mulla Nasruddin went to a lawyer and told him the whole story. The lawyer said, “Don’t be worried, your victory is absolutely certain, a hundred percent certain. Trust me. Leave it to me. You are going to win.”
But Mulla Nasruddin got up and started to leave the office. The lawyer said, “Where are you going? You have not said anything.”
Mulla replied, “There is no need. I have told you the other man’s story, the other side’s story. Now there is no need to fight.”

But this is no way to judge. Tell any story and the lawyer says, “Yes, you are going to win.” And he will support you and he will argue for you. He has no interest in truths: his only interest is if he is paid – then everything is okay. Then what is he serving? Truth or untruth? It does not matter, it is immaterial. He serves money, prestige, power, respectability. If these things come he is ready to support anybody. He is not against crime; he is ready to protect crime if that is the way money comes.
Now, this man is a sophist, he is not a sage, he is not a master – he is not even a teacher, not even an honest teacher. He is a sophist. But he has persuaded the king: “This is the sort of way I would like to find.” But there is nothing to find.
“The teaching of Confucius and Mo Tzu is what I have in mind.”
Hui Ang is a disciple of Confucius and Mo Tzu; Mo Tzu is a disciple of Confucius. Just as Lao Tzu and Chuang Tzu were the two topmost Taoists, so Confucius and Mo Tzu were the two topmost Confucians.
“Confucius and Mo Tzu became princes without owning territory…”
Now he flatters the king even more, he buttresses him more.
“The teaching of Confucius and Mo Tzu is what I have in mind. Confucius and Mo Tzu became princes without owning territory, became leaders without holding office. Every man and woman in the world craned his neck and stood on tiptoe in his eagerness for their safety and benefit. Now Your Majesty is the Lord of ten thousand chariots. If you were indeed to share the aims of these two men, everyone within your four borders would enjoy the benefit. You would be far greater than Confucius and Mo Tzu.”
Now he is buttressing the ego of the king as much as possible. He says, “Look! Confucius and Mo Tzu were not kings but they were almost like uncrowned kings. They had no territory but they were treated everywhere as great kings. They were men of character, morality, knowledge. They were respected everywhere. They became leaders without holding office.”
“Every man and woman in the world craned his neck and stood on tiptoe in his eagerness for their safety and benefit.” But if that is true, then why was Jesus crucified? If that is true, then why was Socrates poisoned? If that is true, then why was Mansoor al-Hillaj killed? No, Confucius and Mo Tzu were not real masters. They were men of character, great discipline, but a man of character is nothing but a man who follows the rules and regulations of the society. He is not rebellious, he is a conformist. The society certainly respects him, but it is because he respects the rules of the society.
Jesus had to be crucified because he rebelled. Mansoor had to be killed because he rebelled. The society takes revenge if you don’t follow the rules of the society, if you start talking in ways which sabotage the foolish rules of the society. The rules are stupid, they are meaningless, but millions of people believe in them. Once a man like Jesus or Socrates or Mansoor is there and he starts talking about truth and that truth goes against the so-called truths of the society, they are bound to take revenge.
But Confucius was respected. He was not a man of rebellion; he was just a conformist, a traditionalist. He followed the neurotic rules of the society; he followed the stupid ways of society to the very letter. Yes, he was moral, but he was not religious. A religious man has found his own law. If it fits with the society, good. If it doesn’t fit with the society, then he still lives his own law. A religious man is free; a religious man is freedom. He lives through his innermost core. He has no outer imposed discipline on himself, he lives in no cage. He lives like a free being – whatsoever the cost. Even if he must pay with his life he is ready to pay, but he is not ready to curtail his freedom. Freedom is his utmost value, his ultimate value. He can lose everything, but not freedom.
A traditional man is ready to lose freedom for cheap things – respectability, social honor. Yes, Confucius and Mo Tzu were honored, they were really honored, but the honor was because they were not free men, not men of Tao.
“Now Your Majesty is the Lord of ten thousand chariots. If you were indeed to share the aims of these two men, everyone within your four borders would enjoy the benefit. You would be far greater than Confucius and Mo Tzu.” Now he is saying, “You can become the greatest man in the world. Confucius is the last word and you can become even greater than him.”
Look – that is the way society persuades everybody. A child is born and the parents start telling him, “Be moral, have character, do this and that – you will be respected and all of society will respect you. You will become a great man, famous, well-known and well respected.” What are they doing? They are creating his ego; they are helping to create the ego in the child.
The ego is the principle of immorality and your so-called morality hangs on the principle of ego. It is based on immorality. But you have been taught to be this way: be the way society wants you to be and society will respect you. If you want respect, never rebel; if you want respect, bow down to the order of society.
And who is this society? The mob, the crowd. The majority consists of stupid people, they control the rules. Society means the lowest mob – they control everything. Yes, society will respect you if you follow it, but following it you will become stupid yourself. If you want to be respected, then you will have to become stupid; if you want to be intelligent, forget about respectability. An intelligent person will live, live tremendously, live greatly, live joyously, but he should not hanker for respect.
Disrespect is more possible than respect; poison is more possible than prestige. You may be beheaded rather than being honored – that is more likely because society has not yet come to this point of growth, it has not yet evolved so much that it can respect the real person.
That must be understood… If Socrates came back, he would be poisoned again. If Jesus came back, he would be crucified again. Time has not made much difference – society remains the same. Society has not yet evolved to the point where it can respect a true person. To respect a true person would mean that society has become intelligent.
The goal seems to be far away. Will it happen or not? It seems it would be almost a utopia if a day came when Socrates was worshipped. Do you remember the people who killed Socrates? Do you know anybody’s name? They were the respectable people; they were the guardians of morality in society. Do you remember the name of the judge who sentenced Socrates, who ordered him to be poisoned? Do you know who these people were? Where they came from? They were respectable people, they were the guardians of morality, they were the protectors of society, they were the leaders and the politicians and the priests. Nobody knows where they have gone, but Socrates remains.
The man who was the opponent, who brought the case against Socrates in the court, said that he was corrupting the minds of the young people. That was the crime that he was doing; he was corrupting the minds of the young people. That’s the crime they say I am doing. I corrupt the minds of young people. I would like to corrupt the minds of the old people but they don’t have any! So naturally I have to corrupt the minds of the young people – only they have minds.
When the man had won the case – Socrates had been sentenced and the order was declared that he would be poisoned – he looked at Socrates and said, “What do you say?” Socrates laughed and he said, “Remember one thing: for thousands of years people will think about me, but they will remember your name only because you brought the case against me – that’s all. They will know your name only because you were the man who moved the court to kill Socrates. Nothing else will be remembered of you.” And that is exactly what has happened. Nobody remembers anything about that man. Socrates will be remembered and remembered.
Who were the men who killed al-Hillaj Mansoor? Their names are forgotten. And they were the pinnacles of morality, they were the paragons of morality, they were the people who were afraid that al-Hillaj Mansoor was destroying morality, religion; that he was a dangerous man and society had to be protected from him. But who remembers their names? Their names are not known. Mansoor will live. As long as humanity continues to aspire to go beyond, as long as humanity has goals of transcendence, as long as the arrow of human consciousness moves toward godliness, Mansoor will be remembered. One day, one can hope that somewhere in the future a time will come when the real man will be respected.
Confucius is not a real man. Mo Tzu is not a real man. They are conventional people, conformists, traditional people, dead. And Hui Ang says: “You would be far greater than Confucius and Mo Tzu.”
This is the whole trick; this is how you have been distracted from your center. You have been told not to be yourself, otherwise you will not get any respect, any honor. If you want to be yourself, nobody will give you any respect – so don’t be yourself, be that which society wants you to be. This is how you have been distracted from your center and you have become pseudo-beings, phony, unreal. You are just a mask. You don’t have any soul; you have lost your soul. The soul comes into being only when you declare, “I am going to be myself. Respect or disrespect, society or no society, honor or no honor, that is irrelevant – I have decided to be myself because this is my life and I have to live it in my own way. Whatsoever the cost I will live like a free man.” Once you declare that, you become centered.
That’s what the whole effort is in sannyas, that’s what sannyas is all about: to bring you back to your center. That’s why I don’t give you any outer discipline, just an inner consciousness, an awareness; no duty, only a responsibility; no outer pattern, no style from the outside, but an inner flow, an inner glow. To live in that glow, to move into that flow and allow your life to have freedom, to be in a let-go, that’s what sannyas is. And that’s what Tao is.
Hui Ang hurried out. And the king said to his courtiers,
“Clever, the way he talked me round with his argument!”
It is not clever, it is cunning. It looks clever because all cunningness looks clever. Remember, cleverness and cunningness are not going to help – only intelligence, awareness, alertness will.
This man deceived the king, but my feeling is that you can only deceive somebody if you yourself are deceived. This man is not a master otherwise how can he deceive somebody?
Let me tell you another story which is just exactly parallel.

A great sage came to China, his name was Bodhidharma. The Emperor Wu of China came to receive him on the border. The emperor had been waiting for years because Bodhidharma was coming from India and he had to cross all of the Himalayas – it took years. Then he arrived. The emperor was a little puzzled seeing him because he looked to be a very strange man. The strangest thing was that he had a shoe on one of his feet and the other shoe he was carrying on his head. Was this man mad?
But the king was a very polite man, cultured of course. He tried not to see it because that would be too impolite. He simply tried not to see it and not to say anything about it. That would be too impolite and this was the first meeting with this great sage – and what type of man was he?
But how long could he avoid it? Bodhidharma was just standing there with his shoe on his head. The king said, “Sir, you can put it down. Why do you have your shoe on your head? It is meant for your foot.”
Bodhidharma said, “I want to make everything clear from the very beginning that I am this type of man. You can think me mad or you can think me enlightened, but I am strange. And be clear from the beginning that you are meeting a strange man. I am absurd, illogical. I am as absurd as this shoe on my head. There is no reason for it, it simply happened. I enjoyed it. And the poor shoe has always been carrying me so why can’t I carry it?”
This was just a Zen gesture. Bodhidharma was trying to fathom this man, this Emperor Wu who had invited him from India. He was trying to see whether he would be able to understand the illogic of truth. Truth has no argument to prove it; it is a statement, remember. Bodhidharma was standing there – he was a statement, illogical, absurd. Thousands of people had gathered to receive him and all were feeling puzzled.
But he was saying, “I am not going to argue. If you are going to listen to me you have to forget all argumentation. I am not going to persuade. I am not here to convince you of anything. I am a simple statement, an absurd statement, about the truth. I will not give you reasons, there are none.”
Then Bodhidharma looked at the king. The king was puzzled, he was perspiring. And Bodhidharma said, “Have you something to ask, Sir? You have called me from India and it took many years to get here. Why have you called me?”
Wu said, “I had many questions but you have confused me. But I will try. The first question: I have made many temples for Buddha – thousands – I feed thousands of Buddhist monks, I have made many monasteries for Buddhist monks and Buddhist nuns; I have done much virtuous work. What will be my gain in the other world?”
And Bodhidharma said, “Nothing! Nothing whatsoever! If you can escape hell that will be enough. The very idea of doing something for gain is irreligious, worldly. You have not done it because you love; you have done it because you are greedy. Greed will take you to hell. Listen, Wu, these monasteries and these thousands of monks that have gathered here are not going to help you. I know that they tell you again and again, ‘Great King, great is your virtue. God will be ready to receive you in heaven’ but I tell you, you will go to hell because greed is the door to hell and you are greedy and you are ambitious. Look at your ugly greed. If you want to make a temple, make it, but make it out of love. If you want to feed somebody, feed him, but feed him out of love. Finished! You have had the benefit. There is no other benefit beyond it. You enjoy feeding a man – what more do you need? The value is intrinsic. Act out of love.”
This is how a master, a real master, is.
Then Bodhidharma turned away, he didn’t enter the kingdom. Wu asked, “Why are you turning away?”
He said, “When you cannot understand me, what about the others? They will not understand me. I will stay outside the kingdom. Those who want me can come and seek me.”
And he remained outside the kingdom; he would not enter. He said, “If even the king cannot understand me, then what about the masses? Your courtiers are standing here puzzled and they cannot understand me, so what about the masses? And these foolish monks that are gathered here – they cannot understand me. So I will not come into your kingdom. I will wait outside. Those who are really desirous should come to me.”
Then he sat for nine years outside the kingdom looking at a wall. People would come and ask, “Sir, why are you looking at the wall? Why don’t you look at us?”
He would say, “It is all the same. Whether I look at you or I look at the wall is the same. I will only turn to look at you when the real person who wants to know truth has come.”
Then Hui Nang came, his first disciple. He stood at Bodhidharma’s back and he said, “Sir, I have come. Turn toward me.”
And Bodhidharma said, “Show the sign.”
Hui Nang cut his hand off, gave it to Bodhidharma and said, “Turn around otherwise I will cut off my head – what else can I show as a sign?”
And Bodhidharma turned immediately. He said, “So you have come!”

One has to pay for truth with one’s life. What about respectability, prestige? All nonsense. One has to give all – only then does one become capable of knowing the truth.
Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
It seems to me that Gramya's question on Tuesday was practically the same as mine on Sunday, only worded differently. But you answered her very lovingly and gently and me with a thousand-pound sledgehammer. Excuse me for asking this, but I too mean to ask lovingly. Why have you become so hard on old disciples? Don't you love me anymore? I am with you whatever is the case.
The question is from Ananda Prem.
The first thing: you cannot ask a question that Gramya asks. Nobody else can ask the question that you can ask. Even if you use exactly the same words, the question will be different and you will get a different answer from me.
I am not answering the question; I am answering the questioner – that must be understood. You can write a question in exactly the same way as Gramya and I will not answer it the same way. You are not Gramya, Gramya is not you. Everybody is so unique, everybody is so individual that never before has there been anybody like you; never again will there be anybody like you. You are simply you, there is only one you; there is nobody else like you.
So how can somebody else ask a question like you? How can you ask a question like somebody else? The wording, the language, the formulation of the question is not important at all; it arises out of your consciousness, out of your mind. And you have a different mind and a different consciousness, a different character, a different past. It arises out of your past.
So never compare your questions with those of others. When I answer you, I answer you personally; that’s why I insist that you write your names on the question. Otherwise the question becomes general and then the answer is in the abstract, then it is not addressed to anybody. The answer, to be meaningful, must be particular. It must be addressed to a particular individual in a specific way – only then does it apply to you, otherwise not.
“It seemed to me that Gramya’s question was practically the same as mine on Sunday…” No, neither practically the same nor theoretically the same, only worded differently. Don’t deceive yourself. It was worded differently, true, but even if it had not been worded differently my answer would have been the same.
Even when we use the same words we don’t mean the same thing. The meaning is not in the words, the meaning is in the mind that uses them.
Meditate on this small anecdote:

The businessman was told by his doctor that he had a heart condition. On the same day he was advised by mail that if he didn’t meet a heavy mortgage payment, his home would be seized. Driving nervously down the highway in a new car on which five payments were due, he rammed into the compact car of one of his best customers and made a sardine can out of it. Continuing to his office, he arrived at the factory just as the firemen were watering down the hot embers. There his bookkeeper handed him a note informing him that all his insurance policies had lapsed.
Disgusted, he took a cab home, walked slowly into the living room and was greeted cheerfully by his wife. “Darling,” she said enthusiastically, “I hope you’ll forgive me but I must run; tonight is my bridge night.”
“Just give me a chance to change my shirt,” answered the husband, “and I’ll jump with you!”

Her bridge night. But how could it mean the same thing to the husband? In his state it could not mean the same. You speak the same words but still you convey different meanings. The meaning is given by the mind. The word is an outside thing, the meaning is an inside thing.

Because of the fog, the plane was in serious trouble. All the passengers were numb with fear, except the minister aboard. He took complete control of the situation.
“Let us kneel and pray,” he suggested to the passengers, and everyone kneeled except a small-time bookie.
“Why aren’t you praying with us?” asked the minister.
“Because,” confessed the bookie, “I don’t know how.”
“In that case,” the minister advised, “just behave as though you were in a church.”
So the bookie went down the aisle and took a collection.

That is the only thing the bookie can understand, that is the only thing he would be interested in, in a church.
Remember always that it is you who comes through loud and clear in your questions. I am not much interested in how they are worded, in how they are formulated. I look for you, I grope for you in your question and unless I get hold of you I don’t answer because then it would be meaningless.
Don’t feel jealous of Gramya. It seems that Ananda Prem has become jealous of Gramya. That again shows her mind. Rather than understanding what I have said to her, she is more worried about why I have answered Gramya so lovingly and her not so lovingly. She was less interested in the answer; she was more interested in love being shown to her. That again shows her mind.
The question was not asked for the answer, the question was just a trick so that I could show my love to her. Then why go so roundabout? Why not simply write: “Osho, say some beautiful things about me.” That would be easy, simple – why make such big questions? Be direct: “I need to be appreciated, applauded.” The mind is tricky. You may ask something but you may not be interested at all in the question or in the answer. There may be some secret desire lurking behind it. Seeing that desire I have to use the thousand-pound sledgehammer.
But you missed. You ducked. You should have bowed down before that thousand-pound hammer, you should have received it, accepted it, welcomed it. It would have given you tremendous insight. But you missed. Rather than listening to what I said to you, you listened more to what I said to Gramya, and now you feel jealous – why have I not said the same thing to you?
That was not what you needed. When you come to me I have to give you the medicine that you need. You cannot say, “Why have you given Gramya a very sweet medicine and me a very bitter thing?” You need it. The sweet medicine may kill you: it is not your need. I am a physician; I am trying to help you come out of your diseases. You may not be too interested in coming out of your diseases, but that is my only interest. I am not interested in anything else. You may be simply hankering for sympathy. Sympathy is poison and must be used only when poison is needed. Sometimes an ill person needs poison – all of allopathy depends on poison.
You should not tell the doctor what medicine should be given to you; you should not prescribe for yourself. Not only have you come with a disease, you have come with a prescription also! You want me to sign it, so you will be very happy. If you can doctor yourself, there is no need for me – then doctor yourself. If you cannot doctor yourself, then listen to what I say, meditate over it – all the nuances of it, all the meanings, subtle and gross, in it. You should have meditated. That hammer would have helped you tremendously.
A thousand-pound sledgehammer had to be used because, Ananda Prem, you have a very thick head. It is almost a rock. In fact, when I use the hammer I am always worried whether the hammer is going to survive or not!
And you ask: “Why have you become so hard on old disciples?” That’s what the old disciple is for. You have graduated, Ananda Prem. Gramya will also graduate – wait! The older you are, the harder I will be because I hope that you will have become more capable. I hope that now you will be able to receive greater shocks.
Naturally, when a new disciple comes, I cannot hit him very hard. I have to be very cautious, I go slowly. The closer the disciple comes to me, the more certain I can be of when the moment is that the disciple can be hit hard. Because deep down the whole function of a master is to behead you. The master is a sword. Says Jesus, “I have not brought peace into the world; I have brought a sword.”
Buddhists have a special name for it; they have called it “Manjushree’s sword.” Manjushree was a great disciple of Buddha, and he functioned as Buddha’s sword. Whenever Buddha saw that somebody needed a real shock he would be sent to Manjushree. Manjushree was really terrible! He would simply smash you. He would not allow any illusions. He was so hard in his hitting that the moment Buddha prescribed, “Go to Manjushree,” people would start trembling. Manjushree? That meant almost death. But Manjushree was really a great, compassionate Buddha and it became famous in Buddha’s time that whenever a disciple had really grown, Buddha sent him to Manjushree the butcher.
When you are older I hope that you will be capable of much more understanding. The day you are really old and you have come very close to me, I am going to cut your head off. That must be done so suddenly, so fast, that not even a drop of blood comes out. It must be done so fast. But for that you have to become by and by, more and more prepared.
The work of the master is not to console you. If you have come here for consolation you have come to the wrong company. Go somewhere else. If you have come only for transformation, then be here – otherwise I am not the person for you. I know your secret desires are not for transformation; your secret desires are for improvement. Improvement and transformation are diametrically opposite. Improvement means that you remain the same but you become richer and richer, your ego becomes more and more decorated. You remain the same – whatsoever happens becomes a new layer on you but you remain the same. The new is an addition to you, but you remain the same with the old. You are for improvement. You want to become beautiful, you want to become more blissful, you want to become more knowledgeable, you want to become a buddha – this and that. The buddha disease.
I am not here to improve upon you because if the base remains wrong, all improvement is going to lead you into more and more trouble. The base must be transformed; you have to be cut from the roots. Naturally it is going to be hard, arduous.
Just the other day I was telling you about the Hebrew name Mariam, Jesus’ mother’s name. It means rebellion. It has another meaning also – both meanings are beautiful. One is rebellion, another is arduous, hard. The path is a razor’s edge. It is hard and arduous. Jesus comes through that arduous path, through Mariam – it is rebellious and arduous.
The greatest difficulty to be encountered is the ego. Ananda Prem asked the question and she must have been listening with the idea that I would decorate her ego a little bit here and there, would give her new enthusiasm. And I took away the very ground underneath her feet. That shocked her.
The older you are around me, wait for many more shocks. That’s the only way I can show my love to you.
You ask: “And don’t you love me any more?” Now I have started loving you, Ananda Prem, hence the thousand-pound sledgehammer. When I love you even more I will have to take even weightier hammers. Otherwise why should I bother to hit you at all? What would it profit? By hitting you there are only two possibilities: either you receive it and you become more understanding, or you escape from me. What am I going to gain out of it? Either you are going to gain or I am going to miss you – there is no gain for me in it at all. There are two alternatives: either you escape from me and become very much afraid – then I have lost a disciple; or you become enlightened – then too I have lost a disciple. So what is the gain? For me at least, there is no gain. I am going to be a loser either way.
And finally she says in a bracket: “I am with you whatever is the case.” That I know – I know your stubbornness.

During a flood in a little town, a little girl was perched on top of a house with a small boy.
As they sat watching, they noticed a derby hat float by. Presently the hat turned and came back. Then again it turned and went downstream and once more turned and came back again.
The little girl said, “What do you think of that derby? First it goes downstream, then it turns and comes back.”
The boy replied, “Oh, that’s my father. He said, ‘Come hell or high water, I’m going to cut the grass today.’”

And I know Ananda Prem is that type. She is absolutely stubborn. I can trust her that much. She will not leave, so only one possibility is left. If she becomes capable of receiving the shocks that I am going to give – this is just the beginning – then there is a possibility of a new light dawning in her soul.

The second question:
Osho,
What do you mean when you say to ponder or meditate on a parable? What is the process?
PS. I can hardly even remember the parable after the discourse.
That means the discourse has succeeded. I don’t mean for you to memorize it. If you have understood it, the fragrance enters into your soul. It is not a question of memorizing. This is not a university. And nobody is going to examine your memory; nobody is going to ask you how much you remember.
When I say ponder over it I don’t mean repeat it, remember it, cram it – no. When I say ponder over it, I mean let the fragrance of it be released into your soul.
Buddha has said that there are three steps in how to listen to a buddha – three steps. First, hearing; second, pondering; third, living. Hearing means that when you are listening to me you should simply listen; do not think about it. Do not go on commenting inside your mind: right, wrong, good, bad. No commentary on your part is needed; all commentary will be a distraction. And you will miss.
When I say “Listen,” I don’t mean concentrate, because if you concentrate, you will become very tense. Meditation is not possible in a tense mind. So when I say, “Listen, hear,” the first step – it means: simply be relaxed, open, available. I am singing a song to you, let this song reach you and vibrate in you. You should not be worried whether you will be able to remember it or not – that is not the point at all. Once you have vibrated with it, something of it will have penetrated your being, will become part of you. In fact, that which becomes part of you is real knowledge and you need not cram it. The unreal knowledge is that which you have crammed and has not become a part of you.
When a student goes to an examination he remembers a thousand and one things. But after three months, if you ask him, ninety-nine percent of it has gone down the drain. Somehow it was just managed, with very great tension and strain. He was keeping it, holding it, for the examination; once the examination is finished he will lose that hold and things will disappear.
You can observe it in your own life. How much do you remember of that which you crammed in your university days, how much? If you are examined again you will all fail. You will not be able to remember. Even the professors who teach in the universities will all fail if they are examined again because the examination was just a momentary effort. But real knowledge is never forgotten because real knowledge is never remembered. That which is remembered will be forgotten; that which is not remembered cannot be forgotten, there is no way to forget it.
There are a few things you cannot forget: for example, swimming. You cannot forget it. You may not have been to a river for fifty years, but you cannot forget it because it has never been remembered; it has gone into your being, it has become part of you. This is real knowledge. All that is real becomes part of you; it remains available forever and ever. There is no way to forget it. That which I call knowing is that which cannot be forgotten. Even if you make an effort to forget it you will fail – you cannot forget it.
Watch in life and you will find two different categories. One which you have to remember but you go on forgetting again and again. Another is that which you don’t remember but is simply there – is there not as a memory but as part of your being. There is no need to hold it, it is simply there. Even if you want to throw it out, you cannot. That is real knowledge.
So when I say “Hear” I am not saying “Be attentive” because in attention there is tension. The very word is from tension – attention means at tension. Your mind is narrowed. When I say, “Listen,” I mean be relaxed, open; become a sponge. Soak it up. Let it sink into you. Listen to me as you listen to the birds singing in the trees or to the sound of running water. There is no meaning in it. Or, listen to me as you listen to music. Music has no intellectual meaning. You listen to it – you simply drink it, you let it in, you allow it into your very innermost core. And you enjoy it. If somebody later on asks if you remember what music you have heard, you will not be able to say anything. You will say, “I enjoyed it, it was beautiful, it was something that thrilled me to the very core. I was refreshed through it. I became more alive through it; I felt a sudden joy bursting in my heart.” But these are the impacts that happened to you: there is nothing to say about the music. Listen to me as you do to music.
So don’t be worried. If you forget, good. I am not saying these things to be remembered. I am not here to make you knowledgeable, professional pundits, no. I am not here giving you a training for memory. But an upsurge of understanding can happen. You can respond. You can respond, you can vibrate with whatsoever I am saying. And that will be real hearing. That is the first step.
The second step is pondering. The first step, hearing, is through the mind door, because you have to use the ears and you have to use the mechanical device of the mind. It goes through the mind. If you are not thinking, the mind allows it. If the mind is thinking, the mind obstructs, distorts, and does many things to it. If the mind is not thinking, then mind becomes simply a pure passage, a receptivity.
Hearing is through the mind, pondering is through the heart. When the mind has allowed it, all that you listen to in silence, in love, en rapport with my being – it falls into your heart and accumulates there. Remember the difference. If you want to remember it, it will be retained in the head. The memory exists in the head. If you don’t want to retain it, if you are not interested in remembering it, then it goes into the heart; it falls, pours into the heart and accumulates there.
Then it has a totally different impact on your being. You will not remember it but it will surround you like a fragrance. When I say, “Ponder it,” I mean: let it reach your heart. Don’t listen through thinking; listen through feeling – that is the meaning of pondering. To ponder over it means: let your feeling be aroused – not your thought, not your logic, but your love. Let your love respond. That’s the difference.
When an outsider comes to listen to me just as an outsider, he will at the most be able to accumulate something in the head. When you become a sannyasin it changes, it changes completely. Then you listen in a totally different way. Then you are not fighting with me, you are not arguing with me, you are simply enjoying the song. You dance with me, you sing with me, you are with me. Then it reaches into the heart – you feel with me.
Whatsoever I say to you has nothing to do with my head. It comes from my heart. I say it because I feel for you, I say it because I love you, I say it because great compassion is here, I say it because I want to share my heart with you. It is not a lecture. I am not lecturing at you; I am not your enemy. Why should I lecture at you? I am simply opening my heart, I am allowing you to come into me, I am inviting you to become my guest, I am inviting you to partake of something of my being. That’s what Jesus means when he says to his disciples, “Eat me. Drink me.” This is a feast! When I say, “Ponder,” I also mean: eat me, drink me, feel me. Let your feelings be thrilled, stirred. Let your heart dance. Rejoice with me. It is a great tiding. I bring you a gospel.
The third step is living. First hear, without thought interfering; then feel, fall en rapport with me, in tune with me; and then live it. It is not a question of cramming, remembering. Living, yes, living is the thing.
You hear me. If it goes into your heart, it will become very easy to live it because from the heart where else can it go? It will go into your being. These are the three layers. The first layer is thinking, the head. Deeper than the head is the heart, feeling. Deeper than the heart is being. So if it soaks through the head, it reaches the heart. If it soaks through the heart, it reaches your being. And from there comes living.
I am not saying practice it. Practice happens only when something has not reached your heart but has been retained by the head. And then you try to practice it. Practice means that you are avoiding the heart, staying in the head; and now you are thinking about what to do about it, how to manage, how to practice, how to create a character on the basis of it. If it reaches your heart, then you can relax. By and by it will start affecting your living.
So what must be done about the third point? You just have to not force it and not obstruct it when it comes. Don’t stand in the way. To many people it is happening every day. Something I said to you six months ago, which you had completely forgotten, is suddenly there when a situation arises – it starts functioning and you behave accordingly.
Not that you try – if you try that is not the real thing, that is pseudo – and suddenly, one day, you feel you are not behaving in the usual pattern; the gestalt has changed. Somebody insults you and you don’t feel hurt. You are surprised at yourself. What has happened? Now, if this happens allow it to happen, support it, cooperate with it; it is very new and fragile; it will need your support. Sometimes it is happening but you obstruct it because you think, “This man is insulting me and this is not the time to ponder on great things. If I allow him to insult me, he will insult me more. Today he will insult me but tomorrow he will start beating me.”
Your mind starts bringing in the old pattern. Your heart is saying, “Relax, this is the moment, smile.” All those beautiful parables and all that fragrance that you have been accumulating in your heart is ready to explode; but your mind says, “Wait, this is not the moment to meditate and this is not the moment to think about great things. This is dangerous.” And you shrink. If you shrink, then that which was happening naturally has been obstructed.
All that your ego can do is negative. Don’t obstruct. Hearing, don’t think, that is negative. Let it be there. Pondering in the heart is positive, feel it. Again, living becomes negative. Don’t obstruct. Let it take its own form and shape. Let it flow wherever it goes. Don’t be worried. Don’t start manipulating the energy. Allow it. Be in a let-go. When hearing is negative, pondering is positive, living is again negative.
Then you will come to know the ultimate positive, the fourth step, what in India we have called turiya, “the fourth.” That is your selfless self, beingless being, being as non-being – what Buddha calls anatta, no-selfness. That is the most positive thing that will happen. Negative hearing; positive pondering; negative living; and then the ultimate positive happens – the ultimate being.
But the most basic problem arises in the first step. The first step is always the most basic. The second follows easily, the third even more easily, the fourth without any problem – it comes on its own accord. But the first is the most difficult step.
Have you watched a small child starting to walk? The first step is the most difficult. The child hesitates; he has never walked. He has no self-confidence; he cannot trust that he will be able to walk – how can he trust the unknown? That which you have never done before? Again and again the child starts crawling, afraid that he may fall, that he may hurt himself. The first step is the most difficult. Once he has taken the first step then it is very difficult to prevent his taking the second, his taking the third. It is impossible to prevent him. Whenever his mother is not looking he will try again. He may fall but now he has known the adventure, the beauty of it that he can stand on his own.
So the first step is listening without thinking. When I am talking there is every possibility that you are continuously thinking about how to practice it. That is your greed. Beware of it. The greed will not allow you to hear.

Two millionaires were discussing their personal buying habits.
“I like to shop at Lord & Taylor’s. They’re very reliable,” said the first. “I tore my coat on a nail in front of their store and they immediately gave me ten dollars.”
“Really?” gasped the second. “Do you think the nail is still there?”

Now this man cannot listen. He has already moved into greed. “Do you think the nail is still there?” He only appears to listen but he has gone into the future. He has started planning: what to do, how to get those ten dollars. He may even be a millionaire – that doesn’t matter.
When you listen to me don’t start trips in your mind. It happens every day. I can even feel when a person has gone on a trip. His face changes, he is no longer here. A certain lust can be seen on his face, a greed. He has started thinking about what to do, how to do it and how beautiful it will be if he can do it.
Listening, just listen; don’t move from here. One way is to move into the future, don’t do that; another way is to move into the past, don’t do that either. When you listen to me you start thinking, “Yes, I have heard this, I have read about this. That’s what I also think.” But you have stopped listening.

It was one of the greatest manhunts of all time and Detective O’Sherlock was hot on the trail of the killer. He trailed him into a department store, then he trailed him into a restaurant, then he trailed him into a trailer. But he lost him eventually.
“How in God’s name did you lose him?” the chief roared angrily.
“I followed him into every hole in town,” explained the great O’Sherlock, ace of the force. “Into everything from men’s toiletries to men’s toilets but I didn’t follow him when he went into the movie. That’s where I lost him.”
“And why didn’t you follow him into the movie?” the chief calmly queried, bursting a blood vessel.
“Because I already saw the picture.”

Remember, don’t bring in the pictures you have seen before. Don’t bring your memories in. When I am taking you into something, just relax and go with me. Don’t allow the future to interfere; don’t allow the past to interfere. When the past and future are not interfering, you are hearing. When you are hearing, the second step is very easy – your heart will gather the fragrance of whatsoever is being poured into you, has been told to you. Your heart will start throbbing with a new rhythm that you had not known before, with new energy, with new vitality. The heart will start a new movement of energy.
Then enjoy that, don’t be afraid of it. You are very afraid of the heart; you have been taught to control the heart. You have been taught to reduce the heart to being a slave and to make the head the master. You will have to do just the opposite, if you really want to go with me into the unknown. The head cannot be the master any longer. Instead of the head, the heart must be crowned again; the heart must become the emperor again. The heart is the master. Feeling should be the master, not thinking, because joy is a feeling, not a thought; because love is a feeling, not a thought; because happiness is a feeling, not a thought; because silence is a feeling, not a thought; because godliness is a feeling, not a thought. Let feeling be the supreme-most – the sovereign – and let the head serve it. This turn, this conversion, makes one religious.
Then the third step is even easier – just don’t obstruct it. When your heart starts functioning in your day-to-day life, allow it, go with it. Take the risk. That’s what I mean when I say, “Meditate over this parable.”

The third question:
Osho,
I am terribly scared to ask this question. Why do you mention Swami Yoga Chinmaya's name when he asks a question? And why does something in me have to ask this question?
This is from Deva Nirvesh. First, Swami Yoga Chinmaya’s name makes you laugh – and it saves me a joke. That is economical. Second it makes you happy, it makes Swami Chinmaya happy, it makes me happy. You laugh, you are happy; Chinmaya is happy, his name has been mentioned; I am happy because you all are happy. So at no cost everybody is simply happy! That’s why.
It is a tacit understanding now that when Swami Yoga Chinmaya asks a question it is bound to be ridiculous. So just mentioning the name is enough! He is a great seeker and when you are a great seeker you stumble upon many ridiculous questions. He goes on thinking about everything and when you go on thinking about everything you are bound to find many ridiculous questions.
In fact, deep down, every question is ridiculous. Life simply is; it is not a question and there is no answer to it. It simply is. There is no question mark to life. If you look deeply, you will find there is an exclamation mark but no question mark. Life is a wonder, a mystery. But that happens only when you look at life as a poet.
Chinmaya looks at life as a thinker – then the exclamation mark appears to be a question mark. That is the mistake every thinker is bound to commit. And he is a very logical thinker. He thinks logically. But logic always leads into absurdities so what can he do? He goes to the very end and then the thing turns into a ridiculous question. He is courageous to ask.
So it is a tacit understanding – when I mention the name of Swami Yoga Chinmaya you can relax. You know that something beautiful is coming.
I have heard…

It happened that in a madhouse, a new superintendent had come to take charge. The old superintendent introduced him to the inmates. A great meeting was called of all the mad people, of which there were many.
The new superintendent was very surprised. He could not believe what was happening because, instead of a speech, the old superintendent merely said a few numbers. He said, “Forty-nine,” and everybody started laughing. And they laughed so uproariously that they were bursting. They started rolling on the floor. And then he said, “Seventy-two,” and they started going mad.
The new superintendent could not understand what was happening. So when the speech was finished – it had been just numbers – he asked, “What is the matter? What are these numbers?”
And the old superintendent said, “l have been here for many years and they have also been here for many years so we have a tacit understanding. I have numbered my jokes. What is the point of telling the same joke again and again and again? Forty-nine – and they know, so they laugh. It is an arrangement. Seventy-two is the most ridiculous, that’s why they were jumping and rolling on the floor. Everybody knows!”
The new superintendent said, “This is beautiful. I will try it tomorrow.” So he listened to a few jokes, remembered the numbers and the next day he stood there and said, “Forty-nine.” But nobody laughed. What had happened? So thinking that maybe they were not in such a jovial mood that day he said, “Seventy-two.” But they just sat there, nobody even smiled. He looked at the old superintendent and said, “What is the matter?”
The old man said, “You just don’t know how to tell a joke.”

So please remember, if you say, “Swami Yoga Chinmaya,” nobody will laugh. It is a number, a tacit understanding: one has to know how to say it.

The woman sought the hallowed advice of the marriage counselor.
“I just don’t know what to do!” She was obviously distressed. “The first year my husband spoke to me only once and we had a son. The second year he spoke twice and we had twins. The third year he spoke to me thrice and we had triplets. The fourth year, four times, and we had quadruplets. What shall I do?”
“Tell him just to point, you’ll know what he means.”

It is a tacit understanding by now that if I say “Swami Yoga Chinmaya” it is enough. You can trust me.
You said: “I am terribly scared to ask this question.” You should not be scared. Why should you be scared? This is such a beautiful question. If you go on asking such questions, you can become a second name. I need a Ma too. Swami Yoga Chinmaya is one; Ma Deva Nirvesh can become a second. So go on, persist, persevere. You should not be scared. I have heard the rumor that Nirvesh is going with Swami Yoga Chinmaya. It is a rumor, I cannot vouch for it. Rumors go around here fast – so many women, you know. Women may not have a sense of humor but they have a sense of rumor.
And you ask: “And why does something in me have to ask this question?” Now, that you have to ask yourself. You must be feeling sympathetic to Swami Yoga Chinmaya. Beware. Only wrong people feel sympathetic to Yoga Chinmaya. Beware. Up to now he has had only one great follower – Ma Ananda Prem – now you may be the second.

The fourth question:
Osho,
Why don't I have any other question than this one? I am not enlightened so I feel my mind is becoming dull.
It is just the other way round. Your mind is dull that’s why you are not getting enlightened! You are putting things in the wrong sequence completely. Don’t wait for enlightenment to come, and don’t hope that when enlightenment comes you will be intelligent.
It will never come. Intelligence is a first requirement for enlightenment to happen at all. Intelligence is the preparation for it. Be intelligent. Behave intelligently. Live intelligently. Otherwise enlightenment is not going to happen at all. If you are hoping that one day enlightenment will come and then you will be intelligent, a genius, you are wrong.
There are a few people who go on talking nonsense like this. One of them is old Pundit Gopi Krishna. He thinks that when kundalini arises one becomes a genius, one becomes tremendously intelligent. This is not true. If you are tremendously intelligent, only then does your kundalini arise, otherwise not. If Gopi Krishna is right, it means that a dullard, a stupid person, can make his kundalini rise and can become intelligent. That is impossible.
To help your energy rise and soar high you will need tremendous intelligence, sharp intelligence. Otherwise you will not be able to bring your energy up so high. A stupid person cannot do that. Enlightenment, nirvana, moksha, liberation, the arousal of your kundalini energy, whatsoever the name – are just names, symbolic. But one thing is certain: intelligence has to precede them. You cannot afford to be stupid and hope that someday something will happen and you will become enlightened. Then you are hoping in vain. You will have to create intelligence.
How to create intelligence? First become more and more alert in small things. Walking along the road, become more alert, try to be more alert. For such a simple process: walking along the road – you need not have any alertness. You can remain stupid and walk well. That’s what everyone is doing. The stupidity does not hinder you at all. Start from small things. Taking your bath, be alert; standing under the shower, become very alert. That cold water falling on you, the body enjoying it… Become alert, become conscious of what is happening, be relaxed yet conscious.
This moment of consciousness must be brought in again and again, in a thousand and one ways: eating, talking, meeting a friend, listening to me, meditating, making love. In all situations try to become more and more alert. It is hard, it is certainly difficult, but it is not impossible. Slowly, slowly, the dust will disappear and your mirrorlike consciousness will reveal itself; you will become more intelligent.
Then live intelligently. You live in such a confused way, in such a stupid way, that if you saw somebody else living that way you would immediately say that he was stupid. But you are doing the same things, although somehow one manages not to see one’s own life.
A man came to me and he asked, “What should I do, Osho? I have fallen in love with two women.” Now, one is enough – one would do enough harm – but he had fallen in love with two women. Now both were struggling and he was crushed. He said, “I am in misery; both are fighting over me.” And naturally he was being hit from both sides. When I told him, “Choose one,” he said that it was difficult. This means that one person is riding on two horses. He said, “It is difficult to choose one.” I told him, “Then let it be; have it your own way. You will destroy your life.” Choosing two women or two men as your love object is bound to split you. You will become schizophrenic and you will start falling apart.
This is stupid. It is so simple to look into the phenomenon. Maybe sometimes it is difficult, it is difficult – but then too one has to choose. You cannot go in all directions simultaneously. If you have come to listen to me you have chosen. You have missed a few things. You could have been in a restaurant sitting with friends, sipping coffee, but you have chosen not to do that. You might have gone to a movie, but you have chosen not to go there. Or you might have chosen just to lie down on your bed and relax and be a Taoist – but you have not chosen that. You have come to listen to me and to sit on this hard marble floor, cold and hurting – but you have chosen it.
What will you say about a man who just stands outside his house and says, “I am in difficulty. I cannot go to the lectures and I cannot go to bed because I want to do both together. So I am standing here.” He will miss both.
If you look at your life, you will find how unintelligently you have been behaving. You read a book and you accumulate knowledge and you start thinking that you know. You have learned the word God and you think you have known God. You are ready to argue – not only argue, you are ready to kill and be killed. How many Mohammedans, how many Hindus, how many Christians have been killed for something they have read only in book! Tremendously stupid people. One is fighting for the Koran, another is fighting for the Gita, another is fighting for the Bible – you are fighting for books and killing living people and sacrificing your tremendously valuable life! What are you doing?
But man has behaved in stupid ways. Just because everybody else is behaving in the same way does not make it intelligent. If all are fools, it does not make you intelligent because you are following them.
I have heard…

A flock of birds was flying into the sky and one bird asked another, “Why do we always follow this stupid leader?”
And the other said, “I don’t know. I have heard that he is the one with the map.”

The map! Nobody has the map. But you go on following the pope, and the shankaracharya, and a maulvi, and a pundit, and you think that they have the map, that they know. Just look at their lives. What do they know? They may even be far more stupid than you are. Just look at the unintelligent way they are living. Watch their life. Are they happy? Is there a dance in their life? Is there fragrance in their life? Just looking at them do you feel a silence showering on you? Nothing of the sort. Just because they have a book and they have read it and studied it for years, it does not make any sense to follow them.
Become a man of knowing, not a man of knowledge. Then you live intelligently.
To me, intelligence is the basic morality, the basic virtue. If you are intelligent, you will not harm anybody because that is foolish. If you are intelligent, you will not harm yourself because that is foolish. Life is so precious, it is not to be wasted; it must be lived in deep celebration, in deep gratitude. One must be very careful and watchful because a moment gone is gone forever. It will never return. If you waste it in stupidity you are wasting a great opportunity. Live each moment so totally, so fully aware, that you never repent later on that you didn’t live, that you could have lived more, that you could have enjoyed more. That’s what intelligence is: to live life so totally that there is no repentance, never. One is always contented. One knows that one has lived to one’s uttermost.
Then, in the uttermost state of awareness, enlightenment happens. You say: “I am not enlightened so I feel my mind is becoming dull.” No, sir, your mind is dull, that’s why you have not become enlightened. So don’t wait for enlightenment to come and do everything for you – do something so that your dullness is dropped.
It can be dropped because nobody is born dull; every child is born intelligent. Can’t you see it in children? – how intelligent they are, how full of life, how full of love, how full of joy. Look into their eyes – how much shine there is in their eyes. They are the glories of God. Then the society jumps on them, and the parents and the teachers and the education system and everybody starts making them dull because the society needs dull people. Only dull people can be dominated, oppressed. Only dull people can be ordered to go here and there, to do this and that. Only dull people are needed by the society because dull people are very efficient, they don’t have any mind, they are not dangerous. Dull people are very convenient. Dull people drag their whole life.
Just think if people were intelligent. Do you think anybody would be ready to waste his whole life as a clerk? Think of it. Would anybody be ready to waste his whole life as a politician? Would anybody be ready to waste his whole life as a soldier? For what? One would like to live an intelligent life of love, art, creativity. Ninety-nine percent of things would disappear from the world if people were intelligent.
War would not be possible. Now war is almost the major work of humanity – it has been so for centuries. Seventy percent of a nation’s money is wasted on war – seventy percent! What are you doing? Simply preparing for war? You don’t know anything else. You know only how to kill. People have become efficient only in killing. This can only be done by dull people. Intelligent people would throw away the arms. They would dump all the atom bombs in the Pacific and they would say goodbye to all war.
What is war for? Life is so short and there is so much to enjoy – the stars and the moon and flowers and men and women and the rivers and mountains. And you are simply fighting and just living a very dull and stupid life.
Society needs dull people, remember it. Be aware that the society would not like you to become intelligent. It would like you to become a machine – efficient, certainly, but not intelligent. Do the work that is given to you, and then die. Drag your life from the office to the house, from the house to the office. Your whole life is from the office to the house, from the house to the office. In the house you will have a wife to nag you and in the office you will have a boss to insult and humiliate you. And on the road there is the mad traffic. Go to the office, back home, to the office, again home – and then one day you die. That is the only hope – that one day you will die!

Mulla Nasruddin went on a world trip. He was on a ship for the first time. And, of course, he was suffering tremendously, terribly, from seasickness. He could not eat anything, he could not drink anything, he was continuously vomiting.
Then the captain came and he said to Nasruddin, “Don’t be worried. I have been in the service for twenty years and I have never seen or heard of a man dying of seasickness. Don’t be worried.”
Mulla beat his own head and he said, “That was my only hope! I was hoping to die, but now you say that nobody has ever died!”

Your only hope is that one day you will die. So just a little more, tolerate it a little more, a few more days of the office, a few more days of the house. Tolerate. Death is coming to deliver you. That is your only hope.
What life is this where a man hopes that death will deliver him? What life is this where people commit suicide? What life is this where people go mad, insane, just because they cannot tolerate it anymore, because it becomes too much? It breaks their nerves. No we are living very unintelligently. In this unintelligence enlightenment is not possible.
But remember, basically you came with intelligence; unintelligence is forced on you by society. So there is hope. It can be dropped. It is just dust that has gathered on the mirror. The mirror is still clean and clear, it is just that the dust must be removed. Once the dust is removed the mirror will be as clear as ever. Everybody is a genius. God never creates anything else – God only creates geniuses. Everybody is intelligent, nobody is mediocre, cannot be. How can somebody come out of God and be mediocre? God does not deal in mediocres, he only makes masterpieces. But the society has forced you to become dull. So much dust has gathered on your mirror that you don’t look like a mirror at all.
What is enlightenment? It is to attain to your mirrorlike quality again. It is a recovery. It is not something that you invent; it is already the case – deep down in your heart you are enlightened. Dust has just gathered on the surface, you need a good cleansing.
That’s what we are doing here. A good cleansing. You need a good bath. Meditation is an inner bath. Sannyas is a total cleansing. Trying to live intelligently, whatsoever the cost. Trying to live courageously. Trying to live your life in your own way, trying to do your own thing in your own way and not bothering about what others say. With that declaration you become intelligent. With that declaration of individuality you become intelligent. And only through intelligence does the bird of enlightenment one day come. Open the window of intelligence and wait.

The last question:
Osho,
Why are you against marriage?
Why should I be against marriage? First, I have never been married, so why should I be against marriage? You need experience for such things.

A youngster was thinking about getting married. So he wrote to his father for some personal advice. His father wrote back:
“I can’t tell you how happy I am to hear about your impending marriage. You will find marriage the most wonderful state of bliss and happiness. As I look across the table at your dear mother, I realize with great pride how full and wonderful our years together have been. By all means, get married. You have our blessings. It will be the happiest day of your life.
Sincerely,
Dad.
PS. Your mother just left the room. Stay single, you idiot!”

I have no experience, so why should I be against marriage? Fortunately my parents were very simple people. They have also not created a sense in me to be against marriage. They have loved each other tremendously, innocently. In my childhood I never saw them fighting, quarreling, nagging. They have lived as peacefully as possible. It is very rare to find such a peaceful couple.

She watched the young man have his soup with the wrong spoon, grasp the utensils with the wrong fingers, eat the main course with his hands and pour tea into his saucer and blow on it.
“Hasn’t watching your mother and dad at the dinner table taught you anything?” she asked.
“Yeah,” said the boy. “Never to get married.”

I could not have deduced it from my parents so why should I be against marriage? Those who know are against it but then it is too late.
Once a friend told Alfred Adler about a certain Miss X who was going to be married soon. Usually in such situations people inquire, “To whom?” but Adler asked, “Against whom?” He had suffered much. He knew that a marriage is not with somebody, but against somebody, so it was not right to ask, “With whom?” but, “Against whom?”
What you call marriage is nothing but an arrangement, a social contract. What you call marriage is nothing but an institution. It is not good to live in an institution. It is not love; it is a poor substitute for love. If marriage arises out of love it is beautiful – but then it is not really marriage, it is a totally different thing. But if marriage is just a legal binding and there is no love in it, then you are entering into an imprisonment – and one of your own accord.
Marriage as such is going to disappear from the world; it should disappear. Love should be enough cause to be together. I know that there is danger, because love is something like a breeze: when it comes it comes, when it goes it goes. It is not very dependable. It is not an electric fan whose button you switch on and the fan starts. Marriage is an electric fan, you can depend on it. Love is a natural breeze – sometimes it is there, then it is beautiful; but then it can go too, any moment it can be gone.
Love is like a roseflower – it blooms and withers. Marriage is a plastic flower – it never blooms and it never withers. It is very permanent. Many people have chosen the plastic flower over the roseflower, the real flower, because they are afraid of its momentariness.
Life is momentary, life is a flux. To hope that one can create something permanent in life is to hope in vain. You are asking for frustration. All of life is a continuous movement: things change. Except change, everything changes. The only thing that is permanent is change.
Whatsoever is real is changing: that’s why fear arises in man’s mind. Love cannot be depended on, so you have to bring in the court and the law so that things become permanent. When love disappears the law will bind you, but anything that binds is ugly. Unity is one thing; to be tied together is another thing.

One night, Mulla Nasruddin and his wife were sitting by the fireside. It was a cold night. Mulla was reading his newspaper and his wife was doing some knitting. The dog and the cat of the family were also resting by the fireside, dreaming, enjoying.
The wife suddenly said, “Nasruddin look at the dog and the cat and how peacefully they live together. Why can’t we do that?”
Nasruddin said, “Why can’t we do that? Tie them together and see what happens.”

Once two people are tied together freedom is lost and anger arises. Freedom is lost and everything becomes ugly. Love means that freedom remains intact: marriage means that freedom has been dropped. You have bargained for permanence, for security, and you have paid for it with freedom.
Marriage is going to disappear, should disappear. Now the point is coming in the history of humanity where it becomes feasible for marriage to disappear. It is already an outmoded phenomenon, it has lived too long and it has created nothing but misery. Marriage should disappear and love should flower again. One should live with insecurity and freedom. I call that intelligence.
To seek marriage is to be dull; to seek love is to be intelligent. Anything that gives you a false sense of security makes you dull, makes you less alert; anything that keeps the insecurity as it is – and life is insecure, love is insecure, everything is insecure – makes you remain alert. Because then you have to be alert every moment, you cannot depend on anything, you cannot go to sleep, you have to keep aware. Then life will have a deeper significance and life will become more natural – that is the meaning of living the life of Tao. Living life in insecurity is to live the life of Tao.
I am not against marriage; I am against the ugly institution that has evolved in the name of marriage. If marriage allows freedom and love to exist together, it is good but then marriage is totally different. Always be aware: never lose your freedom and never dominate anybody so that he or she loses his or her freedom. Freedom is the goal and freedom should be the very foundation of life. Love is beautiful when it flowers in freedom. When it flowers in a hothouse, closed from everywhere, it is simply a phony thing. It is not true and it cannot satisfy you. To be real the flower needs the storm, the lightning, the thundering, the clouds, the sun, the wind – it needs all these challenges to be real. When you protect it too much, in that very protection it loses all reality, it becomes pale, it becomes anemic; it is already dead before its death.
I am not saying that through love your life will become more secure – no, I am not saying that. Through love your life will become more insecure. But I am all for insecurity because through insecurity is growth. When you are secure you are in your grave.
Enough for today.

============================================================

In middle age Hua-tzu of Yang-li in Sung lost his memory. He would receive a present in the morning and forget it by the evening; give a present in the evening and forget it by the morning. In the street he would forget to walk; at home he would forget to sit down. Today he would not remember yesterday; tomorrow he would not remember today. His family were troubled about it and invited a diviner to tell his fortune, but without success. They invited a shaman to perform an auspicious rite, but it made no difference. They invited a doctor to treat him, but it did no good.

There was a Confucian of Lu who, acting as his own go-between, claimed that he could cure it. Hua-tzu’s wife and children offered half of their property in return for his skill.

The Confucian told them: “This is clearly not a disease which can be divined by hexagrams and omens, or charmed away by auspicious prayers, or treated by medicines and the needle. I shall try reforming his mind, changing his thoughts; there is a good chance that he will recover.”

Then the Confucian tried stripping Hua-tzu, and he looked for his clothes; tried starving him, and he looked for food; tried shutting him up in the dark, and he looked for light. The Confucian was delighted and told the man’s sons:

“The sickness is curable but my arts have been passed down secretly through the generations, and are not disclosed to outsiders. I shall shut out his attendants, and stay alone with him in his room for seven days.”

They agreed, and no one knew what methods the Confucian used; but the sickness of many years was completely dispelled in a single morning.

When Hua-tzu woke up he was very angry. He dismissed his wife, punished his sons, and chased away the Confucian with a spear. The authorities of Sung arrested him and wanted to know the reason.

“Formerly when I forgot,” said Hua-tzu, “I was boundless; I did not notice whether heaven and earth existed or not. Now suddenly I remember; and all the disasters and recoveries, gains and losses, joys and sorrows, loves and hates of twenty or thirty years past rise up in a thousand tangled threads. I fear that all the disasters and recoveries, gains and losses, joys and sorrows, loves and hates still to come will confound my heart just as much. Shall I never again find a moment of forgetfulness?”
This is one of the greatest parables of Lieh Tzu, pregnant with profound significance and insight. Based on a great experience of the inner world of consciousness, it is paradoxical but it indicates something absolute.
Let us go into it very softly, delicately, carefully. It has much to give you; it has much to show to you. It can give great clarity to you on your path. Before we enter into it, a few paradigms of Taoism will be helpful.
First, Taoism believes that memory is the problem. Because of memory we are not really alive. Memory holds us back in the past, it never allows us to be in the present. It is a dead weight. It goes on growing every day. Every day the past becomes bigger and bigger and bigger. Every day more and more experiences, more and more memories become accumulated. And they hold you back.
The child is free. He has no past. The old man is not free. He has a long past. The child has nothing to look back to, he has everything to look forward to – he has the future just opening up for him, a great adventure. The old man has nothing in the future. Everything has happened. And all that has happened goes on cluttering his mind. It is a weight that pulls him down, backward, it does not allow him to go with the times. He lags behind.
Memory is how you are rooted in the past. Unless you become so free of memory that you need not look back – memory no longer disturbs you, memory no longer clouds you – you will not be able to live in the present. If you cannot live in the present the future is not yours – because the future is contacted only through living in the present, the future becomes a reality only through living in the present. The present is the door by which the future enters and the past goes out. If you are looking at the past, you will miss the future because during the time you are looking at the past, the future is entering into the present and you cannot look both ways simultaneously. You have eyes to look forward; you don’t have eyes at the back of your head. Nature never intended you to look back otherwise your eyes would have been at the back of your head. Nature has intended that you should look forward, nature has not given you any instrument to look backward.
When you look back you have to turn back, and during the moment you are looking back and your head is turned to the dead past, the future is turning into the present. You will miss that birth, you will always miss the future turning into the present – which is the only reality there is.
Now, what happens? If you are too interested in the past, too attached to your memories, you start creating an unreal future – in the imagination. A man who is too attached to the past projects his future also. He lives in his memory and through his memory he creates an imagined future. Both are unreal. The past is no more, you cannot live it again – there is no possibility of that. That which is gone is gone forever, it is impossible to bring it back. Because it is impossible to bring it back you start imagining a similar type of future, something similar – a little more decorated, a little sweeter, a little better. You start imagining a future but that future is based on your past experience. What else can it be based on?
You loved a woman. Almost everything was good in the woman except for a few things. Now you project a dream: in the future you will find a woman who will be as good as the past woman but with those wrong habits deleted, with those wrong habits dropped. In the future you will have a house as beautiful as in the past, even more beautiful, but with a few things which were not there in the past. You will manage the future.
Your imagination is nothing but a modified past. This is how people are living. The past is no more and the future is nothing but a desire to repeat the past – of course, in a better way, but it is the same past. You ate something yesterday; you would like to eat it again tomorrow. Yesterday you loved a man or a woman, tomorrow you would like to love a man or a woman again. You want to repeat your past.
The mind is a repetitive mechanism; the mind continuously hankers for sameness. Reality is new every moment; it is never the same. You cannot step into the same river twice. Life is constantly moving, changing. Only change is permanent, everything else is changing. Only change is not changing. That is reality. But then you create a false, a pseudo-reality of your own invention – fabricated in the mind, manufactured by your desire – and you start living in that.
Taoism says that to be in reality a man has to come out of his mind, a man must become a no-mind. To be in reality a man has to uproot himself from the past; one has to forget the past. To remember that which is; the eyes have to be completely unclouded from the past – only then can you see in reality. Eyes clouded with the past are blind eyes. You are not really blind; you are just clouded by your past. You cannot see directly because of so many screens covering your eyes. Those screens have been created by your past.
A man insulted you yesterday and today you come across him on the road. The past arises. A screen falls over your eyes. This is the same man who insulted you. You have to take revenge. You have to pay him back in the same coin – tit-for-tat. You start getting angry; you get into a rage. Now you are missing this man. It is possible that this man is no longer the same; in fact, he cannot be the same. He may have repented, he may have brooded the whole night, he may have decided to come to you and apologize, he may be coming to apologize now. But you cannot see him. Your eyes are clouded with anger and your anger will color your reality. Even if he tries to apologize, you will think that he must be trying to deceive you, or he has become afraid of your vengeance, or he is a very cunning man – beware, he is trying to cheat you, deceive you. Right now he is trying to befriend you, but some day he will again bring some trouble to you.
All these thoughts will be there and you will not be able to see what he is, you will miss the reality. And seeing all these clouds on your face, there is every possibility that, though he had come to apologize, he may not now apologize. Seeing that you are in a rage and you will not understand, he may change his own ideas. Because we affect each other. And if he changes, your ideas are confirmed, they become even stronger. This is how things happen.
A man who has clarity never carries the past. He simply looks into reality with no interference from the past. That is the meaning of this story. Dropping memory means dropping the mind. Dropping the mind means dropping the whole world. Dropping the mind means dropping the ego – then you are no longer self-centered, then you don’t have any mind whatsoever. Then you live a life with no mind of your own – that is the meaning of Tao. Then God’s mind functions through you; you don’t have your own mind. You function but now you don’t function from your own center. Now the center of the whole becomes your center. You act but you are not the doer any more, God acts. Your surrender is total.
Just the other day I was reading a beautiful Hassidic parable.

A young man asked an old rabbi, “In the past, in the old, golden days, we have heard that people used to see God with their own eyes. People used to encounter God. God used to walk on earth; God used to call people by their name. God was very close. What has happened now? Why is God not so close? Why can we not see him directly? Why is he hiding? Where has he gone? Why has he forgotten the earth? Why does he no longer walk on the earth? Why does he not hold the hands of people stumbling in darkness? He used to do that before.”
The old rabbi looked at the disciple and said, “My son, he is still there where he used to be, but man has forgotten how to stoop down so low that he can see him.”

“To stoop down…” Man has forgotten; man is standing very haughty, man is standing very proud, man is standing very erect. Man is standing separate from God. Man has become an island; man is no longer part of the universal, part of the whole – that’s why. God is exactly where he used to be. – He is still trying to hold your hand, but you are not willing. He is still confronting you, but you look sideways. He is still there, calling you by your own name, but you are full of your own noise, the inner talk, the continuous chattering – you have become a chatterbox – that’s why.
Man has forgotten to stoop, to bow down.
In the East, bowing down has always been a very significant gesture. The disciple goes to the master, bows down, lies down flat on the earth. That is a gesture of surrender. He says, “I am no more.” He says, “I will not exist any more as myself. Now I will be a vehicle, I will be passive. You pour and I will be a womb, you pour and I will be a receptacle. I will not fight. I surrender.” In that surrender something of tremendous value happens.
With the master you start learning the ABC of surrender. Then one day, when you have learned what surrender is, you try it with God. The master is just a kindergarten, just a beginning, the beginning of surrender. When you have learned the joy of it, the beauty of it, the benediction of it, then you want to go on to deeper seas. You have learned swimming near the banks, now you would like to go to the farthest point. Then God is available. But if you exist as you, if you exist as a self, then it is impossible. Then you exist as an ego.
Memory in this parable means ego. These Taoist parables are very subtle.
Now let us go into it.
In middle age, Hua-tzu of Yang-li in Sung lost his memory.
That is a way of saying that he became a meditator.
That is a Taoist expression: “…lost his memory.” It means: became a non-individual. It means: became a non-ego. It means: became loose from the grip of the mind, dropped the weight of the past. It is not something condemning, remember, it is a great appreciation.
In Taoist circles, when somebody says, “Somebody has lost his memory,” remember that he is praising the man. Taoists have their own way of saying things, very peculiar ways of saying things. But the meaning of their gestures is profound.
In middle age, Hua-tzu of Yang-li in Sung lost his memory. He became a no-mind, forgot all about his past, forgot all that had happened –as if all the dust on the mirror dropped away. He came to exist in the present – that’s what it means. He was no longer in the past, he did not exist through the past, he did not function through the past. He had started functioning in the immediate present. He now lived moment to moment – not gathering, not accumulating, not hoarding any knowledge or any information. Whatsoever the totality brought in the moment was all. If he felt hungry he looked for food, but he had no idea about any food that he had eaten before. And the moment his appetite was fulfilled he forgot all about it. He did not carry the idea in his mind; he had no fantasy about food, either before or after. The moment was all, the now and the here was all; there was no then and there was no there.
This is the first satori – when a man becomes loosened from the grip of the past, the hold of the past, as if a snake had slipped from its old skin. He has become absolutely new, like a tree which, dropping all the old leaves during the fall has sprouted new leaves. The moment something becomes old, it is dropped immediately. One goes on slipping again and again into the present. It is a totally new style of life – the way of Tao, the way of Zen, the way of sannyas.
Look for it in your own life. How do you live? Do you bring in the past again and again? Do you always live through the past? Is your life too colored by memory? Then you are living the worldly life. To live in memory is to live in the world, samsara. To live without memory is to live in godliness, to live without memory, to live in nirvana, enlightenment.
Remember, by saying that Hua-tzu lost his memory, you should not translate it to mean that he became absentminded. No! That is not the meaning of it. To become absent-minded is a totally different thing. It is a disease: memory persists but becomes distorted. You know but you don’t know clearly. An absent-minded person is not a man of Tao. An absentminded person is simply absentminded. The man of Tao is very much present, he is not absentminded. In fact, he is so present that his memory cannot interfere. His presence is tremendous; his presence is so intense, the light of presence is so intense, that his memory cannot interfere. He functions out of the present; you function out of memory.
When somebody becomes absentminded he looks as if he were ill – naturally – because he goes on forgetting. Not that he has really forgotten, but he remembers that he has forgotten – the difference must be understood. He remembers that he has forgotten; he knows that he knows and yet he cannot remember it. That is the man who is absentminded.
I have heard many stories about Thomas Alva Edison. He was a man who could be called perfectly absentminded…

One day he went into a restaurant, ate his lunch, came out and met a friend at the door on the street. They talked for a few minutes and then the friend said, “Why don’t you come with me and have your lunch?”
So he said, “Right. You made me remember. I came for my lunch.”
Then they went inside the same restaurant. The food was served. The friend said to Edison, “You look a little puzzled.”
Edison said, “What’s the matter? I don’t feel any appetite at all.”
And the waiter laughed and he said, “Sir, you ate your lunch here just five minutes ago.”

This is absentmindedness.

Once it happened that he forgot his own name. He was standing in a queue and when his turn came and his name was called he started looking here and there, looking for the man whose name had been called. And then somebody who was standing behind him said to him, “Sir, as far as I know, you are Edison; who are you looking for?”
And Edison said, “Thank you. In fact, I had completely forgotten.”

This is absentmindedness. Edison was not a man of satori; he still lived in his memory but his memory was a chaos. He could not figure out what was what. He was not a Buddha, he was not a Hua-tzu. He did not live in the moment; he still lived in the past. Of course, his past was very clumsy. Absentmindedness is a clumsy past, a clumsy memory, a lousy memory.
But a man who has lost his memory in the sense that Taoists use this term is a man who functions out of the presence of his mind – presence of mind.
Just a few days ago I was reading the memoirs of a very rare man. He was a saint who died a few years ago. He lived for a really long time – almost one hundred and forty years. His name was Shivapuri Baba, Shivapuri Baba of Nepal. In his memoirs he tells a story.

He went to Jaipur and a very rich man gave him a box full of money, one-hundred-rupee notes. While in the train he looked into the box; it was full of rupees and he wanted to know how many he had. He started counting. In the compartment there were only two persons, Shivapuri Baba, himself a very old ancient man – at the time he must have been about one hundred and twenty years old – and an English lady, a young woman. She became interested. This old beggar was in the first class and was carrying a whole box of one-hundred-rupee notes.
She suddenly had an idea. She jumped up and said, “Give me half the money otherwise I will pull the chain and I will tell them that you tried to rape me.”
Shivapuri Baba laughed and put his hands to his ears as if he were deaf. And he gave her some paper and said, “Write it down. I cannot hear.” So she wrote it down. He took it and put it in his pocket and said, “Now pull the chain.”

This is presence of mind! It is not functioning out of the past because this has never happened before and it may not happen again. But, in a flash, like lightning, a man who is really present will act out of his presence.
You would have been in trouble because you would have looked into your memory – what should I do now? You would have started groping in your memory: is there something in the past from which I can have some idea of what to do now?
In real life nothing is ever repeated. Everything is new. That’s why your responses always fall short. You act out of the past and the thing is absolutely new, it has never happened before; so in fact you don’t have any experience of it. Your experience may be of something similar but it cannot be about exactly the same thing. It is not a repetition, the situation never repeats. Maybe it was something similar: you were cheated by somebody, something similar. You were deceived by somebody, something similar. You were threatened by somebody; something similar, but not exactly the same. So when you start looking into your memory you are showing that you don’t have presence of mind.
This looks like a paradox: a man of no-mind is a man with presence of mind. And a man of mind, a man with memory, is a man who is absent. He looks into the past. The situation is herenow, confronting you; it is an encounter. Respond right now, like a mirror. A mirror reflects whosoever comes in front of it. It does not look into memory: this man has been here before, in front of me, so how to reflect him? It simply reflects. When there is no memory it is not absentmindedness, the mirror is simply clear, the dust is not there, the dust is not a distraction. The reflection will be clear and out of that reflection will come the act. When you act out of the present moment your act is always total. You will never feel frustrated.

Two Englishmen met in London.
“I say, Derrick!” called Quincy. “How are you, old chap?”
“Fine. Just fine,” said Derrick. “Lots doing. Business, grandchildren fine, weather pleasant and all that sort of balderdash.”
“Jolly good. Anything else?”
“Let me see. Ah yes – buried my wife.”
“Really?”
“Had to. Dead, you know.”

Now this man is an absentminded man. Not that he has lost his memory, he has a lousy memory. Remember the distinctions. Sometimes they may look the same – they are not.
This story of Hua-tzu is about a man who lost his memory, who lost his mind, who lost his past – who became unburdened. To say it in Christ’s words, “Who became a child again, capable of entering into the kingdom of God.”
But to his family, to his friends, he must have posed a great problem. Naturally. They must have wondered what had happened to this old man. A calamity. They must have thought that he had fallen into a deep sleep, a sort of sleep. But exactly the contrary was the case – they were asleep and this man had awakened from sleep. But they could understand only the language of sleep so they must have thought that he had fallen asleep.

A big-city sharpie made a wrong turn and found himself helplessly lost in the sticks of Kentucky. After bouncing along a rocky country road for more than an hour, he reached a large intersection. There, standing on the side of the road, was an old-looking hillbilly.
“Hey, fellow!” he shouted. “Could you tell me where the road on the right leads to?”
“I don’t rightly know,” the country boy answered slowly.
“Well, then, I wonder if you can tell me where the road on the left would take me?”
But again the boy shook his head. “I don’t rightly know that either.”
A little perturbed, the city fellow barked, “You’re not too bright, are you?”
“Maybe not,” drawled the hillbilly, “but I ain’t lost.”

This old man, Hua-tzu, must have been thought by others to be lost. He had changed so diametrically, he had changed so tremendously, that the whole village – his relations, his friends, his family, his sons, his daughters, his wife – must have become very worried. What should they do with this man?
He would receive a present in the morning and forget it by the evening…
He had really become a child again. That is the quality of innocence.
…give a present in the evening and forget it by the morning. In the street he would forget to walk; at home he would forget to sit down. Today he would not remember yesterday; tomorrow he would not remember today.
This is not absentmindedness. He was simply no longer gathering the past. It is not that he had a lousy memory; he was cut away from his memory utterly. He was like a child.
You are angry with a child and the child is angry with you. Look at his face! He is so angry and so red that he would like to kill you. He says, “I will never talk to you again. Finished!” And the next moment he is sitting in your lap again and talking beautifully. He has forgotten. Whatsoever he has said in a rage, he has not carried it. It has not become luggage in his mind. Yes, in the spur of the moment he was angry; he said something, but now the anger is gone and all that he had said in that moment has gone. He has not become committed to it forever; it was a momentary flare-up, a ripple. But he is not frozen in it, he is a flowing phenomenon. The ripple was there, a wave had arisen; now it is no more. He is not going to carry it always and always.
Even if you make him remember it, he will laugh. He will say, “All nonsense!” He will say, “I don’t remember. Is it so?” He will say, “Have I really said that? Impossible!” He will say, “How I can say that? You must have imagined it.”
It was a flare-up: this must be understood. A man who lives moment to moment is sometimes angry, sometimes happy, sometimes sad. But you can depend on him – he will not carry these things forever. A man who is very controlled and does not allow any emotion to arise in his being is very dangerous. If you insult him, he is not angry. He holds it. By and by he will accumulate so much anger that he is going to do something really nasty.
There is nothing wrong in a momentary flare of anger – it is beautiful in a way. It simply shows that the man is still alive. A momentary flare-up simply shows that the man is not dead, that he responds to situations – and responds authentically. When he feels that the situation is such that anger is needed, anger is there. When he feels that the situation is such that happiness is needed, happiness is there. He goes with the situation. He has no prejudice for or against. He has no ideology as such. He does not have a certain idea that you should not be angry, that whatsoever the situation you have to remain non-angry.
If a man tries to be non-angry in that way, what will he do? He will repress his anger. Eventually that anger will come all out of proportion in situations where it will look almost mad. He will be capable of murdering somebody or committing suicide or doing something really harmful – because when so much anger is released it is very poisonous, very destructive.
Nothing is wrong with ordinary anger. In fact, a person who can become angry and forget all about it the next moment is really a very good person. You will always find him friendly, alive, loving, compassionate. A man who is always holding onto his emotions, controlling and controlling and controlling, a man of so-called discipline, is never a good person. He will always show that he is holier than you, but you can see his anger in his eyes, you can see it in his face, you can see it in his every gesture – the way he walks, the way he talks, the way he relates with people – you can always see it there, boiling. He is ready to burst any moment. These are the murderers, these are the criminals, these are the real evil-doers.
If he goes on controlling, all his control will make his ego stronger and stronger. Now ego is far more dangerous than anger. Anger is human, nothing wrong with it. It is simple, it is simply a situation in which you are provoked, and you are alive so you respond to it. It is saying that you will not yield; it is saying that this is not a situation you can accept; it is saying that this is a situation in which you want to say no. It is a protest, and nothing is wrong with that.
I am not against anger, I am against accumulated anger. I am not against sex, I am against accumulated sexuality. Anything that is in the moment is good, anything that is carried from the past is bad, is diseased, is illness.
This man became like a child. Today he would not remember yesterday; tomorrow he would not remember today.
Jesus says to his disciples, “Think not of the morrow. Look at the lilies in the field, how beautiful they are. They don’t think of the past, they don’t think of the future. They are not worried at all about what is going to happen and what has happened. They simply live herenow, that is their beauty.” That is the beauty of the trees and the rocks and the stars and the rivers. All of existence is beautiful because it has no past.
Man is ugly. His past makes him ugly. Apart from man, nothing is ugly because it is only man who goes on brooding about the past and the future, and goes on missing the life that is available in the present. That is the only life there is, the only dance there is. Naturally you become ugly because you have no opportunity to live, to live authentically.
I have heard a beautiful anecdote:

A man was talking with his friend, the tailor, about hunting trips.
“Once,” said the tailor, “I was in Africa hunting lions. I discovered one standing ten feet away – and there I was without my gun. The lion came closer. Now he was only five feet away.”
“What happened?” the man asked breathlessly.
“Well, to make a long story short, he leaped up and killed me.”
“What? What do you mean he killed you?” the man asked. “You’re sitting here, very much alive.”
“Ha!” said the tailor. “You call this living?”

Even people who look alive are not really alive. They have been killed and not once, but many times. Killed by the past, the lion of the past; killed by the future, the lion of the future. And they are being killed every day; they are being murdered every day by these two enemies.
There is a beautiful Buddhist parable of many meanings. All the meanings are beautiful, but today try to understand one certain meaning in it:

In a forest a man is running, trying to escape from a lion who is following him, chasing him. The man comes to a precipice. There is no other way to go, so he stops. For a single moment he cannot understand what to do. He looks down. It is a very deep valley, a great abyss. If he jumps he is gone. But still there is a possibility for him – miracles happen. So he looks down more closely and there, deep in the valley, two more lions are standing, looking up. So that possibility is gone.
The lion is coming closer; and he is roaring, the man can hear the roar. His only possibility is to hang from the roots of a tree sticking out over the valley. He cannot jump and he cannot stand on the precipice so he holds onto the roots of the tree. The roots are very fragile and he is afraid that at any moment they will break. Not only that, it is a very cold evening, night is gathering, and the sun is going down. And his hands are so cold that he is afraid he will not be able to hold on for long. Already the roots are slipping out of his hands. They are frozen. Death is certain. Each moment death is there.
Then he looks up. Two mice are chewing through the roots of the tree. One is white and one is black: the symbol of day and night, the symbol of time. Time is running out fast and the two mice are chewing through the roots and they are really doing a great job. They are almost at the end, they are just going to finish – it is evening and they also have to go and rest so they are finishing in a hurry. Any moment the root will break away from the tree.
The man looks up again and there on the tree is a beehive out of which honey is dripping. He forgets all and tries to catch a drop on his tongue and he succeeds. The taste is really sweet.

Now this parable has many meanings. I have talked about this parable in different ways. This time I would like to indicate a certain meaning: this moment. In the past a lion is coming, in the future two lions are waiting; time is running out fast, death is very close by as it is always; day and night the two mice are cutting away the very roots of life, but still, if you can live in the present, the taste is tremendously sweet. It is really beautiful.
The man lived in the moment and forgot everything. For the moment there was no death, no lions, no time, nothing existed – only the sweet taste of honey on his tongue.
This is the way to live, this is the only way to live – otherwise you will not be living. This is the situation each moment. The parable is really very existential. This is the situation: you are the man clinging to the root of the tree, surrounded from everywhere by death, and time is running short. Any moment you will drop into death and disappear. Now what to do? Worry about the past? Worry about the future? Worry about death? Worry about time? Or enjoy this moment?
“Think not of the morrow” means to let this moment become a drop of sweet honey on your tongue. Even though death is always there, life is beautiful. Even though the past was not very good, and who knows about the future – it may not be very good. As things are, it is hopeless to hope – but this moment is beautiful. Look at this moment. Let me become a drop of honey on your tongue. This moment is tremendously beautiful. What is missing? What is lacking?
If you can be in this moment – that is the meaning of the Taoist expression: Hua-tzu lost his memory.
His family were troubled about it and invited a diviner to tell his fortune, but without success. They invited a shaman to perform an auspicious rite, but it made no difference. They invited a doctor to treat him, but it did no good.
Now that is beautiful – and meaningful. It was not a disease so no doctor could cure it. Had it been a disease then the doctor could have cured it. It was not anything physical. The man was perfectly healthy.
In fact, he had never been healthier than he must have been at that time. When you forget about your past you forget all about your illnesses also. The past is a reservoir of all illnesses. When you forget the past you are neither young nor old, you simply are. And that is the moment of being healthy and whole.
The man must have been very healthy so what could doctors do? The family called the doctors but they could not treat him. It was not a disease. A disease could have been treated, but this was not a disease.
The family asked a diviner to tell his fortune but without success because a man who has no memory has no imagination for the future. And a man who has no imagination for the future is unpredictable. You cannot predict anything about him. He is just open. Ordinarily men are predictable because they have a certain projection into the future, some idea about the future, a seed for the future. That seed will one day sprout.
That’s how the diviners, the palmists, the fortune-tellers live: they live on your imagination. If you go to a fortune-teller, he will look at your hand and he will say, “There is a great possibility that money will come – but it will not stay.” It can be said about anybody except for a man like me, you cannot say it! But it can be said about anybody – money will come. Everybody is hoping for it, so who is going to deny that it will come? That’s why he has come to the fortune-teller – for his ideas to be approved, to be confirmed. Money will come, but he will not be able to keep it. Who has ever been able to keep money? Money comes and goes.
In fact, money exists only in its coming and going. If you are able to keep it, it is no longer money. You can keep a thousand notes in your house, you can hoard it underground, but it is no longer money. You could have kept stones there; it would have been just the same. Money exists only in its coming and going. When somebody gives you a hundred-rupee note, when the note changes hands, then it is money. Just for a moment it is money – when it changes hands. Then the other man is getting something out of it and you are getting something out of it. When you give it to somebody else, again it will be money. That’s why notes are called currency. Currency means movement. They should move. The more they move, the more money there is.
That’s why there is more money in America and less in India. There is so much movement. Everybody is just spending – spending what they have and spending even that which they hope they will have one day. People are purchasing cars and fridges and everything on credit. Someday they hope they will have the money and then they will pay. But they are purchasing right now. There is money in America because people have come to know that money exists in its movement. Let the money change hands. The more it changes hands, the richer and richer and richer the country becomes.
Let a one hundred-rupee note circulate here. If we are five hundred people and a one hundred-rupee note changes hands, it becomes five hundred notes of one hundred-rupees. Each time it comes to one person he will have one hundred rupees. But let one person keep the note and then this group will be poor. Then only one person has a hundred-rupee note. If it had changed hands and moved, then everybody would have enjoyed a hundred rupees. Of course, there would have been much wealth.
But these predictions are possible only about people who have an idea of a future.
There is a story…

When Buddha became enlightened, he was going along the bank of a river and an astrologer passed who was coming from Varanasi. He had become a great scholar of astrology and was coming home with all the degrees and diplomas that were available in those days. And suddenly he saw the footprints of Buddha in the sand. He could not believe his eyes because in his books it was said that such a footprint is only of a man who had conquered the whole world, a chakravatin, one who is the emperor of the whole world, of all the seven continents. But why should an emperor of all the seven continents come on a hot afternoon to walk by this poor river? And walk on the hot sand without shoes? Impossible!
He became very puzzled. He was fresh from Varanasi and it seemed that this first encounter was undoing all his learning. Was his science wrong? What had happened? Why should the emperor come here?
So he followed the footprints. Buddha was sitting under a tree. Looking at Buddha he became even more puzzled. A beggar! And his puzzlement was even greater because he looked like an emperor – his face, the grace, the peace. He had seen emperors; in fact, nobody had looked more emperor-like than this man. But his clothes, and the way he was sitting under the tree, and not even a servant around…?
He went to Buddha and he said, “Sir, this is a very decisive thing for me. Allow me to disturb you. Please tell me one single thing because my whole life will depend on it. I am carrying all these books; I am coming from Varanasi. Twenty years I have wasted studying astrology, and here you are sitting and disturbing all my knowledge. So either you tell me that astrology is useless so that I can throw these books into the river and go back home and forget all about it or tell me what has happened. These footprints are the footprints of a chakravatin, the emperor who rules the whole world, the greatest emperor, one who is the ruler of all seven continents. All the indications are here. But what are you doing here?”
Buddha laughed and said, “You need not throw away your books, you can take them home. You will not come across a man like me again very easily. Don’t be disturbed. The people that you will meet, you will be able to predict. But it is true: about me, you cannot predict anything because I have gone beyond mind. All predictions are below the mind. People who live in the mind are predictable.”

This is significant. People who live below the mind are predictable. People who live in the mind are predictable because they are all mechanical. You can say what they will do tomorrow because they will repeat themselves. Nothing new is going to happen. They will simply repeat their past. But a man who has gone beyond mind is unpredictable because he will never repeat anything. So you cannot use any clue from his past to predict his actions.
The diviners failed. They could not say anything about Hua-tzu. And the shaman was called but he also could not do anything. The shaman can only do one thing: he can pray. He can do certain rituals to help. But a man who has gone beyond mind needs no prayer; no prayer will be of any help to him. In fact, prayer means asking God to do something, naturally asking God to do something for you. A man who has gone beyond mind has become part of God – there is nobody to pray and nobody to be prayed to. Who is there to ask? Only God is.
No, these auspicious rites and rituals were of no help so nobody could help.
There was a Confucian of Lu who, acting as his own go-between, claimed that he could cure it. Hua-tzu’s wife and children offered half of their property in return for his skill.
Confucians are the first behaviorists of the world. Pavlov and B. F. Skinner are nothing but their disciples. Confucius says that a man’s behavior can be changed, manipulated, through punishment and reward. That is the whole technique that has been used down the ages by the moralists. You reward the child if he follows your idea; you punish him if he goes against you. Through punishment and reward by and by you condition his mind.
All minds are conditioned – and what Maoists are doing in China today is very ancient there. Confucius taught it very well. The idea must be understood: that a man can be manipulated if you torture him or you reward him. Through greed and fear a man can be manipulated. That’s what you have been doing to your children; that’s what has been done to you by your parents and by your society.
What are you doing to criminals in your prisons? Torturing them; trying to condition their minds. Why does the priest go on talking about hell and heaven? What is the idea of hell and heaven? It is just the simple idea of punishment and reward. If you follow the priest you will be rewarded in heaven; if you don’t follow the priest you will be punished in hell. And they have painted hell in such colors that anybody will become afraid, anybody will start trembling. Then one starts holding on to oneself, repressing oneself.
This Confucian said he could cure Hua-tzu. First of all, the man was not ill, so to say that he could be cured is stupid. The same stupidity continues, even now. There are many people in Western countries who are not mad but who are being cured by psychologists. They are not mad; in fact, they have gone a little higher than ordinary man. They are what Sufis call mastas, those who have become mast, or drunk with God. But they are being treated. And what is their treatment? Electroshock, beating, torturing in a thousand and one ways. Electroshock treatment is a torture – the latest invention to torture man. These people are put into asylums and forced to live a very routine life.
Many of them are farther ahead than ordinary humanity; many of them have achieved a better consciousness. But naturally they have fallen separate from ordinary humanity.
The normal seems to be the rule; the normal seems to be the healthy person. The normal is not the norm, remember, the normal simply means the crowd, the mob, the mass. The mass is not healthy and the mass is not in any way sane; in fact, no individual has ever been as insane as the behavior of masses prove. Masses are more insane. No Hindu is as insane as the Hindu society. No Moslem is as insane as the Moslem society. The Moslem mob can go and burn a temple and kill Hindus, but ask each individual of that crowd and you will not find any individual who is so insane. Every individual will say that somehow it happened. He was just there, and he somehow joined in with the crowd: “It was not good.” Ask each individual and you will be told, “It was not good.” But the crowd did it. The crowd has always been insane. Wars, conflicts between religions and nations – these are all just crowd minds.
The crowd mind is insane. The psychologists and the psychiatrists and the psychoanalysts try to adjust the person if he goes a little beyond society. If Freud had been available, Hua-tzu would have been psychoanalyzed. If Skinner had been there, he would have been reconditioned. That’s what this Confucian said.
The Confucian told them, “This is clearly not a disease which can be divined by hexagrams and omens, or charmed away by auspicious prayers, or treated by medicine and the needle. I shall try reforming his mind, changing his thoughts. There is a good chance that he will recover.”
He said that he would recondition, re-form, he would recondition his mind. How do you recondition a mind? You start torturing the body. When the body is tortured, the consciousness that was flying beyond has to come down to look after the body, naturally. You exist in the body; the body is your vehicle. If your body is harmed, you naturally cannot fly very high, you have to come back to protect your body. That’s the way to recondition. And that’s what he did.
Then the Confucian tried stripping Hua-tzu…
It may have been winter and he stripped Hua-tzu naked; naturally, when he started shivering, his mind would suddenly come back: “You are shivering, Hua-tzu. Find your clothes.” And he would start looking for his clothes.
…and he looked for his clothes, tried starving him, and he looked for food, tried shutting him up in the dark, and he looked for light.
His consciousness was flowing higher than the mind. If you torture the body, the consciousness has to come back to the body. Have you noticed it? If a small thorn enters your foot, your consciousness will go there. A small thorn in your foot, and your consciousness has to go there, it is a safety measure. Otherwise the thorn will become poisonous, will become septic. It is part of your life-survival mechanism that consciousness has to go there and look after it and take the thorn out. When the thorn is there you forget everything else.
Haven’t you noticed it? If your teeth hurt you forget everything else. Then your whole consciousness gathers around your teeth. That pain must be tackled first. When you have a headache then everything else is forgotten. Somebody may be playing beautiful music, but you cannot hear it. Somebody may be dancing, but you cannot look at it. There may be beauty all around, but how can you look at the beauty? You are not free. Your headache is pulling you down into the body.
This is what the Confucian follower did. He starved the man, stripped him naked, put him in the dark – naturally he started looking for light, looking for warmth, for clothes, for food.
The Confucian was delighted and told the man’s sons:

“The sickness is curable, but my arts have been passed down secretly through generations and are not disclosed to outsiders – so I shall shut out his attendants and stay alone with him in his room for seven days.”

They agreed…
The art is not much of a secret. The art is simply to threaten the man with death – either to beat him or to jump on his chest with a spear. So the man is threatened with death. In that moment he has to come back to his body. When one comes to one’s body, the mind starts functioning again because mind is part of the body. The mind is a subtle mechanism of the body.
This man, Hua-tzu, had lost his contact with his mind but the mind was there – the mind is always there. Even when a person goes beyond mind, the mind remains there, dormant, sleepy, in the body. If you are pulled back into the body, the mind is stirred again and starts functioning.
They agreed, and no one knew what methods the Confucian used, but the sickness of many years was completely dispelled in a single morning.

When Hua-tzu woke up he was very angry.
In fact, he was awake all this time, but now he has fallen asleep. But to the Confucian mind, or to the ordinary mind of humanity, it seems as if he woke up, as if he had fallen asleep. When Hua-tzu woke up he was very angry. Naturally, what is sleep to us was not sleep to him.
It used to happen in Ramakrishna’s case. Singing the song of Kali, dancing before Kali, many times he would fall and become unconscious. He would be unconscious to us, but to himself he would be superbly conscious. From the outside it looked like he was in a coma. If you had asked psychoanalysts, they would have said this was hysteria, a hysterical fit.
If you ask the psychiatrist about Ramakrishna, he will prove that he was neurotic. They did the same to Jesus, so they would not leave Ramakrishna alone. Jesus was neurotic, they say. Ramakrishna would have been even more neurotic to them. Sometimes for six days he would remain unconscious – unconscious to us. Let me remind you again and again: to himself he was superbly conscious. In fact, he was so conscious within himself that his whole consciousness was involved there; all consciousness was taken from the outside to the inside, it came to the center. That’s why on the outside he appeared unconscious.
You are conscious on the outside because inside you are unconscious. In the deepest core of your being you are fast asleep and snoring; that’s why you look so awake on the outside. Things change. When a man like Ramakrishna moves into his core from the outside, he falls asleep on the outside and inside he becomes awake. To us it would seem that he has forgotten all; to him it seems he has remembered all.
When Hua-tzu woke up he was very angry. The same used to happen to Ramakrishna. People would try to bring him back. Naturally the disciples would become very afraid – would he come back or not? And they would massage his feet with ghee and camphor, and they would massage his head and his whole body and they would try to bring him back somehow. Sometimes the disciples would even do something which looks ugly and cruel. They would suffocate him by closing his nose because when the body is suffocated and a great need for air arises, the consciousness has to come back.
Or sometimes they would burn very bitter things around him and the smoke would get into his nose and he would suffer terribly. He would start moving, moaning, and then he would come back. And these were disciples, not enemies. Sometimes you can do harm even while thinking you are doing good.
When he came back he would start crying and the disciples would ask, “Why are you crying?” He would say, “What have you done? Why have you brought me back? I was so tremendously happy inside. I was in a totally different world. I was in the world of God. God was very much present. I was showered by bliss. Why have you brought me back? Let me go again.”
When Hua-tzu woke up he was very angry. Naturally. Obviously.
He dismissed his wife, punished his sons, and chased away the Confucian with a spear.
Maybe that was the same spear that the Confucian had used to threaten him to death.
The authorities of Sung arrested him and wanted to know the reason.

“Formerly, when I forgot,” said Hua-tzu, “I was boundless; I did not notice whether heaven and earth existed or not. Now suddenly I remember, and all the disasters and recoveries, gains and losses, joys and sorrows, loves and hates of twenty or thirty years past rise up in a thousand tangled threads. I fear that all the disasters and recoveries, gains and losses, joys and sorrows, loves and hates still to come will confound my heart just as much. Shall I never again find a moment of forgetfulness?”
What you think of as remembering is forgetfulness for a man who has arrived home. What to you looks like forgetfulness is really remembering for a man who has awakened to his soul. Remember this paradox.
The languages are different. You are asleep but you think this is waking, you think this is a state of awareness. You are mistaken. Therefore, when a person becomes really aware, it seems to you that he has fallen asleep. You are so self-conscious that when a person loses his self and really becomes conscious you think he has gone mad. It appears as if he is ill. He has become whole, he has become healthy.
Hua-tzu said, “I was boundless formerly, when I forgot. There was no boundary to me; there was no definition to me. I was all, I was whole, I was one with the universe, nothing separated me. I was in a tremendous unity – unio mystica – there was oneness. And it was beautiful, it was a benediction. Now suddenly I remember; and all the disasters and recoveries, gains and losses, joys and sorrows, loves and hates of twenty or thirty years past rise up in a thousand tangled threads. Now I am back to madness. All of my past is again opening its doors. It is a nightmare.”
Now he has tasted a few moments of forgetfulness, or self-remembering. Now he is in a state of mind to compare, that’s why he is angry. You cannot compare because you have not experienced anything beyond the past, beyond memory, beyond mind. You have never tasted anything, not a single drop, of no-mind. That’s why you cannot compare.
This will happen one day if you continue meditating. One day suddenly you will see that you have taken off from the mind. The airport of the mind is left far behind, and you are soaring high in the sky. Then for the first time you will say, “How beautiful life is. How beautiful existence is.” You will feel tremendously grateful. Then to come down back to the mind you will feel as if you are coming back into the madhouse. Memory is a madhouse.
Everything is rising up: “…in a thousand tangled threads. I fear that all the disasters and recoveries, gains and losses, joys and sorrows, loves and hates still to come will confound my heart just as much.” This is past and now the future is coming and he will be burdened more and more because the past will grow every day.
“Shall I never again find a moment of forgetfulness?” In that forgetfulness you come home. In that forgetfulness you remember. In that forgetfulness you become aware for the first time. In that forgetfulness you are in the present, herenow. You enter eternity. That forgetfulness is the door to eternity.
Kabir said, “When I was, God was not. Now I am not and God is.” Kabir said, “When I used to think, I used to miss. Now I have forgotten how to think and all is available. First I used to seek and there was only frustration and frustration, now I am no longer there to seek and he is there seeking for me. I have forgotten all, and in that very forgetfulness I have remembered.”
To forget means to forget the world, to forget means to forget the non-essential, to forget means to forget the dust and remember the mirror, remember consciousness.
The mind is continuously fabricating, imagining. The mind is a liar; it goes on lying to you. The lie is that it gives you something which is not real, something which looks as if it is real but is not real. Are you not fed up with it? A man becomes religious when he is fed up with the mind.
Listen to this small anecdote:

“Why should I buy that mutt for twenty bucks?” the TV producer asked the agent.
“Because he is a talking dog,” said the agent.
“Listen, I’m sick and tired of that talking-dog routine,” said the producer. “Take the mutt and get lost.”
Suddenly the dog jumped up onto the producer’s desk. “Please, sir, I know I don’t look like the most attractive dog in the world, but it’s not my fault. My present master never feeds me. He’s a cheap, conniving, dishonest agent. He has made a fortune booking me into the largest theaters and concert halls in the world. I have entertained kings and noblemen, presidents and premiers. I assure you that if you buy me I’ll make you half a million the very first year.”
The producer was amazed at the dog’s fluency, his power of speech, his intense projection.
“This dog talks like a Harvard graduate,” he said. “Why do you want to sell him to me for twenty dollars? Have you gone mad?”
“Because,” said the agent, “I’m fed up with his constant lying.”

The mind is a lying mechanism. It never allows you to see the truth. Either it is lying about the past or it is lying about the future. And remember, whatsoever you memorize about the past, it is not true. It is touched up; it has been created again and again by the mind. Much is dropped, much is added and the mind goes on touching it up every day. You can never be certain with the mind – it is a lying mechanism.
When a person is really fed up with this mechanism then the turn, the conversion, the quantum leap, becomes possible. This parable is about the mind and how, because of the mind, we have forgotten godliness, we have forgotten Tao. This parable says that unless you get out of the mind you will never be able to know the truth. If you want to know the truth there is no other way than to get out of the mind. That’s what meditation is all about – how to get out of the mind, how not to allow the mind to constantly interfere with reality.
This is a great parable. Ordinarily the so-called religions are nothing but moralities. They condition your mind. Tao is a process of unconditioning. Ordinary religions hypnotize your mind; Tao is a process of de-hypnosis. One simply peels the mind away, just as you peel an onion, and you find layer upon layer, layer upon layer. Go on peeling, go on peeling, and a moment comes when nothing is left in your hand. That nothing is what Tao is. That nothing is all, what Buddha calls shunya, that nothingness, that emptiness.
That emptiness is the source of all. Once you have touched, lived, been in that emptiness, only then will you know how much you were missing. For the first time you will become aware that you were asleep for centuries, for lives together. Right now you are asleep.
Gurdjieff used to say to his disciples that they were somnambulists – moving, walking, talking in sleep. The first thing to do is not about morality but how to shock you into awareness. Gurdjieff’s greatest disciple was P. D. Ouspensky. P. D. Ouspensky dedicated his book In Search of the Miraculous to his master with these words: “To Gurdjieff, to my master, who has disturbed my sleep forever.”
Yes, the master is there to disturb your sleep. Your sleep is nothing but the mind; mind is another name for your sleep. This is the distinction between Confucian thought and Lao Tzuan thought. Confucius is an ordinary moralist, a puritan, one who believes in conditioning people, in disciplining people. Lao Tzu is a rebellious man who believes in taking people beyond all conditionings – unconditioning people. Only in freedom is godliness possible, only in utter freedom is truth possible.
Seek this utter freedom. Destroy conditionings. Destroy, by and by, all the layers that hold you down. Take off. The whole sky is yours – in fact, not even the sky is limiting.
Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
You have talked much on love, relationship, union, etc. Is there a merging between the Tao and Tantra?
Tantra means technique, and Tao can have no relationship with any technique whatsoever. Tao is non-methodological, non-technical. Tao means spontaneity. How can spontaneity have a technique? You cannot practice it; if you practice it, you miss it. There is no way to cultivate it; cultivated spontaneity could be anything else but it could not be spontaneity.
Tao means a let-go. Wherever your energy moves, allow it to move. Don’t swim – float with the river. Swimming is a technique, but if you are just flowing with the river, what technique is needed? Technique means that you have a direction, you want to reach somewhere. Technique means that you want to impose your will on reality, you want to be someone, somewhere, in some state; you have a desire, you have a projection.
Tao says you are already there, you are already that. There is nowhere to go and nothing else to be, so just relax and let things happen. Whatsoever happens is good. There is no denial in Tao, no rejection, no repression. It is the greatest rebellious attitude possible. Never has man’s intelligence risen higher than in Tao. But there is no way to it. You cannot be guided to it.
Buddha has talked about five ways to reach truth. The first he calls the way of sheela, the way of morality, character, virtue. The second he calls the way of knowledge. The third he calls the way of dhyana, meditation; the fourth he calls the way of devotion; and the fifth he calls ashiksheya, that which cannot be taught.
That fifth way is Tao. It cannot be taught. Yes, it can be learned but it cannot be taught. And when I say that it can be learned, I mean that if you relax, if you allow life to happen to you, if you don’t create a barrier, if you are ready to go wherever it leads, you will learn it. It is the most dangerous path because you will not be in control. Your mind cannot manipulate; your mind cannot prepare in any way. You will have to live moment to moment – as the trees live, as the stars live, as the mountains live. You will have to live in the same way, the same natural way. Tao is nature.
So the Indian Tantra cannot have any merger with Tao. The Indian Tantra is very scientific. It is the science of how to transform sexual energy into spiritual energy; how to create the dynamo that changes, transforms, transmutes energy; how to move from the lower to the higher; how to go from earth to heaven. It is a way from sex to super-consciousness. It is very technological.
Tao has no technique – this is the first thing to be understood. But there is another thing of great importance: that is, Tao has its own Tantra. But it is not a technique.
There is no meeting possible between the Indian Tantra and the Chinese Tao, no meeting is possible. They are far apart, poles apart, and it is impossible to mix them. If somebody tries to mix them, Tao will be destroyed; Tantra will not be destroyed. Always remember whenever you mix a higher viewpoint with a lower, the higher is destroyed; the lower is not destroyed. It is always the higher that loses because the higher is delicate, the higher is very, very vulnerable, fragile, like a flower. If you crush a flower with a rock, the rock is not going to be destroyed. The rock may not even know that there has been a clash. But the flower will be gone – crushed, destroyed. Tao is the highest possibility and Tantra can destroy it. So remember not to mix them.
But Tao has its own Tantra because Tao is a total world view. It has everything that is possible. It is the world. So there is something in it for love, for sex. What is Taoist Tantra? I have to use the word Tantra, remember, but I am not using it in the Indian sense. What is Taoist Tantra? It is spontaneity in sexuality; it is spontaneity in love.
For example, if you read a Tantra manual, an Indian Tantra manual, there is great ritual in it. Every step is very clearly indicated. It is not easy to practice Indian Tantra – you have to become adept at it. Don’t fool around. Don’t think that while you are making love to a woman you are practicing Tantra. Tantra is difficult. It is a long process. And it takes years to get trained in it.
The greatest training that is involved and the most difficult problem that arises is that Tantra allows a man to make love to a woman only when he has lost all sexual attraction toward her. There is no sexual attraction at all. That is the whole process. The woman becomes almost a mother to you, or a sister to you – a goddess. She must be worshipped. In tantric ritual the woman must be worshipped like a goddess. And for months together one has to practice that worship.
The woman sits naked in front of you on a throne and you worship and you bow down and you pray to her. And you create the idea in your deepest core of consciousness that she is just a representative of all womanhood, motherhood. She is a goddess.
One day, slowly, slowly, you lose all sexual interest in her. You become auto-hypnotized with your own idea. The day you lose all sexual interest in her body and you can look through and though her, and her body is no longer a thrill, her body is not even seen at all, she becomes luminous, she is just a presence, only then does the master allow you to make love to her. Now love will have a totally different quality. There is no sex involved in it, no attraction involved in it, no physicality involved in it. It is absolutely spiritual – a meeting of two souls.
But that is a long process. Many rituals, many prayers, many yantras, many meditations are needed. After years of training you come to the point where the woman is no longer a woman to you, she has almost become a mother – “motherhoodness” has arisen. You have projected that motherhoodness on her. You see her breasts but they no longer provoke any sexuality in you, just the idea of a mother. You see her body and you start feeling that you are part of her body, just as you were part of your mother. It is recreating the mother, and it is a long process. Tantra is very procedural, ritualistic, and a great experiment in hypnosis, auto-hypnosis.
It is a great experiment in getting rid of the idea of sex. It is not sexual at all, as it is commonly understood. It is a totally different attitude, not sexual at all. It is very prayerful. When you make love to a woman after you have become an adept in Tantra, the master allows you; and it has to depend on the master’s agreement, it does not depend on you. The master sees in your eyes that all lust has disappeared, that your body has become almost asexual; he sees that now you are standing before the woman as a small child, unaware of sexuality – you are naked, she is naked but you are not at all interested in sexuality. When the master confirms it, when he gives you a signal, then you are allowed to have intercourse. It depends on the master. He has to watch, watch carefully. It takes months, sometimes years, to prepare for it.
Tao has its own Tantra. First of all: Tao never divides into lower and higher, that is the beauty of it. The moment you divide reality into lower and higher you are becoming schizophrenic. The moment you say something is sacred and something is profane you have divided. The moment you say something is material and something is spiritual, you have divided, split reality. Reality is one. There is neither matter nor spirit. Reality is one. It expresses itself in many forms – on one level as matter, on another level as spiritual. The spiritual is not higher and the material is not lower – they stand on the same level. That is the Taoist attitude. Life is one. Existence is one. It is a tremendous oneness and there is no valuation.
The first thing in Tao is to drop duality. Sex is not lower, and samadhi is not higher. Samadhi and sex are both expressions of the same energy. There is nothing laudable about samadhi and there is nothing condemnable about sex. Tao acceptance is total, absolute. There is nothing wrong with the body and there is nothing beautiful in the spirit – they are both beautiful. The Devil and God are one in Tao, heaven and hell are one in Tao, good and bad are one in Tao; it is the greatest non-dual understanding. There is no condemnation and no preparation. Prepare for what? One has simply to relax and be.
If you can love a woman spontaneously… In fact, Tao will say that Tantra has a wrong attitude in this way because you have to prepare for it. Preparation means that you are preparing for the future. Tao knows only one time – which is now; and only one place – which is here. Now is the only time, and here is the only place. Here is heaven and now is nirvana. So don’t prepare.
If in some moment love flows, love takes possession of you, go with it. Don’t push the river. Don’t try to give it any shape. Don’t try to fix it into any ritual. Just go with it. In deep trust, in deep gratitude, go with it. While making love to a woman don’t try to prove anything – as people try to do in the West. Don’t try to prove anything because when you start trying to prove something, your mind comes in. While you are making love to a woman forget that you are a man and she is a woman. Let boundaries merge and mix. Don’t remain a man; otherwise you will miss because again a dualism comes in: you are the man and she is the woman. Nobody really knows why two people make love. Many times it happens that the man becomes the woman and the woman becomes the man. Why bother who is who?
If you are thinking about it, then the mind is there and the mind is a barrier; it does not allow the unison to happen totally. So Tao says, simply go spontaneously, with no ritual, with no idea to prove. And remember, never use sexuality for anything. Tantra uses it as a step toward samadhi. Tao says, never use anything as a means. Everything is an end in itself. The moment you start thinking of somewhere to go, something to reach, some result to attain, you are not total – you are divided, your mind is already in the future. There are no means and no ends. Everything simply is an intrinsically beautiful an end unto itself.
In Tao this is very basic. Love, eat, go for a morning walk, swim in the river, sit in the sun, watch the stars, but let everything be simple, not for anything else. Sing a song, but not for any result. Look at the trees, but not for any result. Go for a morning walk, but not for health. Don’t be a naturopath! Just go for a walk; it is beautiful. Health is a by-product; you need not worry about it – it happens. Lie down in the sun, enjoy it; not for anything else. Lie there for its own sake. That is what Tao is.
In that relaxed attitude life starts pouring into you from everywhere. All doors open, all windows open. Existence flows into you, you flow into existence.
Tao is very simple; and hence very difficult because we are very complex people. Simple things don’t appeal to us. Tantra appeals to many people; Tao does not have that much appeal. Tao appeals very rarely. If Tao appeals to you, consider yourself fortunate. The very possibility of your getting interested in Tao is a great blessing.
Translate everything into terms of Tao and it becomes spontaneity.

The second question:
Osho,
Can you summarize your teaching in short because I am here only for a day or two.
It is impossible. In the first place I have no teaching to summarize. I am not a teacher; I am a presence. I have no catechism. I cannot give you ten commandments – do this, don’t do that.
Whatsoever I say today, I may contradict tomorrow because my commitment is to this moment. Whatsoever I said yesterday, I am no longer committed to. The moment I said it I became free of it. Now I don’t bother about it, I don’t look at it again. Whatsoever I am saying to you right now is true this very moment; tomorrow I will not be committed to it. Whatsoever tomorrow brings, I will say it. Whatsoever today has brought I am telling you now. And if they are contradictory, who am I to make them consistent? I don’t make any effort on my own.
My commitment is to the moment. I am never committed to the past. I am like a river: where I will be tomorrow nobody knows, not even I myself. You will be surprised; I will also be surprised.
The question must be from someone who comes from the country I call “Acirema” – it is America in reverse. America is topsy-turvy. Everything has gone chaotic. People are in such a hurry that they have forgotten that there are a few things which you cannot get in a hurry about, for which patience is a must.
Truth you cannot get in a hurry. Patience is a basic condition for it. It is not like instant coffee and it does not come packed in tins. It does not come ready-made. Truth is not a commodity that somebody can give you. It grows in you.
That’s what I mean: I am a presence, I am not a teacher. If you are here, something may grow in you. I say may because it depends on you. I am here. If you are ready to receive me, something will start growing in you. It is like a child becoming a young man. Yes, truth is like that. The false personality drops and a true being arrives. It is a child becoming a young man, a young man becoming an old man. There is no way to hurry the process. You cannot make a child grow up fast in one night, in a day or two. It will take time. And it is good that it takes time because only through time do things become seasoned.
But in America there is a hurry, a mad hurry.
I have heard…

An American bride and a French bride were discussing love. “A Frenchman is very subtle when it comes to love,” the French girl explained. “He begins by kissing the fingertips, then he kisses the shoulder, then the back of the neck…”
“Boy!” the little American bride interrupted. “By that time an American husband is back from his honeymoon!”

In America things have gone crazy. Everything must be done with speed, and fast. Speed seems to be the only value. It has never been a value anywhere else before, it had to wait for America to be discovered to become a value. Speed has become a value. If you are doing something fast, it is good – nobody bothers about what it is or why you are doing it. If you are doing it fast, perfectly good. If you are driving fast, nobody cares where you are going. You may not be going anywhere in particular but if you are going fast, everybody is happy. You may be going directly into death but everybody is happy – going so fast! Beautiful!
No, I cannot do that, I cannot summarize. I have no teaching. And even if I had a teaching, I would not summarize it because the more you summarize something, the less alive it becomes. Love is vast, life is vast; law is limited. Law can be summarized; love cannot be summarized. Law is defined but life is excessive. You cannot summarize life, there cannot be a synopsis of life. You can summarize law. I am life. There is no way to summarize me. And I am still alive so whatsoever you summarize I will destroy tomorrow.
I have heard…

A Hollywood producer studied the large script submitted by a new writer and complained, “It’s much too long. Just give me a synopsis.”
The next day the writer returned with a five-page synopsis.
“It’s still too long,” insisted the producer. “I’m a busy man. Just give me a digest of this.”
An hour later the writer returned with a sheet of paper on which was written: hero is a lieutenant; heroine is married to his colonel. Madly in love with each other. Commit suicide.
“It’s no good,” said the producer. “It’s Anna Karenina word for word!”

When you summarize, by and by things become absurd.
Never summarize anything that is alive. I am still alive. When I am gone and dead then people will summarize my words. And I am going to give them a hell of a lot of trouble. It will not be an easy thing. They will go nuts. It will be impossible to put me into a synopsis.
It has always been so. You cannot summarize Buddha. Because of summaries many schools were born. Buddha died, then the question arose. People wanted to summarize. For forty years the man had been teaching – morning, afternoon, evening – for forty years. He had talked a lot, he had said many things, and now the master was gone and he had to be summarized.
A great assembly was called. Five hundred of the oldest disciples gathered together and they started reciting whatsoever they had heard the master say. There were many contradictions. One said something and somebody contradicted him, saying, “I heard him say exactly the opposite.” Then there was great debate, discussion – and splits. Thirty-six schools were born out of summarization, and those thirty-six have by now become three hundred and sixty.
When there is a man like Buddha, he is talking to different people in a different way because everyone’s need is different.
Truth is not something like a commodity. When you come to me, if you really want to know what my truth is, you will have to be here. I can express my truth to you only when I have come to know your truth too. When I have come to know you and you have come to know me, in that meeting will be the glimpse. It cannot be given to you. You will have to receive it and you will have to prepare for it. You will have to become a very relaxed being. You will have to be able to soak me up and allow me to sink deep into your heart.
No, I cannot supply a catechism as Christians do. That is not possible. And it would not be of any use to you.

Recovering from a severe operation, the man believed that the doctors were withholding from him his proper share of food. All he got each mealtime was a teaspoon of custard.
“Is that all I get?” he asked the nurse.
“That’s all for a while,” she answered.
He swallowed it with a good deal of grumbling.
“Nurse,” said the patient later, “bring me a postage stamp. I want to do a little reading.”

Summarized, it will be a postage stamp. It will not help. It will not be enough to read. If you want to read, read me. Don’t bother with summaries. Time will be needed because it is a love relationship between the master and the disciple. It needs time to grow, to become intimate. Only in deep intimacy can something be revealed, can be transferred. It is a transfer of energy, not of words.
So please, if you are going in a day or two, you can go, you are free. But don’t carry any idea about what I am teaching here because that will not be understanding; or, even worse, it will be a misunderstanding. If you have heard me say something, forget it, because in a day or two you could not have heard anything significant. And whatsoever you feel you have heard will be very non-essential.
It happened…

In the Amsterdam National Museum an elderly couple came to see Rembrandt’s masterpiece The Nightwatch. When, after a long walk through the many corridors, they finally reached the famous painting, the usher overheard the man say to his wife, “Look, what a beautiful frame!”

The frame may have been beautiful, but can you see that something is missing in the admiration? Something essential is lost. I am not saying that the frame was not beautiful, the frame may have been the most beautiful frame in the world, but to go to see Rembrandt’s masterpiece The Nightwatch and then to talk about the frame is absurd. Even to see the frame is foolish, stupid. The painting is not the frame. The frame has nothing to do with the painting.
What I am saying is just a frame, what I am is the painting. Look at the masterpiece and don’t be bothered with the frame.

The third question:
Osho,
Can the master really save the disciple?
Certainly, absolutely. If the disciple is really a disciple he is already saved. It is not that first you have to be a disciple and then you will be saved. In your very being a disciple you are saved, in your very surrender you are saved. It is not that the master will save you afterward because you are a disciple – just by being a disciple you are saved. In that very surrender you have dropped the ego. That ego was the barrier; that ego was hindering the path. When the barrier disappears you are saved.
In fact, you have always been saved. You were carrying an unnecessary load and because of that load you could not fly into the sky. Now you can fly. The master is just an excuse. It is difficult for you to drop your ego without a master because you need some excuse. Otherwise how can you drop it? Where will you drop it? At whose feet can you drop it? The master is just an excuse.
You fall in love with a man. A man like Jesus, or a man like Buddha naturally attracts thousands of people, seekers, who fall in love. And the man is so tremendously beautiful that you would like to surrender all to him. That is just an excuse. Once you have surrendered you will know that you are not saved by anyone else; you are saved by your surrender. But it will be known only when you have surrendered, not before. To become a disciple is to be saved.
You ask: “Can the master really save the disciple?” It is very simple. There is nothing to fuss about. Sometimes it has even happened that a disciple has saved the master because, in fact, it is love that saves. Sometimes it has happened that the master was not really a master, but was a charismatic man, a man of great magnetism, and was not himself enlightened. Somebody surrendered to him and through surrender became enlightened. Many times it has happened that the disciple became enlightened before the master. You will be surprised because you think that you can only become enlightened through an enlightened master. All rubbish! You become enlightened through surrender. Even if you have surrendered to somebody who is just a pseudo-master, who simply pretends that he is a master, if your surrender is total you are saved. It has happened sometimes that the master was saved by the disciple when the disciple became enlightened.
Let me tell you one beautiful Hasidic parable:

Elisha Ben Abuya was a great religious scholar. But he was just a scholar. He attracted many people, many talented people. His name was known all over Israel. Many people came and surrendered to him. But he was just a scholar, a pundit, he was not a real master. He knew about God but he had never encountered God. It happened that late in his life he turned a skeptic and became rebellious – became irreligious, turned against God. He was a great logician and well versed in scriptures; it was very difficult to defeat him. When he started talking against God he was as impressive as when he was talking for God. He was a real intellectual.
His chief disciple Rabbi Meir tried many times to bring him back to the fold. The disciple tried to bring him back to the fold. Rabbi Meir, who was Elisha Ben Abuya’s disciple, had become enlightened.
The disciple tried many times to bring Elisha Ben Abuya back to the fold, but the old man was really a logician and it was impossible to argue with him. The disciple suffered very much because he loved the man. He knew that he was not enlightened and he knew that he was not a real man of knowing. But he loved him and felt grateful because he had become enlightened through him. Whosoever he was, whatsoever he was, Rabbi Meir had become enlightened through surrendering at Elisha Ben Abuya’s feet. How could he be ungrateful?
Rabbi Meir, however, persisted in his attempt. When he heard that Elisha was dangerously ill he went to visit him.
Rabbi Meir again asked him to repent and Elisha asked, “Will he receive me now? Will God receive me now? Will he forgive me?”
“Yes,” replied Rabbi Meir. Elisha wept and died.
A few days later Rabbi Meir was told that a fire was issuing out of the grave of his master. He went there, covered it with a mantle and said, “Slumber tonight, for perchance the Lord will save you, and if not, I will save you. Sleep until morning.”

This is of tremendous beauty. He says, “Sleep tonight, for perchance the Lord will save you. And if not, I will save you. Sleep until morning.” That’s why I say it is very simple for a master to save you because sometimes even the reverse has happened – that a disciple has saved a master.
But remember, it is love that saves; it is surrender that saves. Remember that love liberates. If you can remember that love liberates, that is a mantra: love saves, love liberates. Fall in love with a master and you are saved.

The fourth question:
Osho,
Lieh Tzu devastates Confucius with few words and subtly. You have been devastating him discourse after discourse with a cannonade of words and have virtually clubbed him to death. I doubt if anyone in the ashram would defend Confucianism. Please let Confucius and me rest.
Both together? It is impossible. If you want to rest, Confucius must be killed utterly. With Confucius there is no possibility of rest.
Whatsoever I am saying or whatsoever Lieh Tzu is saying has nothing to do with the historical Confucius – remember it. I am not against that poor man, Confucius. Why should I be? He was a beautiful man in his own right.
Why am I trying to destroy Confucius so deeply? Because Confucius is part of your mind, he is a part of everybody’s mind. Confucius has ruled over humanity. You may not have even heard his name – that doesn’t matter; you may not know who he is, but deep inside, Confucius is the ruler.
In India, Manu is the ruler. He is the Indian counterpart of Confucius. All over the world there are counterparts of Confucius. Confucius is symbolic. What does he represent? He represents the legal mind, he represents the formal mind, he represents the ritual mind, he represents the conventional mind, the “straight” mind. He represents tradition.
I am destroying tradition, convention, the legal mind, the structure of the conformist. Confucius is the conformist par excellence. And you all have it in your minds.
Lao Tzu rarely enters your mind. He is rebellion. He is going beyond tradition. He is going beyond the past. He is going beyond all structures. Confucius is a structure; Lao Tzu is no-structure. Confucius is character; Lao Tzu is characterlessness, freedom. Remember it. All character is an imprisonment enforced on you by the society, enforced on you by the state, by the priest and the politician. This character that you carry around you is a cage. Lao Tzu says there is a different character which is not imposed by the society; a different discipline which is not enforced from the outside but comes from inner awareness. Only that is true. Follow only that. Follow only your own inner, small, still voice.
Confucius says, “Listen to the scripture, listen to the ancient masters, listen to tradition.” Lao Tzu says, “Listen only to your own inner voice and follow it, wherever it leads. It is God’s voice. It is Tao.”
You say: “I doubt if anyone in the ashram would defend Confucianism.” In fact, everybody is defending it. Nobody says it, but deep down you are defending it; otherwise you would all become enlightened. The moment you are not defending Confucius there is no barrier for you to becoming enlightened. You are enlightened! When Confucius is dropped you become enlightened; when Confucius goes out one door, enlightenment enters from another door.
If you are not enlightened, you must be defending Confucianism. It may not be very conscious; it may be just an unconscious habit – you have been conditioned for it. That’s why you ask me: “Please let Confucius and me rest.”
I cannot help you rest. I am here to help you rebel. Only after rebellion will real rest come. Whatsoever you now call rest is nothing but slumber, is nothing but a sort of sleep. Not all sleep is rest; in your sleep you dream of a thousand and one things and you go through many nightmares.
I would like for you to have real rest – what Jesus meant when he said to his disciples, “Come to me and I will give you rest. All those who are heavy laden, come to me. I will give you rest.” That rest is a totally different thing. It is not the rest that comes by living in a crowd with the herd, following the herd. Certainly you feel okay, but okay is just okay. No problem, no inconvenience – you live comfortably and you will die comfortably. That is not the rest I am leading you toward. Real rest means you have come into your own being – centered, grounded. You have been daring enough to assert that you are yourself, and you are no longer trying to imitate anybody else; you are not trying to become a carbon copy; you have become an authentic person, an authentic being. Then the rest comes, the real rest.
With Confucius that is not possible. With Confucius you will always be in conflict – Confucius means conflict. He will always say, “This is bad and this is good. Choose the good against the bad.” Then what will you do? You will have to repress the bad and enforce the good. You will become a hypocrite. Follow Confucius and you will be a hypocrite. Follow Lao Tzu and you are not following anybody; you are following yourself. And you will become an authentic being.
To be authentic is the only rest there is.

The fifth question:
Osho,
I like to listen to your talks very much but I hate the meditations. Is it okay? Perhaps my path is that of prayer.
If you really enjoy my talks, you will enjoy the meditations too because they are interconnected. In fact, my talks are nothing but appetizers. If you enjoy the appetizer and you don’t enjoy the lunch, you are going to die sooner or later. You will die starved. The talks are just to prepare you for the meditations. If you hate the meditations then you have not heard me. Then you may think you have heard me but you have not.
Hearing me, what else is there to do? If you have heard me, you will be ready to go deep into the meditations. Whatsoever I am saying will become a real experience only when you have gone into the meditations. It will become your experience. Listening to me it will remain borrowed, listening to me you may be thrilled by the possibility of it; listening to me it is as if I am talking about the beautiful Himalayas – you listen to me and you enjoy it. But you have never been to the Himalayas and whatsoever I say is nothing compared to the beauty of the Himalayas. How can it be put into words? You will have to go.
If you are really listening to me, one day, suddenly, you will feel, “Now the time has come and I have to go for the adventure. I have to take the risk.” Meditations are a real journey. Here I simply seduce you for meditation. It is not the end, it is the beginning.
I have heard…

A movie-house usher was astonished to see a big, brown bear sitting in the front row, munching peanuts.
“Say, you!” he shouted. “You’re a bear! What are you doing in here?”
“Why, I enjoyed the book so much,” replied the bear, “I thought I’d like to see the picture.”

If you are really listening to me and enjoying it, one day you will want to see the picture too.
If it is true that you enjoy whatsoever I am saying, then how is it possible that you hate the meditations? I am not an entertainment. Maybe you are using me as an entertainment. Maybe sitting here for one and a half hours every day you forget your worries; for one and a half hours you are transported into another world, into my world. And you see beautiful things – at least you visualize, imagine them – and then you are gone. Then you become addicted to it. Every day you have to come and listen to me. Then it is just an intoxicant. It is not going to help.
I am talking about the food – just talk about food is not going to help. The menu is not the food. The talks are just the menu, then you will have to order.
It happened…

The American playboy checked into one of the most exclusive hotels in gay Paree. He told the room clerk he wanted the best room in the place.
When he reached the room he was impressed with its exquisite furniture and tasteful decor. However, he spied a number of colored buttons on the wall. “Tell me,” he asked the bellhop, “what are the buttons for?”
“Well, monsieur,” said the bellhop, “when you press the gold one, a beautiful blonde appears.”
“Go on,” said the playboy gleefully.
“When you push the red one, a redhead appears. And when you push the brown, a beautiful brunette appears.”
“Let’s forget about the room,” said the playboy. “I’ll take the buttons.”

But the buttons come with the room; just taking the buttons home won’t help – then you can go on pushing the buttons but nobody will appear.

In the memoirs of Lawrence of Arabia he writes that once he took twelve Arabs to France with him. This was the first time they had gone out of their country. There was a great exhibition in France and Lawrence had taken them to see it.
But he was very puzzled. Once they entered their bath they would not get out. They remained for hours in the bath! He thought, “It is natural. They come from a desert country where water is very scarce so they are enjoying their tub and their shower.” They jumped and danced in the bathroom and were not at all interested in the exhibition. The moment they would come back – and they were always in a hurry to come back to the hotel – they would say, “Let us go upstairs.” And they would run into the bathroom and enjoy themselves.
The last day, when everything was packed and put into the cars and they were leaving for the airport, all the Arabs suddenly disappeared. Lawrence inquired where they had gone because they were about to be late. Suddenly he remembered that maybe they were back in the bathroom. So he rushed upstairs and they were all there trying to take out the faucets.
He asked, “What are you doing?”
They said, “We thought why not take these faucets? We will enjoy them in Arabia.”

They thought that the water came out of the faucets. It was a miracle! They were not aware that there was a pipeline and a great mechanism behind it and you couldn’t just take the faucets – they would not be of any use.
What I am saying to you is just a faucet. There is a great source behind where it all comes from. Unless you go there, just listening to me is not going to help. It may be a solace, a consolation, an addiction, but it is not going to bring any revolution in your life.
You ask: “Is it okay?” It is not okay at all. You are wasting your time. If you stop listening to me and continue the meditations, that is far better than stopping the meditations and only listening to me.
Then you say: “Perhaps my path is that of prayer.” Don’t try to deceive yourself. Have you done any prayer? Have you been praying? You say perhaps; you have not even tried that. Maybe you are using the word prayer just to avoid meditation. Prayer itself is a meditation and to avoid meditation in the name of prayer will not help. These escapes are for weaklings. Don’t be a coward.
People come to me. If I gave them prayers and I told them, “Do this prayer,” they would come and say, “Osho, maybe prayer is not my path.” If prayer were given to them, they would say that prayer was not their path, that it is difficult to pray. If meditation is given they think that meditation is not their path. In fact, you don’t want to do anything; you don’t want to grow, you don’t want to be transformed.
There is a story about two ministers who were crossing one of the Scottish lakes:

This was in the days before roads and automobiles; a person got to his destination by getting into a boat and being ferried across the lake. Those lakes are sometimes treacherous. Storms can come up suddenly and within five minutes a boat can capsize and the people in it drown, even on what had been a beautiful and calm day.
The two ministers wanted to cross the lake. One was a tall, husky, six-foot countryman with muscles like a blacksmith, and the other was a small, weedy, studious townsman – the long and the short of it. They hired a boat, the old boatman got out the boat and got out the oars and they started off.
In about five minutes’ time a terrible storm came up and churned up the lake. The boat was rocking and the boatman said, “Me lads, you’ll have to help me. Grab hold of those other oars if you expect to come out of this alive.” So the two clergymen picked up the oars and began to bend their backs. It was pretty hard work, but for a few minutes they kept the boat straight into the wind.
Suddenly the storm got worse. The husky minister threw down his oars and said, “Let us pray.”
But the boatman yelled, “No, no, the little one can pray, but you keep on rowing.”

Don’t be a coward. Let the little ones pray. You take the challenge of the meditations. It is a challenge. Prayer seems to be easy because you have nothing to do; you just have to say, “God, do this, do that.” In prayer you give God work to do, and if he does not do it then he is responsible. You asked it, so what more can you do?
Meditation means to do the work yourself. And my feeling is that if you do your work to your uttermost capacity only then does God start working on you – never before it. Unless you help yourself, no help ever comes from God.
If you understand my approach… When your meditations succeed, only then can prayer start. Never before. When you have done all that you can do, when you have not saved anything, when you have put yourself totally at stake and you feel that nothing is happening, then you are entitled to ask the sky, “Now help me. What more can I do?” And the help comes.
Not doing anything on your own, just saying a prayer every night when you are going to sleep, when half asleep, just saying, “God do this, do that,” these things will not help you at all. If you really want God to do something to you, first you have to try your uttermost; at the optimum, help happens, never before it. When you are doing all that you can do, absolutely all that you can do, immediately, help is available.

The sixth question:
Osho,
Recently you talked again about the adverse aspects of marriage. Would you please talk about what you mean by intimacy? Particularly, when is staying together through difficult times positive and when is it negative?
Marriage is a way to avoid intimacy. Creating a formal relationship is a trick. Intimacy is informal. If a marriage arises out of intimacy, it is beautiful; if you are hoping that intimacy will arise out of marriage, you are hoping in vain. Of course, I know that many people, millions of people, have settled for marriage rather than for intimacy because intimacy is growth – it is painful.
Marriage is very secure. It is safe. There is no growth in it. One is simply stuck. Marriage is a sexual arrangement; intimacy is a search for love. Marriage is a sort of prostitution, a permanent sort. Somebody goes to a prostitute; another has gotten married to a woman or to a man – it is a permanent prostitution. The arrangement is economical, not psychological, not of the heart.
So remember, if marriage arises out of intimacy it is beautiful. That means that everybody should have lived together before they got married. The honeymoon should not happen after marriage, it should happen before marriage. One should have lived the dark nights, the beautiful days, the sad moments, the happy moments together. One should have looked into each other’s eyes deeply, into each other’s being deeply.
How do you decide? If your intimacy is helping you to grow and to become mature, then it is positive and good and healthy, wholesome. If it is destructive and it is not allowing you to become mature – rather, it is helping you to remain childish, immature – then it is unhealthy. Any relationship that keeps you childish is evil. Get out of it. Any relationship that gives you challenges to growth, to go on an adventure, to go deeper and higher into life… I am not saying that a positive marriage will not have problems; it will have more problems than the negative marriage. A positive relationship will have more problems because every day new challenges will be there. But each time a problem is solved, you will have gone a little higher; each time a challenge is met, you will find something has become integrated into your being.
A negative relationship has no problems – or at the most pseudo-problems, so-called problems, not real problems. Have you noticed it? A wife and husband are fighting over such trivia. These are not problems. Even if you fight, it doesn’t give you anything, it doesn’t help growth. Look at wives and husbands; look at yourself. You may be a husband, a wife.
Just watch. If you are fighting over trivia – small things which don’t mean anything anyway – then you will remain immature, childish. Real problems, authentic problems, which really have to be faced, create great turmoil in your being; they bring a cyclone. One has to face them. Never avoid them. The trivial questions are an escape from the real questions. A husband and wife will fight over very small things: which film to go to and which not to go to; what color car should be purchased, what model, what make; what restaurant they are going to this evening. Such trivia! It does not make any difference. If you are making too much of a fuss, your relationship is not going to help you, will not give you any integrity, any center. I call it negative.
The positive relationship will face real problems. For example: if you are angry or if you are sad, you will be sad in front of your wife, you will not smile a false smile. And you will say, “I am sad.” This must be faced. If, walking on the road with your wife, you see a beautiful woman pass by and a great desire and longing arises in your heart, you will tell your wife that this woman created a great desire, stirred your heart. You will not avoid her; you will not avert your eyes. And you will not pretend that you have not seen the woman at all. Whether you pretend or not your wife already knows it! It is impossible for her not to know because immediately your energy, your presence, changes. These are real problems.
Just getting married to a woman doesn’t mean that you are no longer interested in any other women. In fact, the day you are not interested in any other women, you will not be interested in your wife either. Why? What has your wife got that is so special? If you are no longer interested in women, you will not be interested in your wife either. You are in love with her because you are still in love with women. She is just a woman. And sometimes you come across a woman who enchants you. You will say it to your wife, and you will face the turmoil that will arise. It is not trivia; it will create jealousy, it will create a struggle, it will disturb all rest, you will not be able to sleep at night. Your wife will be throwing pillows at you.
To be true creates real problems. To be authentic creates real problems. Say whatsoever is the case – never demur, never look sideways – look straight into it and be true. And help your wife to be true, too; help your husband to be true as well.
Yes, there are problems in real intimacy, more problems than in a negative state of intimacy, more problems. Because if you are really intimate with your woman, how can you avoid the fact that you become interested in another woman? You have to say it. That’s part of love, part of intimacy. You denude yourself, you expose yourself totally, you don’t hold anything back. Even if during the night you dream a dream about another woman, in the morning you will relate it to your wife.
I have heard about a film director…

During the night he started talking to his girlfriend in his sleep, and he had the habit of talking loudly. So he was saying beautiful things and his wife started staring at him. When you are married, even in your dreams, you remain afraid of your wife. Suddenly he became afraid. What was he saying? He felt his wife looking at him and with great presence of mind he said, “Cut! Next scene.”
…as if he were directing a film!

If you really love your woman, in the morning you will tell her your dream – that you made love to a woman in your dream in the night. Everything must be shared. Your whole heart must be shared.
Intimacy means that there is no privacy. You don’t carry anything private now – at least with the person you are intimate with. You drop privacy. You are nude and naked. Good, bad, whatsoever you are, you open your heart. Whatsoever the cost that you have to pay for it, and whatsoever the trouble you go through with it, you go through it. That brings growth.
And you help the other person also to drop all inhibitions, screens, masks. In an intimate relationship one comes to see the original face of the other and one comes to show his own original face. If a relationship helps you to find your original face, then it is meditative, then it is religious. If your relationship simply helps you to create more and more masks and hypocrisies then it is irreligious.
Try to understand my definition. If my definition is understood then out of a hundred marriages, ninety-nine are irreligious because they are simply creating more and more falsity. From the very beginning the falsity starts.
I have heard…

The minister, casting an appraising eye over the bridal couple before him and the goodly crowd come to witness the ceremony, intoned, “If there is anyone here who knows why these two should not be joined together in wedlock, let him speak now or forever hold his peace.”
“I’ve got something to say,” a voice rang out bold and clear.
“You shut up!” snapped the minister. “You’re the groom!”

From the very beginning! They were not even married yet. The minister said, “You shut up! You are the groom!” That’s how the life of a married couple starts.
People keep quiet. They don’t say anything. They don’t say the truth at all. They pretend lies. They smile when they don’t want to smile; they kiss when they don’t want to kiss. Naturally, when you kiss and you don’t want to kiss, the kiss is poisonous. Naturally, when you don’t want to smile and you have to smile, your smile is ugly, it is political.
Then somehow one gets accustomed to these things, one settles for the falsity, for the inauthenticity of life. And one consoles oneself in a thousand and one ways.

“Oh, we’re very happy,” insisted the husband. “Of course, once in a while my wife throws dishes at me. But that doesn’t change the situation one bit. Because if she hits me she’s happy and if she misses me I’m happy!”

One comes to such an arrangement by and by – both are happy.

The car in which the elderly couple was riding went over the cliff. It was an awful wreck.
“Where am I?” moaned the man when he opened his eyes. “In heaven?”
“No,” said his dazed wife. “I’m still with you.”

These settlements are very hellish. What you know in the name of relationship is just a pseudo-game.
So remember it as a criterion: if you are growing more and becoming an individual, if life is happening more to you, if you are becoming more open, if more beauty is felt in existence, if more poetry is arising in your heart, if more love flows through you, more compassion, if you are becoming more aware in your life, then the relationship is good. Carry on. Then it is not a marriage. Then it is intimacy.
But if the reverse is happening; if all poetry is disappearing and life is becoming prosaic, if all love is disappearing and life is becoming just a load, a dead load, if all song is dying and you are just living as a duty, then it is better to escape out of this prison. It is better for you and it is better for your partner with whom you are living.

The seventh question:
Osho,
Was the man in today's story (where a man had no memory) enlightened? Or had he a glimpse? Do we get it and forget it and get it and forget it and one day maybe not forget?
Yes, the man had a glimpse. If he had really become established, then there would have been no way to bring him back – you cannot bring a buddha back. He only had a glimpse. He was just entering the door and he was pulled back. If he had entered the temple, then he would have been gone, gone forever.
Many times a glimpse will come and will disappear. It is natural because if enlightenment suddenly came like lightning, like thunder, you would be crushed. You would not be able to receive it. It would be too much. You would go mad.
Glimpses come and prepare you. Glimpses will come, more and more, and by and by you will become acclimatized to a totally different world, a totally different dimension of being. Otherwise you would go mad. Sometimes it happens that a man who has been working alone without a master, and is not aware that one should not rush into it, rushes into it and goes mad.
The master is needed for many things. But he is most needed when you are coming very close to enlightenment. Then he is needed very, very deeply because he will allow you to go only so far. Slowly, slowly, in quantities, he will help you to absorb the vastness of the experience, the tremendousness of it. It is a mysterium tremendum. You are just like a drop and enlightenment is like an ocean dropping into you. One cannot be greedy. First the master pushes you into it; and then he holds you back and allows you to go very slowly into it.
The man in the story must have had only a glimpse.
You ask me: “Do we get it and forget it and get it and forget it and maybe one day maybe not forget?” No. One day one forgets both getting and forgetting. Then, only then is it there. One day one forgets both getting and forgetting; one day one simply recognizes that it is your innermost nature, that it is not something that you can get or that you can forget.
You can get something from the outside, you can forget something from the outside, but this is your own flowering. It is you, it is your fragrance. How can you get it and how can you forget it? One day one forgets both getting and forgetting. Then one has come home.

The last question:
Osho,
Six hours of sleep every night. An hour and a half of satsang – playing the beautiful spiritual game with you. Then suddenly switching over from the cold marble floor to a swivel chair – playing the orange airline executive! Spectacular evening performances – changing daily. From absurd comedy to heavy melodrama. Many roles, many plots. Always extempore. Playing father, husband, friend, stranger, wise man, fool!

The one real factor in all this which isn't a game is a deep, deep love for you. This is what makes all the games exciting. Can this be what they call working with the master?
Yes, that is exactly what is meant by working with the master – to live suffused with the presence of the master, to live suffused with the love of the master and to play all the games that God wants you to play. To go on playing where God has placed you. Everything becomes a game. Yes, that’s exactly what it is. Love remains the only reality, everything else becomes a game. If you can play the many games of life without being serious, without being identified, remaining a witness and enjoying the fun of it, you have understood.
To be with a master is to learn that all of life is a game, a maya. Nothing is serious. Nothing must be avoided. Nothing must be chosen in particular – whatsoever happens, allow it to happen. Remain alert and allow it to happen and your alertness will by and by help you to slip into totality.
Remain aware and go on playing the games. Never escape, never run away. To run away from the world means that you have rejected God. To reject the world means that you have rejected the God who has made the world. Love the world, because that is the only way to love God. And enjoy. And whatsoever he wants you to do, wherever he has placed you – enjoy that place. Sometimes it is on the marble floor, sometimes on a swivel chair; sometimes as a wise man, sometimes a fool. Sometimes it is this, sometimes that – remain fluid. Move into one role, then to another; flow, don’t get frozen.
Seriousness freezes. Remain non-serious. Take life as a joy and it becomes prayer.
Enough for today.

============================================================

Mr. P’ang of Ch’en had a son who was clever as a child but suffered from an abnormality when he grew up. When he heard singing he thought it was weeping; when he saw white he thought it was black; fragrant smells he thought noisome, sweet tastes he thought bitter, wrong actions he thought right. Whatever came into his mind – heaven and earth, the four cardinal points, water and fire, heat and cold – he always turned it upside down.

A certain Mr. Yang told his father: “The gentlemen of Lu have many arts and skills, perhaps they can cure him. Why not inquire among them?”

The father set out for Lu, but passing through Ch’en he came across Lao Tzu and took the opportunity to tell him about his son’s symptoms.

“How do you know that your son is abnormal?” said Lao Tzu. “Nowadays everyone in the world is deluded about right and wrong, and confused about benefit and harm; because so many people share this sickness, no one perceives that it is a sickness. Besides, one man’s abnormality is not enough to overturn his family; one family’s to overturn the neighborhood, one neighborhood’s to overturn the state, one state’s to overturn the world. If the whole world were abnormal how could abnormality overturn it? Supposing the minds of everyone in the world were like your son’s, then, on the contrary, it is you who would be abnormal. Joy and sorrow, music and beauty, smells and tastes, right and wrong – who can straighten them out? I am not even sure that these words of mine are not abnormal, let alone those of the gentlemen of Lu, who are the most abnormal of all; who are they to cure other people’s abnormality? You had better go straight home instead of wasting your money.”
Tao is a unique vision. It is a vision, mind you. It is a darshan, not a philosophy. It is a clarity, a transparency, but not an ideology. It does not propose any system of thought – it does not propose anything at all. It neither proposes anything, nor supposes anything. It is not a system of thought; it is just a way of looking directly into reality, into that which is.
Not projecting anything from the mind; not allowing the mind to interfere, compare, interpret, it is wu-wei – non-interference with reality. Whatsoever is, is; it cannot be altered, it cannot be changed; whatever is, is, and whatever ain’t, ain’t. Things should be left untouched, as they are. The moment man enters and tries to change or improve things, confusion arises.
Tao is a great acceptance, Tao is a tremendous acceptance, an unconditional tathata. Whatsoever is, is – nothing can be done about it.
There is no need to do anything, either. The moment you start doing, you create mischief – the doers are the mischievous people. The non-doers are the real people; through non-doing, one can know what is. When you start doing something you bring your mind in, and the moment mind comes in there is confusion – all clarity is lost. Try to understand this as the basic, fundamental Tao.
Then today’s parable will be very easily understood. It is of tremendous beauty. It can open a new vista, it can open a door in your being, it can give you a vision of reality. But the fundamental rule is: do not interfere. That is real nonviolence.
If you go to Lao Tzu and say that somebody is a thief, he says, “So what? Somebody is a thief. Let it be so.” Lao Tzu is unworried about reality. If somebody is mad, Lao Tzu will say, “So what? Let it be so. If that’s how the whole wills it, then that is how it must be. Who are you? Who has given you the authority to change anything, to transform it? Leave reality to itself and everything goes beautifully, rhythmically. Interfere, and everything is disturbed.”
You have heard about the nonviolence of Mahavira, you have heard about the nonviolence of Buddha, but they are nothing compared to Lao Tzu. In their nonviolence there is a subtle violence still – the violence of interference. The good must be brought in, the bad must be destroyed; the immoral must be changed into moral, the wrong must be put right. They are still not in wu-wei, non-interference. The violent person is trying to change reality violently, the nonviolent person is trying to change reality nonviolently, but both are trying to change reality. And to change is to be violent. That is Tao’s understanding: to accept things as they are, to accept with no mind at all.
If you have a mind, you cannot accept. You will judge, you will compare; you will say that this should not be so, it cannot be so; you will say that this can be improved, this can be changed and made better.
The very idea that the world can be made better is the very root of all ego trips. The world is perfect; there is no way to make it better. If you try to make it better, you will make it worse. Things are in perfect rhythm. Nothing is bad; nothing is good. Good and bad are man-created concepts. Nothing is right; nothing is wrong – those are our conceptions. Reality simply is neutral, neither good nor bad, neither beautiful nor ugly. It simply is. This isness is Tao.
Now, enter this parable. We will go into it very slowly. Taste it step by step – it can become a revelation.
Mr. P’ang of Ch’en had a son who was clever as a child…
Every child is born clever. No child is ever born idiotic. To become an idiot one needs to be educated. To convert people to idiocy, schools and colleges and universities are needed. It is a great achievement. Idiocy is not natural; it must be learned, it must be earned. Great effort must be made before you can become stupid. A Buddha or a Lao Tzu or a Jesus are the people who somehow escaped from society, who somehow managed to prevent society from changing them into stupid people. They look rare because all of society has become stupid, otherwise they would be the norm. It should be natural to be clever, intelligent – as natural as breathing, as natural as health.
Watch a child, any child, black, white, Indian, Chinese, German – yes, even German! Watch any child. All children are intelligent and all children are beautiful. Have you ever seen an ugly child? The phenomenon does not exist at all. Have you ever seen a stupid child? Their intelligence is tremendous.
Society starts to cripple the child because society cannot allow that much intelligence. That much intelligence is dangerous. An intelligent child is a dangerous person. Society immediately jumps on the child from the very first day. The child is not even allowed the freedom to breathe on his own – the doctor slaps him on his bottom and society has started. The child is not even allowed to breathe on his own. You should wait. There is no need to slap the child.
Go and see a maternity ward. When the child is born, the doctor will take him by his legs, hold him upside down and slap him on the bottom to help him breathe. As if nature is not enough – your help is needed. Nobody slaps the animals – and they are all breathing, breathing beautifully. No doctor is needed, no nurse is needed, no midwife is needed. Just wait!
But the society cannot wait. Within seconds the society enters. Society has to slap the child. Now people who have been studying the phenomenon of slapping the child say that the first slap comes as a shock because the child is very delicate. For nine months he has lived in a very protected environment – that slap is like a great shock. His life starts with a shock. Then there are even crueler people. Jews and Muslims will do a circumcision – it is a great shock to cut the foreskin of the genital organs. You have started violence; you have started butchering the child. Society is on the way. Immediately everything must be forced on the child. Then the mother is told when to breast-feed the child and when not to breast-feed the child – after three hours.
As if every child is a Ford car, just like another Ford car. Each child is an individual. His needs are different. One child will find that he is hungry within two hours; another child will find that he is not hungry after five hours. This average of three hours is dangerous. One child will not be hungry but the mother will force him to feed because three hours have passed. Another child will be hungry and crying and weeping, but the mother will wait and look at the clock, and because three hours are not over yet she cannot feed him.
These are subtle tricks to destroy the delicate intelligence, the delicate life in the child. Then he must be trained about everything. From toilet training to God, he must be trained about everything. He is not allowed any spontaneity. Intelligence thrives in spontaneity, intelligence dies in discipline. The more disciplined the child, the more stupid he will be; the more intelligent the child, the more rebellious he will be. Rebelliousness and intelligence are synonymous; stupidity and discipline are synonymous. If you have succeeded in ordering the child to obey you and in making him conform to your ideas, you have succeeded in killing his intelligence.
Your schools, your colleges, your universities, all teach nonsense because they are all against sensitivity. Nowhere is sensitivity taught – nowhere. In fact, sensitivity must be destroyed. It is dangerous to allow the child to be sensitive and intelligent because if he remains sensitive, then society will not be able to force him to do foolish things throughout his life.
For example: a person goes on being a clerk his whole life, just piling up files. To do such a thing you need to be very insensitive. If you have any sensitivity, you will want to break out of this nonsense, you will want to go into the fields, into the forest. You may want to become a gardener, you may want to become a farmer, or a fisherman, or a carpenter, or a sculptor, or a poet – but you will not want to become a clerk in an office. Why would one want to be a clerk? When the sun is so bright and the flowers have bloomed and when the birds are singing and you are just doing a clerical job! It will not be possible. Society has to kill your intelligence, your sensitivity, so that you can be put into any job. When you are dull it is easy to force you in any direction. Then a person can keep on doing any nonsense job. When you do a nonsense thing for your whole life, naturally, by and by, you lose all possibilities of being intelligent.
A person can be sent into the army. If people were intelligent, who would go into the army? Why would they kill others and be killed? Life is to live, not to be killed and not to kill. Life is to enjoy; it is a divine gift. But millions of people are in the army, just getting ready to be butchered or to butcher. And their whole life – from morning to evening – is spent parading, polishing their rifles, following some foolish man’s orders: left turn, right turn. Doing this their whole life! Not even for a single moment do they think about what they are doing – what they are doing with their lives. Is life meant for this? Is this the destiny of life?
If you are singing and dancing, maybe it is meaningful, but turning left and right, doing the same march every day, just preparing for death – how can life be just a preparation for death?
Brutality, violence, insensitivity are taught so that millions of people can be turned into slaves. You think you are free people? Slavery has only become more sophisticated, that’s all. Slavery still exists. No society up to now has ever been a free society. All societies have been slave societies.
Yes, one thing is certain: slavery changes its forms. First it was very gross, now it is very subtle. And remember, subtle slavery is far more dangerous than gross slavery because you can rebel against gross slavery, it is so apparent, so obvious. But when the slavery is very subtle then you are not even aware of it. If you are a Mohammedan, if you are a Hindu, if you are a Christian, if you are a Jaina, you are a slave. Your mind has been conditioned to be a Hindu, to be a Mohammedan, to be a Christian, and you have become that.
You have never questioned it. Why should you be a Christian? Why should you be a Mohammedan? You were not born as a Christian, as a Mohammedan, you were born as pure consciousness. Why these limitations? Who has forced these limitations on you? You were born as a pure human being. Who has made you an Indian and who has made you Chinese? You are slaves. If you are Chinese or Indian or English, you are a slave. Slavery is very subtle.
If you are doing things which others want you to do, and you never do the thing that you always wanted to do, you are a slave. You go on loving a person you don’t love; you go on sleeping with a person you don’t love; you go on living in a relationship which is simply destructive, horrible, a hell, but you go on. You are a slave; you are not a free man.
A free man is one who takes back his intelligence, who takes back his sensitivity. To me, that is what sannyas is: to take back your intelligence, to take back your sensitivity – to become again sensuous, alive, to become again intelligent, to become again a child.
Mr. P’ang of Ch’en had a son who was clever as a child… All children are clever. No child is ever born who is not clever. Even if you sometimes think that a child is not clever that is just your thinking.
I have heard…

A boy was sitting on the fence watching his father working in the field. A bull came running. The child shouted, “Papa, a bull is coming!”
The father jumped out of the way and saved himself.
But he was more surprised at the child than at the bull because the boy had not spoken for seven years – he was seven years of age and he had not spoken a single word.
So the father said, “Forget about the bull. You surprised me more! Why have you not spoken up to now? And you spoke so suddenly – ‘Papa, the bull is coming!’”
The boy said, “There was nothing to say before, so there was no point in speaking.”

Even when a child appears to you to be stupid, beware of making judgments. It may only be because of your own stupidity. Whatsoever you have become, you compare from that viewpoint. If a child is not clever in mathematics you think he is stupid. But there can be a society where mathematics is not valued – music may be valued and the child would have a tremendous capacity for music. Then in that society he would be valued as intelligent. In your society a boy who can do mathematics well is valued and nobody bothers about his musical qualities. He may be absolutely non-musical. It depends. What society values is not a natural value, it is a chosen value.
In some societies silence is valued – then to be silent is to be intelligent. In some societies talking is valued, so to talk is to be intelligent. It depends. In some societies dance is valued greatly and one who cannot dance seems to be stupid. In another society dancing is not thought about at all. Then nobody bothers whether you can dance or not. If you can be good at mathematics, at the three R’s, reading, writing, arithmetic, then you are intelligent.
For thousands of years man has lived without these three R’s, yet people have been intelligent, otherwise they could not have survived. In fact, surviving today is very simple, problems have almost disappeared. To survive in the jungle, when there was no house over your head, no food supply, no security, and you were constantly in danger, man had to be very, very intelligent, otherwise there would have been no possibility of his surviving. Man is not a very strong animal, other animals are far stronger, but still man has survived because of his intelligence, his sensitivity. He can feel more, he can become more aware and more alert.
Remember this: you were born clever, talented – a genius. God never creates less than that; God always creates geniuses. This beautiful whole always creates perfect people, how can imperfection be born out of perfection? Have you thought about it?
In the Upanishads they say, “Perfection comes out of perfection. Perfection is born out of perfection.” God is born out of God – nothing else can be born out of God. You are gods and goddesses because you come from that source of divineness.
Each child brings heaven into the world again but we jump on him, and we destroy him, and we destroy his heaven and his paradise. Again and again each child loses his paradise, that’s why we go on seeking and searching for it. If we had not known it, how could we seek and search for it? We can only seek that which we have known before. Each child has known something which has become lost, so again we start seeking it. We have lost our own inner capacities; we have lost our own inner kingdom.
…but suffered from an abnormality when he grew up.
Everybody becomes abnormal. It is very difficult to find a grown-up person who is normal because whatsoever you call the growing-up process is the process of turning people abnormal.
For example: a man is obsessed with money; he is abnormal. Why should one be obsessed with money? You cannot eat it, you cannot love it, you cannot be loved by it. It cannot give you life, it cannot give you beauty, it cannot give you joy. But there are millions of people who are madly in love with money – money is their God, their only God. Now these are abnormal people.
Once this abnormality settles, there arises another abnormality: a few people renounce money and become great mahatmas. First these mad people are obsessed with money, then a new obsession arises from that obsession – they become obsessed with the fear of money. If you take money to Vinoba Bhave he will not touch it. Now, what is wrong in touching money? A poor currency note is just paper; why are you so afraid of touching it? There is some deep fear. And fear is nothing but lust standing on its head; deep down there is still some desire. The fear is: “If I touch the money, I may again become interested in it.” A man who is free of money will use money and not be obsessed either way, for or against. He will live in the world, he will not renounce the world – there is no need.
You cannot drop out of one madness by creating another – you are simply changing your madness. Your so-called money-mad people are mad, and your mahatmas are at the other extreme of the same madness. They are not different. Somebody who is mad for prestige, power, pull, is abnormal. You can sit on a very high chair that is not going to make you happy; you can become a president and you can become a prime minister but that is not going to make you happy. And life is to be happy, life is to celebrate.
You will become more and more unhappy, the more power you have – because the more power you have, the more you will constantly have worries, constantly be in conflict. You cannot be at ease because others will be rushing toward you; they will be ready to overthrow you because they also want the same chair, the same power. Power is scarce and everybody wants power. So you will be in a madhouse.
If you really want to see a madhouse, go to New Delhi. In India that is the greatest madhouse. Right now, because the elections are coming, you can see how many people are mad in this country.
To find a grown-up person who is still intelligent is very difficult, very rare. You can become intelligent only if you become very conscious of what has been done to you, of how your intelligence has been destroyed or covered up. You will have to rediscover it.
When I say these things, remember: I am not saying them only about others, I am talking about you. Notice your own being, watch how you behave, what you do with your life, and you will find many, many mad obsessions. Those mad obsessions have been given to you by society. You have been made ambitious, and ambition destroys intelligence. You have been put on a wrong track, you have been made competitive, you have been made jealous of others, you have been taught only one thing: to compete and to be first.
Life has nothing to do with being first. You can enjoy it wherever you are. You can enjoy it right this moment; there is no need to postpone it. To postpone life is to become unintelligent. You say, “Tomorrow I will live,” so tomorrow you will be intelligent. Intelligence comes only when you live; intelligence is a function of living. When you live tremendously you become intensely intelligent; when you postpone life, dust gathers on the mirror of your being.
You have been postponing. You say, “Tomorrow,” always, “Tomorrow.” People come to me and they say they want to take sannyas, but not today, tomorrow. They say they will come again. But why? Why wait? What are you waiting for? And who knows? Tomorrow may come or may not come. This moment may be the last moment to breathe, you may not breathe again. So why not live this moment as totally as possible?
A person becomes intelligent when he starts living moment to moment totally – as if this were his last moment. Then there is a great passion, a great intensity. One becomes aflame with life. In that aflame state of consciousness one is intelligent, otherwise one is dull, dragging. Tomorrow, the day after tomorrow, one is going to live – so what is the need of being intelligent today? Today you can afford to be stupid. Tomorrow, when you will try to live, you can become intelligent.
But if you are stupid today, you are creating a trend of stupidity, and there is every possibility that tomorrow will not be different from today because it will be a prolongation of today, a continuity of today.
Mr. P’ang of Ch’en had a son who was clever as a child but suffered from an abnormality when he grew up. When he heard singing he thought it was weeping; when he saw white he thought it was black; fragrant smells he thought noisome, sweet tastes he thought bitter, wrong actions he thought right. Whatever came into his mind – heaven and earth, the four cardinal points, water and fire, heat and cold – he always turned it upside down.
That’s what everybody is doing. Look at your life and you will find that you have turned everything upside down. That which is valuable has become valueless and that which is valueless has become valuable.
Look at your life, and be very true and honest in looking because if you deceive anyone, you deceive only yourself and nobody else. Look straight into your own being and you will be surprised. What have you been doing with yourself? Everything has become upside down. You are living for the non-essential and you have forgotten the essential. You are living for things, and things will be taken away when death comes. Money, power, prestige – nothing is going to be with you when death comes.
A person only lives when he lives in such a way that death cannot destroy anything; who creates his inner being in such a way that death cannot take anything away from him; who lives in eternity which death cannot touch; who lives in consciousness – only that man is intelligent. Otherwise everything has been turned upside down: you see white as black and you see black as white; you think fragrant smells nauseous; sweet tastes bitter. You have settled on the artificial. Plastic flowers – yes, that’s where you have settled.
Instead of moving into love you have settled with a marriage; instead of searching a real religion you have settled for Islam, Christianity, Jainism. Instead of searching for God you have settled for words about God. Instead of looking into existence you are carrying dead books. Instead of really living life you have only ideas about how to live life. Just ideas – nothing else.
You have not lived at all; you only carry a few ideas. That’s what I call mistaking the menu for the dinner. You may call the menu the Vedas, or you may call it the Koran, or you may call it the Bible, but it is a menu, it is not food, it cannot nourish you.
So if you are feeling unnourished, if you are feeling weak, if you are feeling death-like, it is natural. Nobody else is to be blamed for it.
…he always turned it upside down.

A certain Mr. Yang told his father, “The gentlemen of Lu have many arts and skills, perhaps they can cure him. Why not inquire among them?”
Remember the last story? It was also concerned with the gentlemen from Lu. This town Lu was a Confucian town. It was almost like Varanasi. In India, if you come from Varanasi, if you can say that you come from Varanasi, you are already a great scholar. It has prestige. It is the Hindu citadel. The town of Lu was exactly like Varanasi. It had Confucian scholars. It was a sort of Confucian university where Confucius lived with his disciples and created much scholarship, created many scholars and pundits. It had become very famous.
A certain Mr. Yang told his father “The gentlemen of Lu have many arts and skills perhaps they can cure him. Why not inquire among them?”

The father set out for Lu but passing through Ch’en he came across Lao Tzu and took the opportunity to tell him about his son’s symptoms.
One thing to be remembered of this parable at this moment is that the mind always looks for the Confucian. It comes across a Lao Tzu only accidentally. The mind is basically Confucian. The mind looks for a structure, an ideology. The mind looks for a principle. The mind looks for some technology so that it can become more powerfully in control. The mind looks for power. It is only accidental that you come across a Lao Tzu: you were not really looking for Lao Tzu, you were looking for Confucius.
For example: you have come here. You were not looking for me; you were looking for a mahatma. Only accidentally have you come across me. You may have been in search of a guru, a mahatma, but you accidentally have come across me. You were not looking for me; the mind cannot look for me. For the mind to look for me is simply to commit suicide. The mind looks for something that helps it to become stronger.
The father set out for Lu… He was in search of some Confucian man who would be able to help cure his son. One thing was certain to the father: his son was ill. He had not taken any time to think about it, to ponder over whether he was really ill, whether he was really abnormal. He had simply accepted the idea that he was abnormal. He did not know anything about what normality was or what abnormality was.
When you make such assumptions, be a little more aware. You think that somebody is mad? Don’t be in such a hurry. He may not be mad; on the contrary, you may be the mad one. Don’t judge. You immediately assume that somebody is a criminal – he may not be. On the contrary, you may be the criminal. The criminal may not be the criminal; the magistrate may be the criminal. The judged may not be the criminal; the judge may be the criminal. Things are very complicated; don’t make assumptions. Don’t fall victim to easy assumptions.
The father had taken one thing for granted: his son was abnormal. Beware of taking things for granted. Never take anything for granted. The moment you take anything for granted you are falling from intelligence. Intelligence never takes anything for granted. It examines it and it remains open. It never creates a prejudice. Who knows?

You must have heard the story about a woman who was brought to Jesus because she had committed a sin. Those who were condemning her were ready to kill her because the old law said that if a woman committed the sin of adultery, then she had to be killed by throwing stones at her. She had to be stoned to death. They came to Jesus. It was also a good opportunity to judge Jesus. Would this man follow the old law, or was he against the old law?
They asked, “What should we do?” And Jesus said, “Do one thing first. Those who have never committed any sin, those who have not even thought about committing adultery, should take stones in their hands. They are allowed to stone this woman.” The people started disappearing. Nobody was left: there was not even a single man who had not committed adultery, even if only in his mind.
Within minutes the crowd was gone and Jesus was left with the woman. The woman started crying. She felt tremendous respect for this man who had saved her. She said, “I am guilty. I have done wrong. Please punish me.” And Jesus said, “Who am I to punish you? Who am I to say that you a sinner? That is something between you and your God. I am nobody to judge.”
Jesus said, “Judge ye not, that ye be not judged.” All judgment is stupid. Only stupid people judge hastily. The more intelligent you are, the less judgment you carry. If you are really intelligent, all judgments disappear. Then suddenly you see whatsoever is before you. But you don’t carry any judgment; you don’t say, “This man is bad and this man is good.” You don’t say, “This man is a sinner and this man is a saint.” These are all judgments. Who are you to judge? Who has given you the authority to judge?

When you don’t judge anybody, when you drop all judgments, suddenly all of life looks so beautiful, so immensely beautiful, so divine. The Devil disappears the moment your judgment disappears.
This man came across Lao Tzu by accident so he: …took the opportunity to tell him about his son’s symptoms. He was not aware who he was talking to.
Lao Tzu is superb, unsurpassed. Unsurpassed before, unsurpassed after. There has never been such clarity in any man anywhere. Such total understanding, such absolute transparency! Even in a Buddha, even in a Mahavira, even in a Krishna, you will find a little judgment – but not in Lao Tzu.
“How do you know that your son is abnormal?” said Lao Tzu.
He raises a very fundamental question. Who is normal? What is the norm? And how do you decide? The crowd? Many people are like that, so is that normal? But the whole crowd can be mad.
There is a Kahlil Gibran story:

A magician came to town and threw some medicine into the town’s well. He said that whosoever drank from the well would go mad.
There were only two wells in the town: one for the ordinary people and one for the king.
By the evening the whole town had gone mad. They had to drink from the well, even though they knew they would go mad, because it was the only well available to them. It was a hot summer day, and they tried not to drink, but how long can you try? By and by they yielded. By the evening the whole town had gone mad.
The king was very happy. Standing on his palace terrace he looked around and he said to his prime minister, “Grateful we are to God that we have a separate well, otherwise we would also have gone mad. The whole town has become mad.” People were dancing, singing, jumping, screaming, howling. The whole town was simply unbelievable. What had happened? It was a nightmare. People were doing all sorts of things they had never done before.
But within hours the king’s happiness disappeared because the people came to the palace and they started shouting that the king had gone mad. The king’s army was also in the town and they went mad, and his bodyguard and his cook, and his servants. Only the king and the queen and the prime minister, three persons, were left.
Now what can you do against a whole town when it is mad? The king became very afraid and asked, “What should we do now?”
The prime minister said, “There is only one thing to be done. I will try and prevent them for a few minutes. Run and drink from that well. There is no other way. You must go fast.”
The king went, drank from the well, and when he came back he was dancing. The crowd shouted in joy and they said, “Thanks be to God. We are grateful to God. Our king’s mind has come back!”

If the whole crowd is mad, the sane person will look mad.
How do you know that all people are not mad? The exceptional looks mad; the common seems to be the norm.
Lao Tzu asked: “How do you know that your son is abnormal?”
I have heard…

A Brit was having tea on his lawn when a spaceship appeared in the sky. He watched calmly as it circled and came to earth nearby. A weird-looking creature stepped from the craft and slowly approached. The thing had two heads with one eye in the center of each head. It had only one arm which protruded from the middle of its chest. It had no legs but walked on a pair of short flippers.
“Earthman,” the apparition squeaked, “I wish to see your leader!”
The Englishman stirred his tea and gazed with distaste at his visitor.
“Nonsense, old man,” he said calmly. “What you want to see is a good plastic surgeon.”

The exceptional seems to be abnormal. He may be a normal person from another planet. If some day you go to some other planet, you will be abnormal; they will immediately send you to a plastic surgeon.
Lao Tzu asked: “How do you know that your son is abnormal?” What criterion is there? What standard do you follow? Norm means the standard. But how do you decide who is normal? Is Buddha normal? Is Jesus normal? Jesus was not normal to the people among whom he lived. They murdered him because he was abnormal, because he was talking about things which should not be talked about. Socrates – was he normal? Athens poisoned him because he was abnormal. If you look down the ages, all great people were abnormal. The ordinary seems to be the normal.
Lao Tzu wants to destroy the criterion. He wants to tell you that there is no criterion to judge. Each individual is unique – that is the vision of Tao. Each individual is so unique, so incomparably unique, that there is no way to judge who is normal and who is abnormal. Look at the freedom Tao gives: you can only say that people are different – nobody is normal, nobody is abnormal. People are simply different.
Once you understand that people are different you drop the idea of inferiority and superiority for the first time. For the first time, comparison becomes: “Somebody is this way, somebody else is that way.”

Somebody asked Bokuju, “Why are you so good and I am not so good? Why are you so silent and I am not so silent?”
Bokuju said, “Come out with me into the garden.” And he took him into the garden where there were two trees. One was very tall, almost touching the clouds, and another was very small. He said, “Look. This tree is small and that tree is tall, but I have never heard any discussion between them. The tall one has never said to the small one, ‘Look, I am superior.’ And the small one has never said to the tall one, ‘Because I am so small, I feel very inferior standing by your side.’”

No, the small is small and the tall is tall; there is no comparison. The small is beautiful in its smallness, and the tall is beautiful in its tallness. The tall is close to the clouds, the small is close to the earth. The tall enjoys tallness; the small enjoys smallness. What is wrong in it?
Nothing is wrong – that is the Taoist vision. Everything is good as it is.
Comparison comes from the human mind. The birds are birds; they are not worried about why they are not animals. The rose is a rose; the rose is not worried about why it is not the lotus. Hence they are not neurotic. Otherwise the rose will become neurotic because he is not a lotus, and the lotus will become neurotic because he is not the rose. And the small bush will lie down somewhere on some psychiatrist’s couch because he is not the Cedar of Lebanon. “Why? Why am I not the Cedar of Lebanon? Why has God made me so small – just a bush? What karmas am I suffering from?” He will make some philosophy to console himself, “I have created bad karmas in my past life, that’s why.”
All rubbish! All theories are rubbish! They are needed because you ask rubbish questions. So somebody has to supply rubbish answers. There is a law in economics: whenever there is a demand there is the supply. If you ask a foolish question some wise guy is going to give you a foolish answer.
It is very simple. Things are as they are. Things are different, certainly, but they are not unequal. Let me repeat it: things are different but they are not unequal. Everything is unique. You cannot find a single leaf in the whole world which is like another leaf. You cannot find a single pebble on the whole earth which is like another pebble. No, nothing is similar, but nothing is unequal. Each thing exists in its own way. That is the meaning of the saying that each thing has its own soul. That uniqueness is what soul means; that uniqueness is the meaning of the saying: “A man has a soul.” It simply shows that he is unique. The tree has a soul; it shows it is unique. The mountain has a soul; it simply shows it is unique. Nothing else is just like it.
“How do you know that your son is abnormal?” said Lao Tzu. “Nowadays everyone in the world is deluded about right and wrong, and confused about benefit and harm…”
First: because of these comparisons people have started to become imitations. Because you don’t recognize your uniqueness, you are not respectful toward your being. You are disrespectful.
A woman came to me and she asked, “What should I do? I am fat.” She was not very fat. Nothing… If she had not said so, I would not have thought that she was fat. But she herself goes on saying it. You must know her. She is called Veena and now she has become known as Fat Veena. And she is not fat. She is nothing like it. She does not know what a fat woman can be.
I have heard about one:

She came out of a hotel and said to the doorkeeper, “Please call me a taxi.”
The doorkeeper looked at her and said, “Okay, if you say so. I will call you a taxi, but you look to me more like a truck!”

But even if a woman is that fat she has a unique soul.
There is no need to be worried. Comparison should not be brought in. One should be respectful toward one’s own being. Comparison comes through others. You see somebody who is lean and thin and a comparison arises. You have a nose which is a little too long and somebody has one with exactly the desired proportion. Now a problem arises.
You may not have heard that even Cleopatra was worried. She had a nose she thought was a little too long. Cleopatra is thought to be one of the most beautiful women of the world, but she was always conscious of her nose. It was a little too long. So she was very worried. Her whole body was in proportion, but her nose created the trouble.
If you compare, you are going to be neurotic. Somebody has beautiful hair, somebody has a beautiful nose, somebody has beautiful eyes, somebody has beautiful legs and somebody has the right proportions and somebody has the right complexion and somebody is more intelligent and so on and so forth. All these people will create inferiority in you. Or, if your start thinking the other way round, you may start feeling superior. Both are illnesses. To feel inferior is ill, and to feel superior is ill; just to feel one is oneself is healthy. Not comparing is healthy.
This constant comparison creates imitation; people start becoming like others. You dress the way others dress, you purchase the cars that others have, you decorate your drawing room as others have decorated theirs – you go on imitating. And an imitator is never happy because an imitator becomes untrue.
Now what has happened to this man? He thinks that his son is abnormal – maybe his son is not like the son of his neighbor, that’s all. The comparison is bringing trouble to his mind. Maybe his son is not like him – but why should the son be like the father?
I have heard…

Three girls were arrested for soliciting. And a peddler, newly arrived in this country, was arrested for peddling without a license. They were brought before the court.
“What do you do for a living?” the judge asked, pointing to the first girl.
“Your honor, I’m a model,” she answered.
“Thirty days,” was the sentence. Then he turned to the second. “What do you do for a living?” he asked belligerently.
“Your honor, I’m an actress.”
“Thirty days.” Then he turned to the third girl. “What do you do for a living?” he demanded.
“To tell you the truth,” she answered, “I’m a prostitute.”
“For telling the truth,” he said, “I’m going to suspend sentence.”
Then he turned to the little immigrant peddler. “And you,” he said, “what do you do for a living?”
“To tell you the truth,” the peddler said twisting his ancient cap in his hands, “I’m a prostitute also.”

That’s how people go on imitating and they think that by imitating you can be true. By imitating, nobody can ever be true. Imitation is the basis of all falsehood.
“How do you know that your son is abnormal?” said Lao Tzu. “Nowadays everyone in the world is deluded about right and wrong, and confused about benefit and harm…” The mind is confusion. The moment you start thinking about what is right and what is wrong you will be confused. The moment you start thinking about what is harmful and what is beneficial you will be confused.
Haven’t you heard the story about the centipede?

A centipede has one hundred legs.
A rabbit saw him and could not believe it! It was almost impossible! A hundred legs. How does he manage? Which one must be moved first and second and third and fourth? A hundred legs. How does he manage?
The rabbit was very puzzled and said, “Uncle, I am very confused. I cannot imagine how you manage. If I had one hundred legs, I would never be able to walk. I would get so confused.”
The centipede had never thought about it, hence he was not confused. But now he said, “I have never thought about it, I will think over it.” And he pondered over it. For the first time he became self-conscious. He looked at his legs and he was confused. He fell down!
And he said to the rabbit, “Never ask such a question! I have always walked, and there was never any problem. Now you have confused me. Now I will never be able to walk correctly. The problem will haunt me. Which one first? Which one second? And there are one hundred legs!”

Lao Tzu says that the mind is confusion. The moment you think, you are confused. Thinking is confusion; hence nobody can get out of confusion by thinking. Thinking will make you even more muddled. One comes out of confusion by non-thinking, by dropping all thought, by dropping all distinctions between right and wrong, between harm and benefit. How can you know, how can the part know what is beneficial and what is harmful? The universe is so vast that one never knows what will finally be the result of your act.
You go and save a man who was drowning in a well; you make an effort and you get him out. And then the next day he commits a murder. Now, was your saving the man right or wrong? If you had not saved him, there would have been no murder. Now the murder has happened. You are also part of the crime. Without you it would not have been possible. But you never thought that way. You were just saving the person. Your whole idea was to help the person who was dying. So what is harmful and what is beneficial?
Sometimes poison becomes beneficial, and sometimes nectar can prove poisonous. Sometimes the person who wants to do good to you may do harm, and sometimes the person who wanted to do harm to you may do good. Things are very complex; in fact, almost incomprehensible by the human mind. Life is so deep and so complex and we are so small, so tiny, there is no way to figure it out.
So what does Lao Tzu say? Lao Tzu says: “Nowadays everyone in the world is deluded about right and wrong, and confused about benefit and harm.” How do you decide what is right? What is the criterion? Was Mohammed right when he took up a sword? He was not right according to the Jainas. To take up a sword is wrong. But according to the Mohammedans he was right because he took the sword in his hand to save religion. According to the Mohammedans, Mahavira is an escapist. When people were suffering he was standing there and meditating. When people were being exploited he was selfish. He escaped to the forest.
When Arjuna sad to Krishna in the Gita, “I don’t want to kill so many people; this seems to be the greatest sin that can be committed. I want to renounce the world and go to the forest and become a forest dweller,” was he right or wrong? If you ask the Jainas he was right. But Krishna says, “No, this is wrong. Don’t go. This is your duty. Do it. God wills it this way, so let it be this way. Escaping from your duty will be going against God. You did not arrange this war. It is happening. Just be instrumental in it. Go into it, but not as a doer, go into it just as an instrument. There is no need to escape anywhere.
“And, Arjuna, even if you do escape, you cannot escape because your whole training, your whole discipline of life, is that of a warrior. You cannot escape so easily. Where will you go? You are not a brahmin, you are not a meditator, you are a warrior. You have to attain your reality only through yourself. Svadharme nidhanam shreyah, it is good to die into one’s own nature; paradharmo bhayavaha, it is very dangerous to follow somebody else’s religion. To be a warrior is your religion. That is what you have trained for your whole life. Each cell of your being is that of a warrior. You cannot meditate, Arjuna. Even if you go into the forest and sit under a tree, if you see a lion passing by, you will immediately search for your bow, and you will kill it. You will become a hunter; you will not become a meditator. That is not right.”
Now, what is right and what is wrong? And who decides? If Arjuna had asked Mahavira, Mahavira would have blessed him. He would have said, “Right. For the first time reality has dawned upon you.” But Krishna says, “You are an escapist, a coward. This is cowardice.” Now who is right and who is wrong?
Ask Lao Tzu. Lao Tzu says that even the distinction between right and wrong is not possible. You simply live, whatsoever – as naturally as possible for you.
I have heard…

A man hired a taxi to the station. From the hotel to the station it was a fixed rate of one rupee. When the man got out of the taxi he gave one rupee to the taximan but the taximan looked unhappy. So the man asked, “Is it not right? Is it not correct?”
The taximan said, “Sir, it is correct but not right.”

You see the distinction? It is correct but not right. “You have paid me. Legally it is correct. But it is not right. You have not tipped me. That is not part of the formal law but it is a convention.”
So what is right? What is correct? Law is limited and life is excessive. If you live according to the law, you may be correct but you may not be right. If you live according to life, you may be right but you may not be correct.
Lao Tzu’s standpoint is that to make the distinction, to bring the distinction in, creates confusion. One should live spontaneously, naturally, and one should not try to follow any right and any wrong. One should remain surrendered. One should live out of a let-go.
“…because so many people share this sickness no one perceives that it is a sickness.”
This confusion has become so common that nobody now thinks it is a sickness. All are ill with the same sickness, the same confusion. Not only those who follow but those who lead as well: they are also in the same boat.

Hungry, exhausted and frightened, the hunter dropped his rifle, stumbled forward, and threw his arms about the man who had just emerged from a patch of timber.
“Am I glad to see you,” he cried. “I’ve been lost for two days!”
“What are you so glad about?” mumbled the other hunter. “I’ve been lost for a week!”

Leaders and followers, the teachers and the taught, are all in the same boat. Whom to ask? All are ill. The confusion is so common that people have completely forgotten that it is an illness.
“Besides one man’s abnormality is not enough to overturn his family…”
And then he asked, “Why be so worried? Even if you think one man is abnormal, what is wrong?”
“Besides, one man’s abnormality is not enough to overturn his family; one family’s to overturn the neighborhood; one neighborhood’s to overturn the state; one state’s to overturn the world.”
So why be worried? A single individual, even if you think he is abnormal, even if it is agreed that he is abnormal, why be worried? He cannot overturn the whole world. He can be accepted the way he is. Why try to change him?
“If the whole world were abnormal, how could abnormality overturn it?”
Then, as far as Lao Tzu’s own vision is concerned, he says the whole world is abnormal. People may be abnormal in different ways, but the whole world is abnormal. But nobody looks at one’s own abnormality. It is very easy to think about the other as abnormal; it is very difficult to think about yourself as abnormal. It is very easy to have a condemnatory attitude about somebody else. Have you ever seen a madman who thinks that he is mad? Never. You can go to the madhouse; you can ask, and they will laugh. They will say, “Are you mad?” A madman never thinks that he is mad. He cannot. If a madman can think that he is mad, then it is certain that he is not mad. Such a man, a man who can think that he is mad, cannot be mad.
A few anecdotes…

In a crowded restaurant the psychiatrist was approached by a woman. “See that man over there?” she whispered. “He’s my husband and he needs your help. He thinks he’s a traffic light. All night long he keeps opening one eye, then closing it, then opening it…”
The headshrinker nodded and said, “I’ll go over and have a talk with him.”
“No, wait,” shouted the woman. “The light’s against you!”

It is very difficult to see that you are mad and it is very easy to think that the other is mad. It is part of the mad mind to think the other is mad.

The woman pleaded for help from the psychiatrist. “My husband thinks he’s a washing machine. He rolls his head around and around and back and forth and soap and hot water come out of his ears.”
The psychiatrist said, “I know it’s distressing, but I can’t see that this hallucination is doing any harm.”
“You don’t understand, Doctor,” the woman said. “He isn’t getting the sheets clean!”

Whenever you think of somebody as mad, wait a minute. The greater possibility is that you are mad. A really sane man like Lao Tzu says that nobody is mad.
People are simply different. Many people are suffering unnecessarily in hospitals, in madhouses, in asylums – suffering unnecessarily. They are not mad; they are different. Certainly they are different. They look at things in a different way, but there is nothing wrong in it.

Van Gogh painted trees so high that they touched the stars. He painted the sun and the moon so small and the trees so big – they go higher and higher and touch the stars. Somebody asked, “Are you mad? Where have you seen such trees? And suns and moons so small and trees so big?”
Van Gogh said, “Whenever I look at a tree, I see the desire of the earth to touch the sky. The tree is the desire of the earth to touch the sky. It is the ambition of the earth. So why be a miser? What the earth cannot do, I can do in my paintings. That’s the way I see it: desires of the earth to touch the sky.”

That is a way of seeing things: nothing is wrong in it. It is very poetic. A man of real understanding will be neutral. He will be like the sun. The sun shines as beautifully and as poetically on the dunghill as on the diamond. No distinction is made. That’s how real understanding is.
Nobody is sane; nobody is insane. If someday the Tao vision becomes the universal vision, many people will be saved from unnecessary suffering. Who decides it? As yet there are no criteria. If you go to a psychiatrist he cannot decide who is mad. All that they decide is that this person is too different from others – that’s all. But why should he be mad?
And the psychiatrist cannot help much. Even when he tries to bring an insane person to sanity, what can he do? At the most he forces the person to adjust to the view of the crowd. He makes him less individual. He destroys his individuality. Nothing much changes.

A man met a friend who had been under psychiatric care. “How are you progressing?” asked the man.
“Fine,” said the friend. “For months I thought I was a fox terrier, but analysis has helped me.”
“Are you cured?” asked the man.
“Not exactly,” his friend replied, “but I have stopped chasing cars.”

At least this much can be done. Certainly you will think that a person who thinks he is a fox terrier is mad, but what about Adolf Hitler? What about Josef Stalin? What about Chairman Mao Zedong? They didn’t think they were fox terriers but they were more dangerous. The man who thinks he is a fox terrier, what can he do? Even if he chases cars it is very innocent. He is not doing any harm to anybody. It is an innocent idea. Nothing wrong in it. But this man will be put into a madhouse and Josef Stalin will become the dictator of Russia and will kill millions of people. Nobody will think that he needs psychiatric help.
This is a very strange world. Innocent people are thought to be mad but nobody thinks the real culprits are mad. Adolf Hitler killed many people, but nobody thought that he was mad while he ruled Germany. Politicians, power-addicted people, money-mad people – nobody thinks them mad. But if somebody sitting under a tree starts laughing for no reason at all, you think he is mad. He is not doing any harm to anybody. He may have some reason to laugh which may not be apparent to you.
And, finally, what is wrong if somebody laughs without any reason? Why is a reason needed to laugh? In fact, a reason is needed to be miserable but no reason is needed to be happy. Happiness should be natural – for no reason. It should be bubbling up. One should be radiant, in tremendous joy, for no reason at all.
“If the whole world was abnormal, how could abnormality overturn it? Supposing the minds of everyone in the world were like your son’s, then, on the contrary, it is you who would be abnormal.”
He is raising a beautiful point. He is saying, “Just think! If everybody was like your son, then you would be abnormal. Now everybody is like you, so your son is abnormal.” The question seems to be only one of numbers. Who is in the majority? Whosoever is in the majority is normal and whosoever is in the minority is abnormal.
But is this a criterion for judging? Then all buddhas are abnormal – that’s what psychoanalysts really say. They say that Buddha was abnormal because he was so rare. He must have been abnormal. Mahavira was abnormal. Jesus was abnormal. You don’t find so many Jesuses; no crowd of Jesuses exists. Then he must have been abnormal. If the majority means normality then Jesus and Buddha and Mahavira and Krishna were abnormal.
What do you want to be? Would you like to be a buddha, or would you like to be just a part of a mob? Even if Buddha was abnormal, one would like to be a buddha because he was so happy, so serene, so calm, so tranquil.
Lao Tzu is saying to drop these ideas; they are meaningless. These distinctions and judgments are foolish.
“Joy and sorrow, music and beauty, smells and tastes, right and wrong – who can straighten them out?”
He says that joy and sorrow are indefinable, so are music and beauty. Who can figure out what is what? Nobody has yet been able to define what beauty is. And nobody has yet been able to define what good is. Good remains indefinable – so does beauty and so does music. What is music to one is just a maddening noise to another. If you are trained for classical Indian music, modern Western music will look insane. If you are trained to listen to modern Western music – jazz and others – then Indian music will look very boring, dull. It depends on your training. What is music? Nobody has yet been able to define it. All that is significant remains indefinable. “Who can straighten them out?”
“I am not even sure…”
Look at the beauty of it. Lao Tzu says:
“I am not even sure that these words of mine are not abnormal…”
What can I say? This is Lao Tzu’s absolute health. Only such a healthy person can say, “I am not certain that my words are abnormal or not. There is no way to say.” Only a really sane person can say, “Maybe I am mad.”

Recently a girl we know found an old love letter which her father had written to her mother when they were courting. The daughter copied the letter, signed a masculine name to it, and mailed it to herself. Then she showed it to her father. There was an explosion like that of an erupting volcano. The father could scarcely express himself. He snorted, “That fellow is the biggest fool I have ever heard of. You better not let him come poking around here or I’ll make mince-meat out of him. We don’t want such a simp in our family. Any ding-busted, fat-headed idiot who would write such a mess of sickly, silly hogwash to any girl deserves to be ducked in a mud hole – and I’d like to do it!”

Now, he himself had written that letter. Haven’t you done foolish things when you are in love? Haven’t you written foolish letters when you are in love? Haven’t you observed that lovers always look mad to other people? And the same will happen to them; when they are in love, others will think that they are mad.
Religious people have always looked mad to the non-religious; worshipping and praying in a temple, you look mad to an atheist. You look like a fool, foolish. What are you doing? To whom are you praying? There is no God. A happy person looks mad to unhappy, miserable people.
Those miserable people sometimes accidentally come here too, and when they come here they see a great crowd of mad people around me laughing, dancing, enjoying, singing. They cannot believe it! They are so miserable, how can they believe it? You only believe that which you are. More than that looks impossible, cannot be, should not be. You think that you are the limit of existence, or, you are the definition of existence.
Lao Tzu says:
“I am not even sure that these words of mine are not abnormal, let alone those of the gentlemen of Lu who are the most abnormal of all.”
About Confucius and his followers he is absolutely certain – they are the most abnormal people. They are the moralists, the puritans; they are the most abnormal people in the world. In fact, they have driven all of humanity to abnormality. They have not allowed spontaneity; they have not allowed people to be natural. They have condemned everything; they have condemned so much that people are simply at a loss as to how to be, what to be. They have condemned reality so much that all of humanity has become fake, pseudo. Everybody is wearing a mask. And everybody has lost their original face.

Two women met on the street for the first time in several months. One of them asked, “How’s your son?”
“Haven’t you heard?” the other asked. “It’s all over town. My son’s a schizophrenic.”
“Really?” her friend said. “Where’s his office?”

All schizophrenic people have now become psychoanalysts. The question “Where is his office?” is relevant. All mad people have turned into moralists, moralizers. They are trying to change the whole world. Whenever you come across a person who is trying to change the whole world, escape from him. He is dangerous. Nobody is needed to change the whole world. Missionaries are the most mischievous people in the world.
Live your life, enjoy your life. If, through your enjoyment and delight, somebody else’s life becomes a little more beautiful, good. If not, that too is good.
“…let alone those of the gentlemen of Lu who are the most abnormal of all. Who are they to cure other people’s abnormality?”
Who are they to cure, to help, to manipulate? Who are they to change others? Don’t become self-appointed dictators.
Moralists are self-appointed dictators. They are ready to change everybody. They are ready to sacrifice their lives to change your life. And they do sacrifice their lives! In sacrificing they are insane. Then they cling to your neck, they suffocate you. The do-gooders are suffocating. They try to kill you. And you cannot even defend yourself because they say, “We are doing you good. We are servants of the people. We serve.”
These servants are the enemies. They have poisoned all of nature. Not only is the atmosphere poisoned, humanity is also poisoned. Scientists have poisoned the outside nature and the so-called religious people have poisoned inner humanity. The whole ecology is disturbed, outer and inner, both.
“Who are they to cure other people’s abnormality? You had better go straight home instead of wasting your money.”
Look at this advice. You may not be able to understand immediately, but the message is very simple. The message is: don’t interfere. The message is: don’t judge. The message is: you are nobody to change somebody else. That is not your responsibility. You are not meant to do that. Live your life and allow others to live their lives. Let everybody have the freedom to do his thing.
All judgment is immoral, and all effort to change somebody is destructive and violent. That’s what your mahatmas and your saints have been doing up to now. That’s why I say that Lao Tzu is incomparable, unique, unsurpassed – before and after. His vision is the ultimate vision of spontaneity, suchness, nature. If you understand him, your life will start moving in a totally different rhythm. You will become a non-interference, wu-wei. Only when you don’t interfere in another’s life do you respect life – that’s what reverence of life is all about.
My teaching is exactly the same. I cannot say that about anybody else, but about Lao Tzu I can say that my teaching is exactly the same. With Buddha I have differences, although I may not say them. With Mahavira I have many, many differences, although I may not talk about them. But with Lao Tzu I am absolutely in agreement. The agreement is unconditional and absolute because he seems to be the only one who has looked at life without any mind, who has looked at life straight, who has no idea, no ideology.
You can also have exactly the same clarity and transparency. That will be the day of benediction, that will be the day of enlightenment. That’s what enlightenment is.
Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
You have helped me to be in touch with my spontaneity, yet it is the most dangerous quality of life I have ever encountered – especially in relationships. I lose myself. And what hassles you have created through it! Now I feel totally helpless, too vulnerable, possessed by you and this spontaneous union. Where is the center of this cyclone?
There is no center to this cyclone, the cyclone is the center. We have a chronic habit of dividing things into two. We have a chronic habit of duality: God and the world, body and soul, the lower and the higher the good and bad. The habit persists. Now it is the center and the cyclone.
Let me insist on it: the cyclone is the center and there is no other center to it. Once you understand this oneness of life, then all tensions, anxieties, anguish, disappear. The anxiety is created because we are always dividing. Through division we become split; through division we become schizophrenic. Now you think that you are on the circumference of the cyclone and the center has been lost, so now the center must be found.
It is the old habit of duality. The “center and the cyclone” is new language, but the habit is very old, the gestalt is very old. It is always that wherever you are, you are not right, you should be somewhere else.
My whole emphasis is that whatsoever is is right. There is no other right. There is nowhere else to go. This is the only life there is, the only dance there is. Only then can you be spontaneous, really spontaneous.
Why have we lost spontaneity? By what trick? The trick is in dividing. You cannot be spontaneous today because you have to think about tomorrow. You cannot be spontaneous this moment because you have to think of the coming moment. You cannot be spontaneous in this life because you have to think about the afterlife. You cannot be spontaneous in your actions because you have to think about the consequences. It is always a division of now and then, of here and there. Hence spontaneity is lost.
Who is spontaneous? One who lives in this moment as if it is all is spontaneous. And this is all. In the beginning it will be just “as if.” Slowly, slowly, as you get in tune with it, you will come to know that it is not as if, it is the only reality there is.
The second thing: spontaneity is dangerous. It will be better if we say spontaneity is danger. To say “dangerous” means that dangerousness is a quality, accidental. So I say that it is better to say, spontaneity is danger, then it is not a quality but the very intrinsic nature of spontaneity. There can never be spontaneity without danger: danger is spontaneity.
What do I mean? The first thing: when you are spontaneous you are not in control, you cannot be in control. If you are in control, then the act is not spontaneous, then you are thinking of the consequences, the results, this and that – a thousand and one things. You are managing. A spontaneous act is one in which you are not the manager; in which God manages. The whole manages – call it Tao – in which you are no longer in control; you have dropped your control, you have surrendered your control. Now you don’t know what is happening, you don’t know where you are going, you don’t know what will be the outcome – and you are not worried about it at all, not even a bit. You are simply herenow, totally. The act is so total that you are absorbed in it; you are not standing outside it. To control something you have to be outside it. A controller can never be inside an act; a controller is always on the outside – hence the controller can never enjoy. To enjoy, you have to disappear in the act. That disappearance is danger. Now you will be vulnerable – naturally so, obviously so. Now you don’t know. Anything is possible. You are not in control so you cannot direct. That is the danger. There is no direction any more. You are completely drunk with the moment, drowned in it, so relaxed in it that you cannot even feel that you are.
Remember, the feeling “I am” is the feeling of a tense mind. When the tenseness disappears the “I” also disappears. The ego is nothing but accumulated tension of the past, of the future. Haven’t you noticed some moments in your life when you were not? Those were moments of benediction, moments of great blessing, beautitude. In those moments, heaven opened for you.
Heaven opens only when you open; and when you open there is danger. The danger simply means that now the future is not in your hands, the future becomes unpredictable. You are at the mercy of the whole – this is what danger is.
So right, your feeling is absolutely right. “You have helped me to be in touch with my own spontaneity, yet it is the most dangerous quality of life I have ever encountered.” In fact, this is the first time you have encountered life, because life is spontaneity and life is danger.
Have you ever heard of any man who has lived without danger? To live means to be in danger; to die means to be out of danger. Those who are in their graves are out of danger, out of all danger. Now nothing can happen to them: nobody can insult them, nobody can kill them, nobody can rob them. Death is not even possible. They are absolutely beyond all danger.
People who are too afraid of danger start living in a sort of grave; they create a grave of security around themselves, and they start living in that grave, a subtle grave, a mind grave. They feel protected. But against whom are you protected? Against life. The moment you protect yourself you are creating barriers against life and then life will come less and less. A person who is secure is a person who is dead.
To live means to live dangerously; to live means to remain available to all possibilities. The possibilities are infinite. You are not limited to any possibility; you have an unlimited being, unbounded. You can be anything; the next moment can bring anything. Deep down each individual is a whole humanity – not only a whole humanity, a whole existence. The tree exists in you, the dog exists in you, the tiger exists in you; all past exists in you and also all future. In a very atomic way, all that has happened in the world and all that is going to happen potentially exists in you. You can be in millions of ways, hence to live means to live dangerously, to live means to live through change, movement. One remains a river.
If you are secured you become a pool of water; there is no movement, no dynamism. Static and stagnant, the pool of water becomes dirty and dies by and by. A river is alive and nobody knows what will happen. It may get lost in a desert. What is going to happen is unpredictable. A predictable life is a mechanical life; unpredictable, you are throbbing with life, pulsating, vibrating. Then God, or Tao, or the whole, lives through you.
You have come across life for the first time; don’t lose this contact whatsoever the cost. I know it is costly to be alive and it is very cheap to be dead. It costs nothing to be dead; it costs much to be alive. One has to pay for it.
“…yet it is the most dangerous quality in life I have ever encountered – especially in relationships.” Yes, it will become clearer in relationships because when you are alone you don’t have any mirror. Just as you need a mirror to see your face, so you need the mirror of relationship to see your being. Love functions as a mirror, it shows you where you are, what you are, who you are. Hence many people become afraid of relationships. They are cowards. They escape to the Himalayas, or to Tibet, or to the monasteries, or to the caves. Why are they escaping, and from what? They are escaping from mirrors.

I have heard about an ugly woman who would never look in a mirror because she used to think that mirrors were against her. While she thought she was one of the most beautiful women in the world, they showed her ugliness. If somebody presented her with a mirror she would simply throw it away or break it immediately. She would never go into a room where there was a mirror because she felt that mirrors had always been against her.

These are your mahatmas. They escape from relationships because relationships show their ugliness, relationships show where they are, who they are. Sitting in their caves in the Himalayas they feel perfectly beautiful because there is no mirror.
Never escape from relationships. That’s why I have introduced sannyas with relationships, not without it. There is great meaning in it. Never on the earth has sannyas existed with relationships, that’s why I say that sannyas has not really existed; or the sannyas that has previously existed was anemic, bloodless. People thought they were beautiful; without the mirror they thought they were beautiful. It is very easy to fool yourself when the mirror is not there.
When you are in relationship with people, in a thousand and one ways you are provoked, challenged, seduced. Again and again you come to know your pitfalls, your limitations, your anger, your lust, your possessiveness, your jealousy, your sadness, your happiness – all the moods come and go, you are constantly in turmoil. But this is the only way to know who you are.
Self-knowledge is not the knowledge of a dead self. Self-knowledge is the knowledge of the process of the self. It is an alive phenomenon. The self is not a thing, it is an event, it is a process. Never think in terms of things, the self is not there inside you, like a thing waiting in your room. The self is a process: changing, moving, arriving at new altitudes, moving into new planes, going deeper into new depths. Each moment much work is going on, and the only way to encounter this self is to encounter it in relationship.
Love is the mirror. Let your meditation be mirrored in love. If you find that something is missing, meditate more – but never escape from love; let it be mirrored in love again and again, because that will be the only criterion of whether you are growing or not. If you are really growing in love, soon you will see that love has remained and jealousy has disappeared; love has remained and possessiveness has disappeared; love has remained and hatred has disappeared. A great purity arises, a great innocence. A fragrance is released into your soul. Go on meditating and go on loving. Let love and meditation be two wings. Let them help each other.
I am showing you the path which is arduous, which is really arduous. Love alone is good because there is nothing to reflect, meditation alone is simple because there is no mirror to reflect. But meditation and love together – I am throwing you into the very eye of the storm. That is the only way one comes home.
When things become silent after the storm, the silence is alive; it is not the dead silence of a cemetery.
“…especially in relationships. I lose myself. And what hassles you have created through it!” That’s my whole work here – to create hassles for you, to send you on hazardous journeys, to push you into new ways of being, into new styles, into the unknown, the unfamiliar, the strange. You would like to remain with the familiar because there you have become very efficient. My whole effort here is to push you again and again out of the familiar into the unfamiliar, because wherever you have become efficient you have become mechanical. Machines are efficient. So when you become efficient, know well that now you have to move. Now this efficiency is no longer of any value, you have to move. You have learned it, now move and learn something else.
If a person remains a learner each moment of his life, from birth to death, only then does enlightenment come, otherwise not.
So never stop anywhere. Somebody asked Buddha, “What is enlightenment?” And he said, “Charaiveti, charaiveti” – go on walking, go on walking, never stop, become an eternal journey. Yes, you can stop for an overnight stay. You can rest under a tree, but don’t make your house there. Let eternal growth be your only house. There is no end to it – that is the meaning of the saying that God is infinite. There is no end to it. You go on arriving and arriving and arriving but you never really arrive. You go on coming closer and closer and closer but you can never say that you have arrived – reality is so infinite, how can you claim it in your fist?
“Now I feel totally helpless…” Good. Blessed are you. To be totally helpless is to be in the hands of God. If you still feel that a little help is possible through your own effort, then God will not be available.
There is a beautiful story:

Krishna was taking his lunch, he had just started, he had taken a bite, he was chewing. Suddenly he jumped up and ran toward the door.
Rukmani, his wife, said, “What are you doing, my Lord? Where are you going? What is the hurry? This is so sudden!”
Then Krishna stopped at the door, waited for one moment, then came back, looking very sad, sat down again and continued eating.
Rukmani was even more puzzled. She said, “Now you have puzzled me even more. Why did you jump up so suddenly to go to the door, and why did you come back? You jumped up as if the house was on fire. I didn’t see anything happening anywhere. And why have you come back if there was something happening?”
Krishna said, “There was something. One of my devotees is walking on the earth in a certain city. And he was singing my song, playing on his veena, dancing in the street, but people started throwing stones at him and blood was flowing from his forehead. He was not reacting at all, he was absolutely silent, absolutely centered, absolutely helpless. I was needed; I was needed to help him immediately.”
And Rukmini said, “Then why have you come back from the door if you are needed so urgently?”
Krishna said, “There is no need. The moment I reached the door he took up a stone in his hand. Now he is helping himself. My help is not needed.”

This is a beautiful parable. God helps you only when you are really totally helpless, absolutely helpless. In your absolute helplessness ego is completely gone. What is helplessness? Egolessness. Egolessness is helplessness. You cannot do anything. How can you be when you cannot do anything? The ego functions through the doer. If you can do a little bit still then the helplessness is not total. And God only comes to you when you are totally lost. When you are really helpless, help comes.
Become totally helpless. I don’t think that you are totally helpless. You are feeling helpless but not totally. Go a little deeper into it. And a moment will come, the moment of transformation will come, when you disappear and the whole takes everything in its hands.
“I am feeling too vulnerable, possessed by you and this spontaneous union. Where is the center of this cyclone?” Nowhere. The cyclone is the center. Lose yourself in this cyclone. Losing yourself in this cyclone you will find the center. But the center is not separate from the cyclone. God is not separate from the world. The soul is not separate from the body, and the mind is not separate from matter; the outer is not separate from the inner, the lower is not separate from the higher – it is one reality, one solid reality. Lose yourself in it and you will find that the cyclone is the center. The moment you have found that the cyclone is the center, you have found a great truth. You have arrived at the door where you can enter the innermost shrine of life, love, meditation, existence.

The second question:
Osho,
What is in my womb – a ghost, or a goat, or God?
A difficult question because I am not a womb-reader. You can wait a little. Time will show who is in your womb.

An old man had a set of monkey glands installed in his system and shortly thereafter was married. In due course his wife was in the maternity room while he waited outside the door. When the doctor opened the door the husband besieged him.
“What is it,” he begged, “a boy or a girl?”
“Don’t be so impatient,” said the doctor. “Wait till it comes down off the chandelier and I’ll tell you.”

If you have monkey glands installed in you then a monkey is born. So the doctor said, “Don’t be so impatient. Wait till it comes down off the chandelier and I will tell you.”
Wait a little; I don’t know how you have managed, what kind of soul you have called into your womb. But a few inferences can be made. They are just inferences, guesswork.
You must have heard the proverb: Hope for the best and expect the worst. So I hope it is a God and I expect it is a ghost. But these are extremes, and extremes generally don’t happen; what happens usually is in the middle, so the greater possibility is that it is a goat. A goat is just midway between a God and a ghost, a cross between a God and a ghost. But, in a way, a goat is better than either because if a God is born, I will not find a new sannyasin because God need not be a sannyasin. And if a ghost is born, it will be difficult to persuade him, he is already in the service of the Devil.
But if a goat is born, it will be a beautiful sannyasin: Swami Goatananda Paramahansa.
Wait!

The third question:
Osho,
If Krishnamurti is enlightened he must see what you are saying himself, right? So why doesn't he just come here and find himself a chair and a case of cold sodas and lean back and forget all that?
He sees what I am saying and I see what he is saying, but neither will he come here nor will I go there. I am doing my thing, he is doing his thing.
Remember, even after enlightenment the uniqueness of the individual remains intact. That uniqueness is so deep that it never leaves you. When a man becomes enlightened his uniqueness blooms rather than disappears. It comes to bloom. A buddha becomes enlightened in his own way. The enlightenment is the same, the experience of the light is the same, the experience of truth is the same, but the experiencer has an individuality, a unique individuality.
For example, during the night, on a full-moon night, the moon is one – but it will be reflected by the sea in one way, it will be reflected by the river in a different way, it will be reflected by a cool, placid pool in a different way. The moon is one but the sea will reflect it in its way – great waves will be arising. The river will reflect it in its own way – small ripples, small waves will arise. A placid pool, a silent pool, will reflect it in its own way – no ripples will arise. The moon is still the same, the reflections are also not different, but the medium of reflection is different.
So what I am saying, Krishnamurti sees; what he is saying, I see. But I will go on doing my work and he will go on doing his work. There is no other possibility. When Buddha became enlightened he functioned in his own way. When Meera became enlightened she functioned in her own way. Buddha could not dance and Meera danced so beautifully. Buddha sat silently under the bodhi tree, there was not even a slight movement, he was almost like a statue.
When the first statues were created of Buddha, it cannot be just accidental, he looked so statuelike. In fact, in Arabic – Urdu – the word for statue is budh and the word itself comes from buddha. Those were the first statues ever created of any man. It is difficult to create a statue of Meera; she is such a movement, a dance. Buddha’s statue is very simple and the marble reflects him perfectly well. Even when he was alive, sitting under the bodhi tree, he was almost a marble statue; there was no movement, no wavering. That is beautiful, it has its own beauty, it has its own variety. Meera is also beautiful.
Mahavira became naked when he became enlightened; Buddha continued to use his clothes. Mahavira’s nakedness is beautiful – such innocence. Krishna is totally different; Christ is totally different. And then there is this man, Lao Tzu. No two enlightened persons have ever been the same, cannot be. Unenlightened people are not even the same, how can enlightened people be the same? Even unenlightened people, imitating each other, cannot completely and utterly destroy their individuality. They react in their own ways even though they try to efface themselves.
Society wants you to efface your individuality completely; society does not like individuals. It likes you to become a member of the society, not an individual. It does not want you to become independent, it wants you to be a dependent link, and it wants you to live the way others are living. The moment you assert your individuality, society comes in and puts you back into your place; it forces you to be just like others. There is a danger when you assert your individuality because you are becoming chaotic, you are becoming anarchic. No, you have to follow the order.
Even unenlightened people, forced by society and the state and the church, still retain their individuality. There is really no way to drop your individuality utterly. Something unique is there – what can you do? You can hide behind the same clothes, you can hide behind the same masks, you can hide behind the same words, same philosophies, same slogans, same flags; but still, all this is just skin deep. Scratch a person and you will find an individual soul, unique. Never before has there been such a person, never will there be again.

Two hipsters were visiting a small Alaska town when they heard some rumbling in the distance.
“Hey, Cat,” one hipster said to a native. “What’s that crazy noise?”
“That noise means an avalanche is starting,” said one of the locals. “In the past we’ve had to leave here for safety’s sake.”
“Man,” said the second hipster, “I don’t dig this. Let’s beat it.”
“You can go if you want to,” screamed hipster number one, “but I’m staying. I’ve got a feeling this town is really going to move tonight!”

If you watch people, you will find that in absolutely alike situations, or even in the same situation, they react differently, they respond differently.
So what can you say about two enlightened persons? They are each like peaks, peaks of the Himalayas, absolutely alone, unique. Never compare two enlightened persons. If you understand me, never compare any two people; but at least never compare two enlightened ones, otherwise whatsoever you think will be wrong.
It is very natural. If you are close to me, you fall in love with me, and naturally you start thinking that this is the only way to be enlightened. Other enlightened people then start looking somehow wrong because you have a fixed idea of enlightenment. How can they be enlightened? If you are with Krishnamurti, the same will happen there – you will fall in love with him and you will start thinking that this is the only way a person can be enlightened.
Beware of this stupidity. There are as many possibilities for enlightened people as there are for unenlightened people. Every person will be unique when he becomes enlightened. He will be a flower, new, incomparable. And always remember that God loves variety. That’s why there is so much variety – there are millions of forms and never any repetition.
Krishnamurti is beautiful, so is Buddha, so is George Gurdjieff, so is Raman, and so is Ramakrishna. They are all beautiful. If you fall in love with one enlightened person, don’t let that love make you blind. It you are alert, you will go on loving me, but that will not make you blind. You will be able to understand that there are other possibilities too. Not all the possibilities are exhausted by me, cannot be exhausted by me. Nobody can exhaust all the possibilities.
It is beautiful that nobody can exhaust all the possibilities, otherwise Buddha or Lao Tzu or Mahavira or Mohammed would have exhausted all the possibilities. Then what would we be doing here?

The fourth question:
Osho,
What is the difference between being special and being unique?
Being unique is everybody’s nature; being special is relative. When you start feeling that you are special you are comparing yourself with somebody. Special is in comparison to somebody; unique, there is no comparison. Unique means you are alone as you are – how can you be compared? You cannot compare a car with an elephant. They are so different, how can you compare them? Each individual is so different from any other individual that there is no possibility of comparison.
Uniqueness is everybody’s nature, but specialness is comparative. Uniqueness is religious, specialness is political. When you claim that you are special you are claiming that you are higher, superior to others; that others are lower, inferior to you. You bring the other in when you use the word special and this is violent. To compare yourself with somebody in any way is violent because he is he and you are you, and you are both so different. The very idea of comparing is stupid.
Through comparison misery arises: either you feel you are inferior, then there is misery, or you start feeling you are superior, then too there is misery. If you feel superior, ego arises – and ego hurts. If you feel inferior, ego is wounded – and those wounds hurt. You may feel superior to one person but what about others? You may one day or other come across somebody to whom you feel inferior. With one person you may feel intelligent, with another you may look like a pygmy. With one you may feel beautiful, with another you may start feeling ugly.
When you carry the idea of comparison you are carrying seeds of illness which will create misery and nothing else. Comparison creates hell. Heaven is an inner space where you live an uncompared life. You simply live yourself; it is your life, you are you. Just think of the beauty of it, the tremendous purity of it. You are simply you. Then you are beautiful. Are you ugly? Are you intelligent, or unintelligent? If you are simply you, and there is no comparison, how can you say you are this or that? Then both disappear. There arises neti-neti, neither this nor that. Then you are simply there.
Just think: the whole world disappears and you alone are left. God takes away the whole world and only you are left, nobody else. Then what will you be – strong, weak, intelligent, unintelligent, beautiful, ugly? Then who will you be? All comparisons will disappear, you will simply be yourself. That is the way to be.
Right now, be that! Don’t create unnecessary misery for yourself and for others. Start living your unique life.
Uniqueness is everybody’s nature. With the feeling of being special ambition enters, comparison enters, jealousy enters, conflict enters. You become political. Then you start pulling others down because you have to be superior. Then you start fighting, struggling, and then you start using all sorts of means. You have to prove and perform and your whole life is wasted in this nonsense.

Three ambitious politicians were walking along the beach, planning a strategic move to defeat a powerful rival, when they came upon Mulla Nasruddin looking for crabs. As each crab was caught, the Mulla put it into a wicker basket.
Looking into the container, one of the politicians warned Nasruddin, “Mulla, you should cover your basket. If you are not careful, the crabs will climb out and run away.”
“Ah, I don’t need any cover,” explained Nasruddin. “These crabs are born politicians and if one crab tries to climb up, the others will pull him down.”

This is what is happening in life. You are pulling others down, others are pulling you down, and your whole life is wasted in this unnecessary struggle. Just be yourself and you are unique; that uniqueness is nonviolent.
Never try to be special. The very idea of being special comes from feeling inferior. Having the very idea of being superior to somebody or inferior to somebody, you have lost contact with yourself, with your uniqueness. In that very idea you become your own enemy. Now your life will be in trouble, you will create more and more misery for yourself and for others; you will create ripples of misery all around you.
A man who simply relaxes into his uniqueness is a man who creates ripples of bliss around him. He lives in bliss and he creates pulsations of bliss for others. If you are around such a person you will suddenly be showered with great peace and love and silence and happiness because he is happy. The moment you accept your uniqueness, your individuality, how can you be unhappy?
Just think of it in this way: God has never created anybody else like you and he will never create anybody like you again. God has created only one you – only one you, mind – and he is never going to repeat you again. This is your uniqueness. Feel grateful, feel thankful. Once you start comparing, you feel ungrateful. Why has he created somebody more beautiful than you, or somebody more intelligent than you? You are bringing misery upon yourself. He has created only you; he has conferred uniqueness on you. It is a gift. Uniqueness is a gift of God; specialty is your own effort. Your effort is not going to be of much use: your doing always proves your undoing.
Ambitious persons become cruel and hard; ambitious persons become rock-like, they lose their softness, they become closed. Their heart is no longer like a flower. How can you be like a flower when you have to fight and struggle? It is a very difficult world then – cut-throat competition everywhere. Everybody is at your neck and you are at everybody’s neck; everybody is trying to destroy you and you are trying to destroy everybody. Where will you find a creative break? Where will you find a breakthrough? Where will you enjoy, and how?
No, all your moments of so-called joy will be when you are able to crush somebody, when you are able to destroy somebody. But how can destruction bring joy? It is not the law of life.

A grocer was delivering some groceries in his wagon one morning when he ran down and badly injured an old lady. The old lady sued him and collected big damages. A few weeks later he ran down an old gentleman. The old gentleman also sued and collected big damages, which almost ruined him.
One Sunday the grocer was sitting at home when his son came running through the door. “Father! Father!” the little boy cried. “Mother’s been run over by a four-hundred-and-eighty-horsepower limousine.”
The grocer’s eyes filled with tears and, in a voice trembling with genuine emotion, he cried, “Thank the Lord, the luck’s changed at last.”

His wife is dying on the road but he says, “Thank the Lord, the luck’s changed at last.” Now he can sue somebody and get all the money back.
An ambitious mind, a greedy mind, a jealous mind, becomes hard, stonelike. And remember, if you are stonelike you will hurt others, but that is only secondary – you will be continuously hurting yourself. Only sometimes will your stone hurt others, but your stoniness will hurt you continuously, twenty-four hours, day in, day out, year in, year out. The stone will be there in your heart, pinching, hurting, wounding.
One is happy only when one is flowerlike – delicate, soft, a lotus: To remain a lotus one has to drop all comparisons, all jealousies – and they are stupid anyway, meaningless.

The fifth question:
Osho,
I have been here two years doing nothing to improve myself, just reading, eating, sleeping, drifting. Now I feel as empty and lost as the day I came. Is there any point in staying longer?
This is from Sambuddha.
The first thing, you have not been just reading, just eating, just sleeping, just drifting. If you had been doing that, you would have been enlightened by now. That is the ultimate relaxed state – just eating, just reading. No, you must have done a thousand and one other things too. While reading, you must have been thinking many, many things; while eating, you must have been thinking; even while sleeping you must have been dreaming.
One thing: if you can really do this, then nothing else is needed – that is all. The very ultimate in sadhana is just to do the thing that you are doing in that moment, with no other thought interfering. Eating, you are simply eating. Not a single thought moves in your mind. Eating, you are just an eater; walking, you are just a walker; listening, you are just listening.
But no, when you are listening you are not just listening, you are interpreting, criticizing, appreciating, saying yes, saying no, agreeing, disagreeing. You are not listening, you are doing something else. You are hearing, certainly, but you are not listening.

A small boy was brought to a psychoanalyst. The mother who had brought the boy talked for a long time and the psychoanalyst was getting bored. Then, when he got the chance, he talked about many things. The boy was getting very bored, and the psychoanalyst, seeing that the boy was not listening to what he was saying, was somewhere else, said, “Have you some difficulty in hearing me?”
The kid said, “No, I have no difficulty in hearing but I have a lot of difficulty in listening.”

Your hearing is perfect. If your ears are healthy, you hear perfectly well – but hearing is not listening. Listening has a depth to it; listening means that the mind is quiet, still, no thought waves in it. Otherwise you go on interpreting, and you will certainly interpret in your own way.

An old lady, who was walking her dog, decided to go into the local supermarket which didn’t allow dogs. She tied the animal to a fire hydrant. No sooner was the dog tied up than every dog in the neighborhood that was loose started sniffing the defenseless animal. The cop on the corner, observing what was happening, called to the old woman and told her that she couldn’t leave her dog there alone.
She asked him why and he replied, “Lady, your dog is in heat.”
She answered, “Eat, she’ll eat anything.”
He countered, “The dog should be bred.”
The old lady replied, “She’ll eat bread, cake; anything you give her, she’ll eat.”
In complete frustration he said, “That dog should be laid!”
The old woman stared directly into his eyes and answered. “So lay her. I always wanted a police dog.”

How you listen depends on you. Your mind is continuously creating your own interpretations. No, it is not possible that you have been just reading, eating, sleeping, drifting. If you could do that, then nothing else would be needed.
The second thing: “I have been here two years doing nothing to improve myself.” That’s what I told Sambuddha – to do nothing to improve. But he must have been watching out of the corner of his eye again and again to see whether any improvement is happening or not. When I said to you, “Don’t do anything to improve yourself,” you agreed – just to improve yourself. You agreed and yet you don’t agree. You said, “Okay, if that is the way to improve, I am ready.”
But you missed the point! You missed absolutely. You said, “Okay, if that is the only possibility for improvement.” Deep in your unconscious, that’s how the logic went: “Osho says drop all ideas of improvement, so I will.” And then you continuously waited for something to happen. One month passed, two months passed, one year passed, now two years have passed, and improvement has not happened.
It cannot happen because you are still looking for it. It can happen only when the whole idea has become simply foolish, when you have dropped it. If the idea of improvement continues, no transformation is possible because the very idea comes from the ego. The ego wants to improve.
Remember the difference between improvement and transformation. I am here to help you to be transformed, transmuted. You are here to improve yourself – that’s where our languages are different. You are here to add some more experiences to your life, to become a little more loving, a little more meditative. You are here to decorate yourself a little more, to succeed in life, to have more pleasures. You are here to improve, you are not here to die and be reborn.
My whole effort here is to destroy you utterly so that you can be created in a totally new way. I would like to create a discontinuity in your life, but you want the same continuity. Sambuddha wants Sambuddha to improve, he wants some more decorations, some more gold medals – but the original center remains the same. That’s the problem, and that’s why transformation cannot happen.
Even if you improve, nothing will happen.
I have heard…

An old woman went to a theater. Suddenly her ears started buzzing. She was an old woman and something went wrong with her ears so she stopped hearing anything. She thought that it must be because she was sitting so far away from the stage that she could not hear.
So she changed her seat and went to the front, but there also she could not hear anything.
Naturally she thought, “What is the matter? The acoustics of this hall are not good. Maybe the people in the balcony can hear.” She looked up and the people were looking very interested so she went to the balcony. Again she could not hear.
The manager, seeing that she had changed her seat again and again, came to her and asked her what the matter was. She said, “Something is wrong. The acoustics of this theater are not good, because wherever I go I cannot hear.”
And the manager said, “Lady, maybe something is wrong with your ears.”

Now if something is wrong with the ears, you can change your place but nothing will happen, no improvement will happen. You will have to change something inside you. If the ego is there, you can improve; if you are poor, you can become rich, if you are immoral, you can become moral, if you are a sinner, you can become a saint. You can move from the ground floor to the balcony, but nothing will happen because the ego is there. You will remain in the same suffering. Maybe the labels change, the names may change, but the suffering remains the same.
My effort is to help you to drop the ego. Now the greatest difficulty for the ego is to drop this plan to improve. The ego exists by planning: how to improve, how to become more and more, how to become great, how to become a hero, how to become a buddha. That’s how the ego exists – by projecting.
I told Sambuddha to drop all projections – just to be. Now, after two years, he says: “I have been here two years doing nothing to improve myself…” No, you were doing nothing only to improve yourself. That’s what you were doing, and that’s why you have failed and you will fail continuously.
Look into the whole phenomenon, go deep into your own mind and see what you have been doing. On the surface you were not doing anything, but you were waiting for the transformation to happen. What I am saying is: forget about the future and live the now. Now is the only time and here the only space. Live now and here.
There is no improvement, and forget about all transformation. Then one day it happens – but only when you have completely forgotten it, only then. If you remember it, you function as a barrier.
“I have been here two years doing nothing…” Doing nothing is not so easy. Doing nothing means allowing the whole to do things – allowing Tao to happen. Doing nothing is the greatest thing in the world. If a man can do nothing, then everything happens, then all is possible, because to do nothing means one becomes nothing, nobody, emptiness. And out of that emptiness arises all that is, all that is possible, all that is potential. Out of emptiness the lotus of being opens.
“Now I feel as empty and lost as the day I came.” You have been changing seats but, because you are deaf, you can go to the balcony, you can go to the front row, you can go to the back and nothing will change. Yes, in two years or two hundred years or two hundred lives, nothing will change. Change comes only when you are no longer interested in change, when you are no longer interested in any improvement, when you are in total acceptance, when suchness happens.
But one thing has happened. When you came two years ago I knew well that you were not aware of your emptiness. Now you are aware of it. That is something that has happened. Now you are more aware of your emptiness, more aware of your misery, more aware that you are not going anywhere, that nothing is happening. This is good. This awareness will become more and more penetrating, will become more and more crystal clear; and one day this awareness will come to a point, to a conclusion, where you will see that nothing ever happens.
Right now you think nothing is happening to you: this is the beginning. One day you will come to understand that nothing ever happens. Nothing has ever happened – not only to you, but to anybody. Nothing has ever happened. How can anything happen? All that is, is. What else can be? And in that moment all happens.
Buddha searched for enlightenment for six years. Remember, you have been here only two years. For six years he searched hard and he did all sorts of things; whatsoever he was told to do he did: fasted, meditated, did yoga, did everything he was told to do, did everything that he had heard, did everything that was traditionally available. He tried it all. He went to many masters, and he was such a great seeker that each master to whom he went became interested in him. His search was so honest, he was so earnest, his thirst was so authentic, that even though he had not arrived at the goal, the masters all wanted him to succeed them, to be their successor.
Wherever he went every master told him, “Be here. Don’t leave me. You will be my successor.” But he said, “What am I going to do as your successor? I have not attained yet. I don’t know exactly what life is. I am not interested in being a successor or becoming a great master, I am interested in knowing. I am not even a disciple yet so how can I be a master?” And he left.
After six years of hard struggle, of strenuous, arduous struggle, one day he came to understand that nothing is possible, nothing ever happens, nothing has ever happened to anybody, that he had been searching in vain, the whole search was futile. This was not a frustration, remember, this was not a hopelessness, it was a great understanding. A great light came to him – that nothing ever happens, whatsoever is, is. What is, is; and what ain’t, ain’t.
So he sat under the bodhi tree and forgot all about his struggles – and that very night he became enlightened. The moment he dropped all struggle and became non-tense, anxiety disappeared. There was nowhere to go so he was there in that moment, total, no desire left, no nirvana, no moksha, no enlightenment. Nothing ever happens; whatsoever is, is.
He rested. After six years he slept without a dream because dreams come only because you desire. Dreams are reflections of your desires. No dreams. He slept the whole night. He slept for the first time – it was almost samadhi. In the morning when he opened his eyes there was no effort even to open his eyes. Listen well: there was no effort; the sleep was complete so the eyes opened. That’s how the Buddhist scriptures say it: he did not open his eyes, because he was no longer there. With sleep complete, the eyes opened. The doer was gone, utterly gone. There was no one to open the eyes, it was a natural phenomenon – just as a bud opens in the morning because it is ready to open, the energy is ready to open. The tree does not try to open it. Buddha found his eyes opening and he looked at the sky and the last star was disappearing. And with that last star disappearing he disappeared utterly, forever.
And he laughed. It was so simple. He was making it difficult by his doing, by his effort.
If you really leave your efforts, nobody is barring the path – you can become enlightened this very moment. As far as I am concerned you are already enlightened, it is only your delusion that you are not enlightened. The day I became enlightened all of existence became enlightened for me. From that day, I have never come across a person who is not enlightened. You may think you are not but that is your thinking, it is not true, it is not the truth. I know you are enlightened, that’s why I give you such a beautiful name – Sambuddha. It means one who is enlightened. For me, you are enlightened, Sambuddha; for you, you are not enlightened. So drop the idea of your being and your ego; it is already the case.
You say: “I feel as empty and lost as the day I came.” No, you are more aware of your hopelessness. The day you came you were full of desire; the day you came you were full of hope. I remember very well, you may have forgotten. You came to me only because of hope, otherwise why should you come? What for? You came to me in the hope that you would attain. You were full of hope. You were doing many things – meditations, groups – and you were enjoying the trip. And then I said, “Don’t do anything.” And you were very happy thinking that now you must have attained a very high state; that’s why I was saying, “Don’t do anything.” And then you became depressed, then you became desperate; I have been watching this for two years. Now you are feeling very, very hopeless.
But things have changed. This hopelessness is good. That hope was illusory; this hopelessness is on the right track. If you really understand that nothing ever happens, that nothing can ever happen in the nature of things, that all is already there, there is no improvement possible… How can you improve upon God? How can you improve upon the whole? The perfect is perfect, how can you make it more perfect? There is no way.
When this understanding goes a little deeper… The moment is coming. If you don’t escape, the moment is coming. But remember, don’t start hoping because I say that the moment is coming. Otherwise again you will settle and you will start looking out of the corner of your eye to see if the moment is coming. The moment can come only when you stop all this nonsense that you have to become something, to do something, to be something.
The situation is different. You are less hopeful. That’s why you are saying: “Is there any point in staying longer?” There was never any point. In the very beginning there was no point in staying here. But there is no point in going anywhere else either; in fact, there is no point! So if you want to go, you can go but there is no point, remember. If you want to stay, stay, but remember, there is no point. And you will have to be somewhere, so why not here?!
Just relax because there is no point. You can relax.
Mind is very cunning, very clever, and because of its cunningness it misses much.

In a discussion between Mulla Nasruddin and his friend Sheik Abdulla, the Sheik maintained that no one could pray without having his mind wander. However, the Mulla positively stated that his mind never wandered while he was praying.
“If you come to me next Saturday and tell me honestly that your mind did not wander once from your prayers on Friday,” said the Sheik, “I will give you one of the best horses from my stables.”
On the following Saturday the Mulla presented himself to get the horse.
“Are you sure, Nasruddin, that your mind didn’t wander once during the prayers?” asked the Sheik.
“Well, maybe it did, once, at the end of the last prayer,” was Mulla Nasruddin’s reply, “when I wondered whether you would give me a saddle too!”

Now, when you are hoping for the horse the idea may come into the mind, “I wondered whether you would give me a saddle too.”
When you are waiting for something, ideas cannot stop. If you are not waiting for anything, ideas can stop. I repeat it again: there is no point, life is pointless, purposeless. Existence is not going anywhere; it has no destiny, no purpose. It just is. Simply, purely, it is. There is no why. It is because it cannot be, it cannot not be.
Relax, and start enjoying. Rather than planning and thinking, start enjoying. Read, enjoy: eat, enjoy; listen enjoy; love, enjoy. These are small things but out of these small things arises the great understanding. The ego always says these are small things, seek the big, seek the huge, seek the great, seek God, seek buddhahood. I say to you, there are no great things, only small things. Love well, love deeply; sing well, sing deeply; dance well, dance deeply. Sleep well, go for a morning walk, do small things – cleaning, taking a bath, working in the ashram. Enjoy small things. There is no other point and there is nowhere to go.
Drop hopes, and drop desires, and just be. Suddenly you will find you have always been a buddha. It has never been otherwise. Buddhahood is our intrinsic nature.
But listening to me, even listening to me, you listen with ideas, with a mind standing just around the corner. You have a fixed desire, you never leave it.

A young suitor was being led through the voluminous pages of the old family album by his girl friend’s proud father. After seeing scores of members of the clan, the young man was finally shown the picture of a solid-looking old gentleman. “This,” said the father proudly, “is the founder of the family.”
“What did he do?” asked the young man.
“He founded the family,” the older man said again.
“I mean, sir,” the suitor floundered, “what did he do to distinguish himself?”
“He was the founder of the family,” the father rasped in exasperation.
“I understand that, sir,” the suitor sighed. “I just wondered what the old gent did in the daytime.”

If you have a certain fixed idea, it has to come sooner or later.
Sambuddha has a fixed idea, a curiosity, a desire – a desire to become enlightened. So, I understand, it must have been hard for him to wait and wait and wait for two years with nothing happening. Nothing is going to happen ever.
Drop waiting, start being. Waiting is a thought process, being is existential. Live, live as much as you can, as intensely as you can, as passionately as you can. And through that passionate love for life, through that flame of passion, of authentic living something burns down in you – the ego. And when the ego is burnt down, something happens. That happening has nothing to do with your effort. It comes. It is a happening.

The sixth question:
Osho,
I am attached and addicted to sitting before you at discourse. Should anyone sit in what I call “my seat,” I have to use every ounce of restraint not to freak out. You are my everything, everything else can go but it seems this possessiveness remains. I am, it seems, without love or mercy when it comes to giving up “my seat.”
The question is from Divya. I have been missing her for many days. She is not in her seat. And it has nothing to do with possessiveness. She should not be worried about it. In fact, she has found the right spot for her; hence it is difficult for her to leave that spot. It has nothing to do with “my seat,” it has nothing to do with “my.” When she sits in a particular place she is flowing. From that angle she receives me best.
Everybody has to find his particular seat by and by. Those who are permanently here have to find their seats by and by. They will have a certain angle where they will be more capable of receiving me, a certain place where they will feel more relaxed.
Divya has found her place, so she need not be worried about it. And nobody should disturb her, let Shiva note it. For a few days she has not been in her seat. Other people have been in her seat, and nobody has been flowing there. One day Sagar was sitting there and he was sitting like a thief. Guilty, ill at ease! When Divya sits there she sits like a queen. She creates a certain space around her.
And I also enjoy her sitting there. So, Divya, no need to worry. Not seeing you there I have been missing you.

And the last question:
Osho,
I have never heard religion talked about in such a delightful way. What are you doing?
To me, religion is not religion but life; to me, religion is not religion but love; to me, religion is not a serious thing but is fun. To me, religion is more like laughter, more like dancing, more like singing. It is not a serious church thing.
I am not interested in the afterlife, I am not interested in heaven and hell; I am not interested in virtue and vice – I am interested only in how to impart to you an understanding of living life intensely, delightfully, because God is delight.

A talkative individual in a coffee house was demonstrating his ability to catalogue people as to their occupations. He had gone around the group with considerable success: a lawyer here, a salesman on the left, a banker in the corner, an editor by the window.
Finally, the self-announced expert’s eyes fell upon the interesting face of Mulla Nasruddin, a little pale, slightly drawn, with a certain glassiness in the eyes. “Here,” he said, “is a religious man, a preacher.”
A moment’s hush and then Mulla Nasruddin said softly, “You got me wrong, sir. I am no preacher. I just have stomach ulcers.”

The preachers that you have known are really pathological people, ill people. They have lost their taste for life.
I teach you the taste. I don’t teach you to be against life because, to me, life is the very shrine of God. I don’t teach you to go against the joys of life but to go into them as deeply as possible. I am affirmative; I am a yea-sayer. I am not negative. I don’t want to deny anything to anybody. Whatsoever God has given must be accepted in deep gratitude and lived. To me God and life are synonymous. That’s why whatsoever I am saying to you has a different quality to it – the taste of Tao, the taste of life and love, the taste of delight.

“When I am sick,” one day Mulla Nasruddin was saying to me, expounding his views on the subject of illness, “I go to see the doctor. For, after all, doctors have to live. He writes me out a prescription, which I take to the pharmacists. I pay the druggist willingly, for, after all, a pharmacist, too, must live. Then I go home and pour the medicine down the drain. For, after all, I have to live.”

So even if you go to a preacher, go to a church, remember that you have to live. Don’t forget it. Even if you accept their medicine out of politeness, pour it down the drain. They have to live so they have to preach. You have to live – so never listen to their preaching.
Enough for today.

============================================================

Tzu-hsia asked the Master:
“What sort of man is Yen Hui?”
“For kindness he is a better man than I am.”
“What about Tzu-kung?”
“For eloquence he is a better man than I am.”
“Tzu-lu?”
“For courage he is a better man than I am.”
“Tzu-chang?”
“For dignity he is a better man than I am.”
Tzu-hsia rose from his mat and asked:
“Then why do these four serve you?”
“Sit down, I will tell you. Yen Hui can be kind but cannot check the impulse when it will do no good. Tzu-kung can be eloquent but cannot hold his tongue. Tzu-lu can be brave but cannot be cautious. Tzu-chang can be dignified but cannot unbend in company. Even if I could have the virtues of the four men all together I should be unwilling to exchange them for my own. This is why they serve me without misgivings.”
The greatest enemy of religion is not materialism but morality. Why? Because morality tries to impose spirituality. It is a conditioning, and religion can flower only from within, it cannot be imposed from without. Hence morality creates an illusion of false religion.
Morality is a pretender, morality is a pseudo-religion. It gives you respectability, but it does not give you understanding. It gives you a great ego trip, but it cannot give you humility. It makes you feel superior, but it doesn’t help inner growth. And the man who feels superior cannot grow. He is stuck with the ego.
Morality is a sort of decoration of the ego. Yes, through morality you can cultivate great virtues, but you will never be virtuous. Through morality you can become very talented in certain areas, but those talents will remain unconscious. Morality cannot bring awareness because morality is not based on enlightenment.
The essential has to come from the inner, the essential has to grow like a tree, the essential is alive. The non-essential is imposed from the outside.
Before we enter this beautiful parable, four things have to be very clearly understood. First, there are two kinds of unity in life. One unity is mechanical – for example, a car. A car has a certain unity, a functional unity, but it is assembled, it comes off an assembly line. You cannot assemble a tree, you cannot assemble a baby. They also have a sort of unity – but it is totally different. Their unity is organic. A car is mechanical, a baby is organic. A machine is mechanical, a tree is organic. You cannot put a tree together; it grows. It grows out of its own inner center. At the most you can help – or hinder – but you cannot put a tree together.
You can put a car together, you can assemble a car; hence a car has no soul, no self, no center. It is a superficial unity. And a car cannot grow; it cannot give birth to new baby cars.
The tree grows and can give birth to millions of trees. And the tree has a center; it is run by its innermost center. When fall comes and the old leaves drop, who brings the new leaves? Where do they come from? They evolve from the innermost core of the tree.
If a mechanical part of the car is missing you will have to replace it. The car cannot evolve itself. It depends on you; it has no soul, it has no inner discipline of its own. If you cut off a branch of a tree another branch is supplied by the center, but if you destroy a machine nothing will come from the center – there is none, there is no center.
Morality is mechanical, religion is organic. This is the first basic thing to be understood. Morality is put together from the outside; religion grows from the innermost core of your being. Religion comes out of meditation; morality comes out of conditioning. Morality is enforced by others, religion you have to seek and search for yourself. Morality is a social device; religion is an adventure, an individual adventure. Morality is dominated by the politician and the priest, religion is a rebellion. Very rarely is a person religious – and whenever there is a religious person there is a great revolution around him.
Moral people are ordinary people, as ordinary as the immoral – sometimes even more ordinary than the immoral. The immoral may sometimes have courage, but the moral have no courage. The immoral may sometimes have intelligence, but the moral have no intelligence. The immoral may sometimes be original but the moral is always repetitive.
Morality is the greatest enemy of religion because it is a pseudo-coin. It pretends, and it can deceive people. It has deceived down through the ages; millions and millions of people are and have been deceived by morality. They think that when they have morality they have religion.
The second thing: morality is always relative. You can have more intelligence than somebody else, or somebody else can have more virtue than you. Somebody can be more courageous than you or is more cowardly than you. Somebody can be more sharing, more loving, or you can be more loving than somebody else. Morality is comparative.
Nobody can have more religion than you or less religion than you – religion is non-comparative, when religion is there, it is simply there. Can you say Buddha had more religion than Jesus? Can you say Mahavira had more religion than Mohammed? Can you say Lao Tzu had more religion than Krishna? It would be absurd; the very statement would be absurd because religion is not quantity, it is a quality of being. You cannot have more or less. There are no degrees. You can be more honest than somebody else; there are possibilities. You can be more of a thief than somebody else; there are possibilities. But how can you be more religious than somebody else or less religious? Religion means awakening. Religion means you have come home. How can you be less at home or more at home than somebody else?
When a man has become aware, his awareness is always total and complete, utterly complete. It does not come in parts, it comes as a whole – hence it is holy. Religion comes as a whole; morality comes in all shapes and sizes. You can have a family size or a medium size morality, like toothpaste. Morality comes in all shapes and sizes, religion is just complete. Either it is or it is not.
Sometimes people come to me and they ask, “Who was more enlightened – Buddha or Mahavira?” The question is absurd. Who was more enlightened? Enlightenment means that you have gone beyond relativity; so more and less cannot exist now. Who is more enlightened? Enlightenment means that you have disappeared, and all relative concepts have disappeared. You are simply there – a pure isness. Whenever anybody becomes a pure isness, a pure existence, a primordial innocence, there is no comparison. To go beyond comparison is to become enlightened, so you cannot ask the question, “Who is more enlightened?” The very question is meaningless.
Religion either is or is not. This is the second thing to be remembered.
The third thing: when religion comes, you are naturally moral but vice versa is not the case – you may be moral but you may not be religious. When you are religious you are naturally moral; morality comes like a shadow.

A disciple came to Lieh Tzu and asked, “What should I do, master, to become enlightened?”
And Lieh Tzu said, “Stand in the sun, walk, and watch your shadow.”
The man went out, stood in the sun, walked and watched his shadow, came back, bowed down, thanked the master and said, “You have shown me the way.”
The other disciples were very puzzled. What had transpired between the master and this new man? They asked Lieh Tzu and he laughed. He said, “It is so simple. I told him to go into the sun and walk and watch his shadow. And he understood the point. If the body walks, the shadow follows. The shadow cannot walk on its own. And even if you can manage for the shadow to walk on its own, the body will not follow, there is no necessity.”

Morality is like the shadow, religion is the real figure. When religion is there, morality comes on its own – it has to come, there is no other possibility. But if morality is there, there is no necessity for religion to be there. You can become a moral person without becoming religious at all. You can have good qualities. You can be honest, sincere, true, nonviolent, but that doesn’t make you religious. If you are religious all moral qualities simply follow you.
When you are moral you have to continuously arrange things because those qualities have to be maintained, otherwise they will disappear. A moral man has to manage his honesty continuously because every moment there is the fear that he may function dishonestly. Dishonesty has not disappeared; it has been repressed. It is there, it is waiting in the basement of his being for its opportunity, and once the opportunity is there it will assert itself with vengeance. It is there and the moral person knows it well. He may try to be loving, but he knows that hatred is there boiling within him. He may be smiling, but he knows that his eyes are full of tears. He may not be showing his anger but he knows that his heart is burning, and he wants to kill. He may be praying but he really wants to curse. He knows it. There is no way not to know it.
You can deceive others, but how can you deceive yourself? Even if you try to deceive yourself, reality will assert itself again and again and you will have to encounter it again and again. You know that you can pretend that you are a very good man, but deep down you know how bad you are. That hangs like a stone around your neck, like a rock, and keeps you pulled down.
The moral person is dual: he is something on the outside and just the contrary on the inside. There is a continuous struggle in his being. He is split. The moral person is schizophrenic. The whole earth has become schizophrenic because of moral teachings. Teach a person to be moral and sooner or later you will send him to the psychiatrist’s couch. You are creating madness in him. The person is feeling angry and you say, “Don’t be angry, anger is bad – because Moses said so, or Mohammed said so, or Mahavira said so. Anger is bad. Don’t be angry.” Anger is coming up naturally and you teach him – because the stakes are great – if he becomes angry he will lose respect. He can be respected only if he is not angry; he has to pretend in order to get respectability.
Look at people. They have lost their original faces. They are carrying masks, hiding behind masks. You can never be certain who is hiding behind the masks. You love a person but by and by you find it is not the same person you fell in love with. Haven’t you noticed it again and again? When you fall in love with a person, after a few months – or even after a few days, if you are a good observer – you will find that the person is somebody else. This woman is not the same woman; this man is not the same man that you fell in love with. You fell in love with the mask and now, by and by, the reality becomes clear. When you live with a person he cannot wear the mask for twenty-four hours. It is heavy and he wants to rest. And sometimes he is on holiday: even saints have their holidays.
I have heard…

In a circus there was a man whom the circus manager used to claim was the tallest man in the world: somewhere near nine feet tall.
A press reporter went to interview him because he was the tallest man in the world. He naturally chose Sunday because Sunday morning was free for the tall man. He went to the circus and found the man lying down in front of his tent, sunbathing. He was very surprised to find that although the face was the same the body wasn’t nine feet tall at all.
He asked, “What is the matter? You don’t look to me more than five foot five inches. But your face seems to be exactly the right one.”
The man laughed. He said, “Yes, you are right. I am the same person – I am the tallest man in the world.”
“But,” replied the reporter, “what is the matter? You don’t look more than five foot five inches.”
And the man said, “This is my Sunday. This is my day off. If you want to see me nine feet tall then you have to see me on duty.”

It is an arranged thing.
When you see the leader delivering a lecture to the masses it is a different face. When you see the priest in the temple worshipping it is a different face. When you fall in love with a woman it is a different face. She is trying to be as good as possible, but that is not the reality, that is a managed reality. She cannot manage it forever; that’s why wives are not very beautiful; that’s why husbands are ugly. You know them. You have seen them on their day off.
Morality creates a division – the inner, the real, becomes hidden and the outer, the false, becomes the manifested. This is one of the greatest calamities that has happened to humanity. Religion makes you one whole. It spreads the inner to the outer.
Religion makes you healthy – then you taste the same always and you are never on a day off because you are always on a day off. It is your natural quality.
The fourth thing to remember: a tree is alive, a machine only exists, it is not alive. A man of morality only exists, he is not really alive. You will not find vitality, you will not find radiance, you will not find a surging energy, you will not find a flood of life in him. He has to curb his being and continuously cut his energies. He has to live at his minimum, he is never aflame. He is always afraid. If he becomes too alive, then that which is repressed will start asserting itself. So he is always afraid. He keeps himself pulled down. He goes on holding onto himself. He never allows himself a total let-go because a total let-go will naturally mean that that which is repressed will suddenly erupt to the surface. It will be like a volcano erupting. So he has to keep himself at the minimum, he has to allow only his minimal energy – only then can he control himself. With his maximum energy flowing he will be out of control, he will be thrown off balanced.
A man of morality just appears to be living – it is an appearance. Only a man of religion is alive. A man of religion lives at the optimum and the man of morality lives at the minimum. Naturally, living at the minimum you live like an impotent person. You cannot be angry so you cannot love either; there is always the fear that if you love too much sometimes anger may come. When one energy is allowed total expression, other energies also gain freedom. When you open your door for one thing, other things will also escape. A moral man cannot open the door; he must be always on guard. Just think of the misery of a man who is always on guard, who cannot relax. A man who is always on guard is a tense man.
A moral man is never happy. At the most he may not be sad, but he is never happy, he is never ecstatic. For millions of years man has existed on the earth, but a single exception has never been seen – never has a moral man been found who is ecstatic. He cannot dance, he cannot sing, he cannot rejoice. Joy is freedom, and he does not know what freedom is. Ecstasy is going beyond oneself and that is possible only when you come from your optimum being, when you are aflame with a great passion to live, when you love totally, when you are flooded with godliness. Only then is ecstasy possible.
Ecstasy is not yours; ecstasy is godliness dancing in you. You cannot allow godliness to dance in you because you have not allowed nature to dance in you. You have not even been natural, how can you be spiritual? Remember, spirituality is a higher stage of being natural; spirituality is the ultimate flowering of being spontaneous.
A moral person is never spontaneous. A moral person lives from the past. He has a character and he has to follow the character. He has a blueprint, he has a map, and he always looks at the map and functions through the map. He never functions in the present, he is a dead man; he carries his character around him. His response is never a real response, it is only a reaction. A man of religion is responsive, not reactive.
A man of morality is predictable because he has a character. You can depend on him; you know that he will be honest tomorrow because he has always been honest. He will be honest even in circumstances where honesty is going to harm the other person. Where honesty is going to be destructive, even then he is going to be honest – you can depend on that. He has no freedom, he has no eyes to look into things, he does not respond to reality. He responds to principles. When you respond to principles you are simply reacting, you have a program in your mind, you are like a computer. You go according to the program – right or wrong is not the question.
The circumstances of life change every moment but your principles are rigid, your principles remain the same. Naturally a man of morality never fits anywhere; he is a misfit. It is very difficult to live with a moral man because he is always a misfit. He does not look at reality, at what really is. He simply lives through his principles; principles are more important than reality.
A religious man has no principles. Let it sink deep into your heart. A religious man has no principles whatsoever, he has only awareness. He looks at reality and whatsoever is required he responds accordingly. His response is spontaneous, not dominated by the past – hence a religious person is not predictable. You don’t know what he will do. Not even he can say what he will do because it will depend on the circumstances. If there is a slight difference in the circumstances, the response will be different.
A religious man has no character – it is difficult for you to get that. A religious man has no character because character comes from the past. A religious man has consciousness instead. Or, to say the same thing in other words, a religious man has no conscience. He has consciousness and the moral man has a conscience, but no consciousness. He functions through dead codes. He carries commandments, and he always looks into his commandments to find how to behave. He is always a misfit, he is never true anywhere. A moral man cannot be true because he has a character. How can you be true when you have a character? If the circumstances are different, what will you do? You cannot change so easily.
A moral man is very rigid; he has no dynamism, he is not flowing and fluid. He has a fixed identity: things should be done only this way. He cannot do things in any other way, whatsoever the situation. The situation may have completely changed but the things have to be done in only one way.

Once Zen Master Bokuju asked a disciple, “What is the sound of one hand clapping?”
And the disciple remained silent. He closed his eyes and fell into deep silence. Bokuju was happy and said, “Good, good, I agree.”
But another master was sitting there while this happened. When the disciple had gone the other master said, “You agreed too early. I don’t see it. Call the disciple back.”
The disciple was called back and the other master asked, “Tell me, what is the sound of one hand clapping?” And he again closed his eyes and remained silent.
And the master laughed and he said, “Wrong, absolutely wrong.”
And Bokuju said, “Yes, I agree with this other master.”
The disciple was puzzled. He said, “But why? Just a moment before, I answered the same way – through my silence – and you said, ‘Right.’”
Bokuju said, “That was true in that moment but now you are repeating it. Now this cannot be true in this moment – everything has changed. That was a response, this is a reaction. Now you have become fixed. When you responded for the first time there was no idea in what you were doing. It came naturally. It came just simply, innocently. Your mind was not manipulating. Now it is not a response of a meditative consciousness, it is the response of a manipulating mind. Now the mind knows the answer. Now the mind says, ‘Good. The same question again, so again the same answer.’”

The master says that although the question may be the same the answer cannot be the same the next moment. It will depend on a thousand and one things.

It used to happen to Buddha every day. Somebody would ask, “Is there a God?” and he would say, “No.” Somebody else would ask, “Is there a God?” and he would say, “Yes.” And somebody else would ask, “Is there a God?” and he would keep silent. And again somebody else would ask, “Is there a God?” and he would say, “Don’t ask nonsense questions.” In one day he gave a thousand and one answers to one question.
His chief disciple, Ananda, became very worried. He said, “Master, the question is the same but you answer so differently, you answer so contradictorily, that we have become puzzled, confused.”
Buddha said, “I was not answering you, so you need not listen. Somebody asked a question and the answer was given to him, not to you. The questioners were different, the time was different, the situation was different – how can the question be the same? One man who had asked, ‘Is there a God?’ was an atheist. He didn’t believe in God. I had to say yes to him, I had to shake him, shock him. I had to bring him out of his ideology, so I had to say yes. But it is not that God exists – it was a response to that man’s reality.
“Then somebody asked, ‘Is there a God?’ and because he was a believer and believed in God I had to say no. I had to shake him and shock him, too, and bring him out of his sleep. If I had said yes to him, he would have gone home thinking that Buddha agreed with him, that Buddha also believed the same way that he believed. Then his ideology would have been strengthened and any ideology which is strengthened is a danger. All ideologies have to be shattered, utterly shattered, so the mind becomes completely free from ideologies.
“I had to remain silent to another person because he was neither a theist nor an atheist. His question was very simple and innocent. He had no ideology so I did not need to shock him. He was a really silent man so I kept silent. And he understood me. He understood the idea that about questions such as one about God, one should be silent. They are meaningless questions; there is nothing to be said.”

Whether you believe in God or you don’t believe in God makes no difference, you don’t change. Go and look: look into the lives of the person who believes in God and the person who does not believe in God. Their lives are the same. There is no difference at all. Somebody goes to the church, somebody else goes to the temple, somebody else goes to the mosque, but look into their lives – there is no difference at all. So what is the point of believing?
You will find a different quality of being in a person who believes in nothing, who has dropped all beliefs, whose consciousness is freed, freed from all ideology. Every ideology becomes a fixation.
A moralist is a man with a fixation; a religious man is flowing and fluid. The moralist has some idea about how to live life; the religious person has no idea about how to live his life. He leaves it to Tao, to God, to the whole. He surrenders to the whole and the whole lives through him. He has no ideas about how to live his life.
Remember, if you have some idea about how to live your life, you will live wrongly. When somebody asks me, “What is the right way to live my life?” I say, The right way to live your life is not to have any ideas about how to live your life. Live without ideas and you live rightly. Live without mind and you live rightly. Live moment to moment and you live rightly. Don’t live out of the past and don’t live out of the future – just live herenow and you will live rightly.
Now this parable:
Tzu-hsia asked the Master,
“What sort of a man is Yen Hui?”
“For kindness he is a better man than I am.”
Tzu-hsia is asking the master about four persons who are the master’s disciples. They all serve him. But they must have been very famous people, sometimes outshining the master himself. And these problems must have been in many people’s minds.
Tzu-hsia asked, “What sort of a man is Yen Hui?” Yen Hui was a disciple, a famous disciple. And the master said, “For kindness he is a better man than I am.”
“What about Tzu-kung?”
“For eloquence he is a better man than I am.”
“Tzu-lu?”
“For courage he is a better man than I am.”
“Tzu-chang?”
“For dignity he is a better man than I am.”
The master is saying that if you take different qualities and you compare them, then these people are in some way or other better than him. If you take individual characteristics, these people are better than him. Somebody is better as far as courage is concerned, somebody is better as far as kindness is concerned, somebody is better as far as eloquence is concerned, somebody is better as far as dignity is concerned. Relatively, morally, these people are better than him.
Tzu-hsia rose from his mat and asked…
He must have become very puzzled.
“Then why do these four serve you?”
Why? If these four people are better in some way than you, you should be serving them. Why do they serve you?
And the master said,
“Sit down, I will tell you.”
This statement from the master – “Sit down” – is very metaphorical. Tzu-hsia’s standing up means that he became excited, he became feverish, his mind was confused. A thousand and one thoughts started rumbling in him. He could not believe it.
Yes, it was true. What the master was saying was true. Everybody felt that these four people had great qualities, that they outshone the master in some way or other. Tzu-hsia must have become very curious. He forgot that you are not supposed to stand in front of the master, and that you are not supposed to ask a question while standing in front of the master.
These are just symbols – symbolic, metaphoric things. When you ask a question of a master you have to ask in a certain posture, bowing down, in deep receptivity. The question should come from a very humble attitude. And the question should come from deep silence, not from a perturbed mind, not out of disturbance, not out of excitement. It should come out of a quiet, silent mind, out of tranquillity.
The master said, “Sit down.” The disciple must have forgotten. With the answer the master gave he must have become really excited. He forgot what he was doing. He must have acted in an unconscious way.
The master said, “Sit down. First sit down.” And it is not only that the body should sit down, the deep indication is toward the mind. Let the mind settle down. Only then will you be able to understand what the master is going to say. That’s what he means when he says, “Sit down, I will tell you.”
Remember, only when the mind is in a deeply settled state will you be receptive. Otherwise, if the mind is stirred and there are clouds and dust arising all over, you are in a sort of storm. Then how are you going to receive the master’s answer?
These are not philosophical discussions; these are penetrations into reality, into your own nature. And the answers to the questions that are being asked are not meant to satisfy curious people.

One day it happened that a great philosopher came to Buddha. Buddha was sitting under a tree.
This man, Buddha, must have loved trees tremendously. He was always sitting under a tree. He became enlightened under a tree – although it is not such a big thing to become enlightened under a tree; many people have become enlightened under trees. You will be surprised to know that Buddha was also born under a tree. And he also died under a tree.
Buddha was a king’s son but he was not born in a palace. His mother was traveling and they came to a garden and suddenly she felt the pain arising. She stood under a tree and there was no other place, so she got down and Buddha was born. Later he became enlightened under a tree and then, when he was dying, he again lay down under a tree and died under it.
He must have loved trees very much. For five hundred years after him the tree remained his symbol. For five hundred years no statue of him was made – just trees were painted. Trees were placed in temples and people worshipped the trees. In a way it was very beautiful.
Let me remind you again – the tree is symbolic of religion because it grows. And it grows out of the innermost core.
Buddha was sitting and this great philosopher asked, “Have you said everything that you know?” Buddha had become very old – almost eighty years old – and within a few months he would be gone. The great philosopher had come from a long way to inquire if he had said all that he knew.
Buddha took a few dry leaves in his hand and asked the philosopher, “What do you think, sir? How many leaves have I got in my hand? Are they more than the number of dry leaves in this forest?” The paths, the whole forest, was full of dry leaves; the wind was blowing here and there and the dry leaves were making much noise and much music.
The philosopher looked and he said, “What type of question are you asking? How can you have more leaves in your hand? You have only a few, a dozen at the most, and there are millions of leaves in this forest.”
And Buddha said, “So remember. That which I have said is only like the few leaves in my hand. And that which I have not said is like the dry leaves in this forest.”
The philosopher said, “Then one question more. Why have you not said that?”
Buddha said, “Because it will not help you to attain nirvana, it will not help you to meditate – that’s why I have not said it. And moreover, it cannot be said. Even if I wanted to say it, it cannot be said. You will have to experience and know it for yourself. It is experiential, it is existential.”

The master will say something only when he feels it is going to help your enlightenment. The master will say something only when he feels you are ready to receive. The master will say something only when he sees that clarity is there and the mind is open; that transparency is there and you are ready, with great humbleness and gratitude, to receive it. You are not quarrelsome, you are not ready to discuss and debate. Only in great sympathy, in great love, when the disciple is en rapport with the master, can these things be transferred. These are delicate things.
The master says, “Sit down.” Not only physically – settle down inside and don’t get excited.
“I will tell you. Yen Hui can be kind but cannot check the impulse when it will do no good.”
Now this is the difference between religion and morality. Listen well. Sit down and listen well. Many of you are standing up. Sit down and I will tell you. “Yen Hui can be kind but cannot check the impulse when it will do no good.” This kindness is not of awareness. One must be capable sometimes of not being kind. Great kindness is capable both of being kind and of not being kind. Great kindness is capable of being hard too. If your kindness is such that you cannot be otherwise, then it is not strength – it is weakness. If you cannot act otherwise, that simply means that you are fixed, you are not fluid. Sometimes it is necessary to be hard.
I have heard…

A Zen master was driving a carriage with a woman and her child in it. Much snow was falling and the morning was very cold and there was no sun in the sky, it was cloudy. The master started freezing and the woman in the carriage did too. By and by he saw that she was becoming blue and was losing consciousness. So he took away the child, pushed the woman out of the carriage and drove away.
The woman was shocked. She was left standing there in the falling snow; her child had been taken away – what type of man was this? And he had taken the carriage. She started running and shouting and screaming and cursing – and within half a mile, because of all the running and cursing and shouting and screaming, she was perfectly okay!
Then the master stopped the carriage, took her in and said, “Now it is okay. I had to do that otherwise you would have died.”

Sometimes to be really kind implies that you can be unkind too. If you cannot be unkind then your kindness is not of much worth. It is cultivated. It is not out of awareness. Now think. If you had been that driver, you could not have done that. It looks immoral. But it is not.
In the Zen tradition there are thousands of cases which look very immoral. Sometimes the master jumps on the disciple, beats the disciple, throws him out of a window. And the story says that the disciple becomes enlightened – when he falls out of the window he becomes enlightened. To people who are not acquainted with the Zen methods it looks absurd. How can a person become enlightened like this?
But you must be made aware that the disciple may have been working for twenty years – meditating, working, meditating, working. And then one day the master finds that only a thin layer of unawareness is left, a very thin layer. He watches the disciple but he cannot get through that thin layer. Remember, when the unconsciousness is very thick you can fight with it but when it is very thin it is very difficult to fight with it. There comes a moment when it is so thin that you think it is not there.
It is almost like transparent glass; it is so transparent you don’t see it. Then how can you fight it? Only the master can see that you are still behind a glass. You are seeing very clearly, almost as if there is no glass, but still you are behind glass. In those moments the master will be very hard. He will do something very shocking. In that shock that thin layer will be broken. Only when it is broken, not before, will you be able to know that something was there in front of your eyes. When it is gone you will understand that a thin layer had been there – a thin film which was so thin and so transparent that there was no way for you to know. Then you will feel thankful to the master.
“Sit down. I will tell you. Yen Hui can be kind, but cannot check the impulse when it will do no good.” Now this kindness is impulsive. You are almost a victim of it – you are not the master of it. If you cannot help but be kind – it is an impotency.
In Japan there exists a statue of Buddha, a very rare statue, of tremendous significance. One of my friends went to Japan where somebody gave him a replica, a plastic replica, of the statue. My friend is a Jaina, and he could not understand it because it looked a little illogical and unhistorical.
In this statue Buddha has a sword in one hand. A sword? Buddha has never been known to carry a sword. He was not a Mohammed, neither was he a Krishna. A sword? But in this statue he has a sword in one hand.
The side of his face is tremendously illuminated by the sword – and it does not look like the face of a buddha, it looks like that of an Arjuna, a great soldier, a great warrior. The expression of the face has a sharpness to it.
In the other hand he is carrying a lamp, a small earthen lamp, and on that side of the face the expression is so quiet, so silent, so buddha-like.
Now this is very absurd. When my friend came back from Japan and showed me the statue he said, “I cannot understand it. What does it mean?” I said, “It is very meaningful. It is a Zen expression. It shows that your silence should be capable of strength also.”
The lamp of peace should be capable of becoming a sword any moment it is needed in that way. And the sword should be capable of becoming a lamp of peace any moment it is needed to be that way. One should be fluid and all the polarities should meet in one.
A man is rich when all the polarities meet in him. When all the contradictions have lost their contradictions and have become friends, when you can befriend the contradictions, then you are really rich. This is the state of a religious man. The moral man chooses, the religious man lives in choicelessness.
“Yen Hui can be kind but cannot check the impulse when it will do no good.” Even when it will not do any good; in fact, it may even be doing harm – then too he cannot check the impulse. He is incapable of checking it. He is incapable of being responsive to reality. He functions according to a principle. So the master says, “For kindness, he is a better man than I, but still there is something missing in his kindness. He has moved too far to the extreme of kindness. He has lost balance. Being a balanced man is the goal – neither the bad nor the good, but the one who is exactly in the middle; neither the good nor the bad, but the one who has transcended both.”
And the master is capable of being both – whatsoever the situation demands. Listen to this point: the capacity to be all is the capacity of a religious person.
“Tzu-kung can be eloquent but cannot hold his tongue.”
If you can be eloquent but cannot be silent, your eloquence is meaningless. Unless words come out of silence they are dead. Unless words come out of your inner emptiness they are not full. When words come out of your inner emptiness they carry a fullness; when they come out of your silence, soaked with your silence, they have a music around them, they have a poetry and a life totally of their own.
When you cannot be silent, when you have to speak and you cannot do otherwise, then your words are meaningless, gibberish. Then there is no poetry; then they are very ordinary. Haven’t you seen it? Jesus speaks the same words that you speak, Buddha uses the same words that you use – so what is the difference? When you speak certain words they carry no meaning, not at all. When Jesus speaks the same words they are tremendously significant – so burningly alive, so aflame with his vitality. Where do they come from? They come from his silence.
Jesus used to go into silence again and again. Whenever he came to the masses, for a few days he would talk to people, meet people, convert them, and then one day suddenly he would say, “Now I will go to the mountains or to the desert. I would like to be silent.” He would leave even his disciples and go alone into the wilderness, just to be silent. He had exhausted his silence by speaking; his silence had been spent in words – now he had to go back to become full again, to be full of silence. Then he would be full of poetry, then he would be full of song, then his words would not be ordinary words, they would be full of luminosity. Then they would hit you and go directly into your heart.
Remember, words go exactly to the same depth from which they come. If my words come from my heart, they will touch your heart. If they come only from my head, they will touch only your head. It depends.
Have you seen an archer pulling his bow back? The farther back he pulls his bow, the farther ahead the arrow will go. If the bow is not pulled back far enough, the arrow will fall short.
The deeper the words come out of the silence of your innermost core, the further they will go – like an arrow – into the hearts of the people.
The master said: “Tzu-kung can be eloquent but cannot hold his tongue.” Eloquence is of no importance as far as religion is concerned. Eloquence is important in politics, but in religion it is secondary. The basic, the fundamental importance is silence. Words are secondary, stillness is primary. If words come out of stillness, then they have some significance. If they don’t come out of stillness, they are just rubbish.
The master said: “For eloquence he is a better man than I am.” But he makes the difference. Tzu-kung may have practiced eloquence but he does not know what silence is. He cannot hold his tongue.
“Tzu-lu can be brave but cannot be cautious.”
When you are brave and cannot be cautious you turn into a fool – you become foolhardy, you become stupid. Bravery in itself is of no value. It can be suicidal, it can be murderous. Bravery in itself is of no value unless there is a light inside it of awareness, alertness. That’s what cautiousness is.
“Tzu-lu can be brave but cannot be cautious.” His bravery is not of much use. Either he will create trouble for others or he will create trouble for himself. His bravery is not going to become a beneficial thing to anybody. Bravery is beneficial, not because of bravery but because of cautiousness.
Look into these things. This is a simple parable but the master is showing what morality and religion are. If you practice eloquence, you will forget about silence. If you practice bravery, you will forget about cautiousness. If you practice kindness, you will forget that sometimes it is kindness not to be kind. You will become fixed. You will have one pole but the other pole will be missing. You will be half; you will not be whole.
To be positive and negative together is what a religious man is. The immoral man has chosen one pole, the negative pole; the moral man has chosen another pole, the positive pole – the religious person lives in choicelessness. He has not chosen anything but he uses all, whatsoever the need. Sometimes he is as negative as the immoral and sometimes he is as positive as the moral. But nothing holds him. He is not confined either to positivity or to negativity. He is a free man. He has freedom. He uses all and he is not used by anything.
“Tzu-chang can be dignified but cannot unbend in company.”
You can be dignified but if your dignity becomes an ego trip then you cannot bend. With an ego how can you really be dignified? How can ego be a dignified thing? How can ego give you grace? It will be just a superficial posture, an empty, impotent posture, nothing inside, just a container without any content.
“Tzu-chang can be dignified but cannot unbend in company.” A man should be able to be undignified sometimes too. If you are always dignified, you cannot laugh, if you are always dignified, you cannot joke, if you are always dignified, you will become inhuman, you will lose all humanity.
Haven’t you noticed it? People who can sometimes become undignified have more grace. A man who can laugh, sometimes laughs like a fool, has more wisdom than a person who is obsessed with wisdom and cannot laugh. He has to protect his wisdom – to be continuously on guard. He cannot laugh; he cannot allow himself to laugh because people will think that he is a fool. He is a fool. A wise man is capable of being foolish sometimes too.
You must have heard that in the old days great kings used to have a fool in the court – the court fool. You will be surprised to know that they were not ordinary fools; they were some of the wisest men in the country. The king used to have wise men and a fool too – to keep a balance. Otherwise the wise people would make things so sober, dry, dull, sad. All joy would be lost. Sometimes you can become too serious, and the very seriousness can become a barrier in looking into things. The fool was needed. When things would be getting too serious he would do something or say something and bring the atmosphere back to a human attitude.

For example, a king was seriously thinking of turning the whole country moral. Nobody should be allowed to say anything untrue. Untruths should be banned. The wise men were all agreed; in fact, because these wise people were his servants they were even going further than him, exaggerating. One wise man suggested that of course this was the right thing to be done – untruths should be banned – and one who was found to be saying some untruth should be immediately sentenced to death. He should be hanged in the marketplace so that everybody would know what the cost of saying anything untrue would be.
The fool was listening. He said, “Okay. Then tomorrow morning I will see you all at the gates.”
They asked, “What do you mean?”
He said, “At the gates.” And he said to the king, “Keep the gallows ready because I am going to say an untruth.”
The king asked, “Have you gone mad?”
And he replied, “I have always been mad: but I will see you all, the whole court, at the gates – and keep the gallows ready. I will be the first person to be hanged.”
It was a challenge. The gallows were made ready and the next morning, when they opened the gates of the town, the fool entered on his donkey. The king asked, “Where are you going, you fool?” He was very angry because they had had to get up early in the morning to get there.
And the fool said, “I am going to the gallows.”
Now he had created a problem. If you killed him, he had said a truth; if you didn’t kill him, he had told a lie. He had said, “I am going to the gallows. Prepare them. I am going to die on the gallows.”
All these wise men and the king were puzzled. What to do with this man? He was telling a lie. If you kill him, the lie becomes a truth. If you don’t kill him, the lie goes unpunished.
And the fool laughed. He said, “You are all fools. Who can ban untruth and who can ban immorality? Everything is needed in proportion.”

Each great king used to have a fool because wise people tend to go to the extreme. And to go to the extreme is a sort of foolishness. To keep a balance one should sometimes forget all about dignity, one should sometimes bend in company, sometimes laugh like a fool, sometimes be like a child – and sometimes be human.
Look at your mahatmas – they are never human. They will not laugh, they will not joke, they will not do anything that would prove that they are human. They keep above humanity. Hence, if they look sad it is nothing unexpected; if their eyes look dull and sad, if they look dead, it is natural.
“Tzu-chang can be dignified but cannot unbend in company. Even if I could have the virtues of the four men all together I should be unwilling to exchange them for my own.”
Now listen to this tremendously important sentence: “Even if I could have the virtues of the four men all together I should be unwilling to exchange them for my own.” Because that which is yours is true and that which you take from others is untrue. The borrowed is never true. The borrowed, the imitated, is always false. Morality is imitation, religion is always your own. A roseflower flowers on a rosebush; somewhere in a pond are lotuses. The lotus comes out of the lotus seed, the rose comes out of the rosebush. The rose cannot borrow the lotus; the lotus cannot borrow the rose. When religion flowers it is yours; when you try to be moral you borrow, you imitate, you try to become a carbon copy of someone.
A Christian is one who is trying to become a carbon copy of Christ; hence a Christian is ugly and Christ is beautiful. Christ is a roseflower, out of his own bush he flowered – that was his crime. The Jews did not like it, they wanted him to become a Moses; they wanted him to become a lotus. And he asserted his own self. He said, “I will be my own being. I will be myself.” That was his crime and the Jews could not forgive him. But Moses was a flower out of his own being, he was not imitating anybody. No religious person has been an imitator. All so-called religious people who are imitators are not religious at all.
Never borrow. Even if your flower is small, it is good, it is yours. Even if somebody else’s flower is very big, has much fragrance, has much color, don’t borrow it. Yours is good. It is your destiny. God wants you to flower in your own being.

A great Hasid mystic was dying. His name was Josia. Somebody around him asked, “Josia, have you made your peace with Moses?”
Josia opened his eyes and said, “Forget everything about this Moses. He is not important. I am dying, and you are talking nonsense.”
The man became afraid – what was he saying? A pious Jew at the time of death was saying, “Forget all about Moses.” And Josia said, “Listen, now I am going to die and I will be facing God. He will not ask me, ‘Josia, why were you not Moses?’ He will not ask me that. He will ask, ‘Josia, why were you not Josia?’ So forget all about Moses. In these last moments leave me alone. Let me gather together my being so that at least I can stand before him on my own feet. I have wasted my whole life and now in the end again you have come to ask, ‘Have you made your peace with Moses?’ What do I have to do with Moses? If Moses has nothing to do with me, what have I to do with Moses?”

Sometimes people come to me and they say, “Do you agree with Buddha?” I say, “Nonsense! He never agreed with me, so why should I bother to agree with him? He did his thing; I am doing mine. Where does this question of agreeing come from?”
Why should you agree with anybody? If you can agree with yourself you have agreed with God. That’s enough, more than enough. If you have agreed with yourself, if you have accepted your being – it is finished. Your journey has come to an end. Now you can flower.
The master said: “Even if I could have the virtues of the four men all together I should be unwilling to exchange them for my own.” It would be a mechanical thing to borrow one thing from one, another thing from another. To borrow from so many people – it would be an assemblage, it would be a mechanical thing.
A car is assembled, a tree grows. The tree is the symbol of religion and the car is the symbol of morality. You can assemble a car. You can go to the market and purchase different parts from different places and assemble it. You can make your own hodgepodge car. But you cannot assemble a tree. You cannot go into one garden, take a branch, into another garden, take another branch, take flowers from somewhere, leaves from somewhere, roots from somewhere else – a tree cannot be put together.
You cannot assemble religion. Religion is not born out of an assembly line.
“…I should be unwilling to exchange them for my own.
This is why they serve me without misgivings.”
“They know that I have an organic unity, and they know that they have only a mechanical unity. They know that they have talents but their talents are fixations, and they know that I have something coming from the inner to the outer, from the center flowing toward my periphery. They know it; hence they serve me without any misgivings. They are great in one way or another but their greatness is one-dimensional.”
This is the last thing to be understood. A man of morality is dimensional, one-dimensional. He moves in one dimension. A man of religion is non-dimensional, he has no fixed dimension. All dimensions are available to him.

A sportsman entered his horse in the Kentucky Derby. The horse won by twenty lengths. After the victory the horse was entered in more than a dozen races at different tracks and came in last in every one.
Puzzled, the sportsman took the horse to see a vet psychiatrist. After a thorough examination, the vet turned to the sportsman and said, “This is a very simple case – the trouble with this horse is that he has a one-track mind!”

Morality is a one-track thing, one-dimensional. And the moral man becomes lopsided because when he moves in one direction all other dimensions suffer. If you want to be very kind, where are you going to get the energy? From other dimensions? It is as if somebody’s head becomes too big and his whole body shrinks and becomes small. Or somebody’s legs become big and all of his body shrinks and becomes small. That is the shape of a moral man.
A religious man is an organic unity, in balance. His head, his hands, his feet, his body, his mind, his soul, all are in deep harmony, in deep rhythm. He is an orchestra.
This parable must be deeply meditated upon. Always remember never to borrow; always remember never to imitate; always remember that you have to grow, not to condition yourself. You have to become a tree; you have to bloom like a tree. You are not to become an efficient mechanism; you have to become a tree so that your fragrance can be released to the winds. That will be your offering to the feet of God.
And remember, he will ask, “Josia, why are you not Josia?” He will ask you, “Why did you miss your being? Why have you not arrived here with your being? Why did you miss your life by following other people? I was always within your heart waiting for you but you never came there. You followed Moses, Mohammed, Mahavira, Krishna. You followed everybody. You looked in every nook and corner but you never came into your own being. And I was sitting there waiting for you.”
When you come into your own being you have come home, you have come to God. God is nothing but a name of your innermost core.
Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
It is all jolly fine for everyone to do their thing, but what should be the attitude when our “things” conflict? I am always giving in for the sake of harmony and to do one's thing under constant threat takes the joy out of it. But harmony is not in itself my thing.
First, if conflict is your thing, then let it be so. Don’t try to impose any false harmony on top of it because false harmony will never be true; it will never be satisfying. It is ugly. A true conflict is beautiful – more beautiful, far more beautiful than an imposed harmony because deep down the conflict continues. You are deceiving nobody; you only think you are deceiving them. Reality cannot be deceived, and you have to suffer the consequences.
If conflict is your thing, then let it be so. That is the message of Tao. It has nothing to do with harmony; it has to do with being in a let-go. If conflict is your thing and you allow it, then that is harmony for you – because you will be in harmony with your nature.
It is difficult because you immediately create ideals. You think Tao is harmony. Tao is, but not as an ideal. When you relax and you do your thing – whatsoever it is, mind you, whatsoever, I say – then you are in harmony.
So the first thing is that you are not to impose anything upon yourself, otherwise you miss the path of Tao.
“It is all jolly fine for everyone to do their thing but what should be the attitude when our ‘things’ conflict?” Let there be conflict. Whatsoever happens, happens. What can you do? Then the conflict must be accepted with great respect. You would like to have no conflict but this is your ego. If existence wills the conflict to be there, then it must be that way. Relax and let the conflict be there.
To move on the path of Tao is to move relaxedly. Whatsoever happens, there should be a total acceptance of it – both of the act and of the consequence. If the conflict brings misery, then that must be accepted. You have to flow with the river wherever it leads. If it goes south, good; if it goes north, good; if it does not go anywhere, good; if it drowns you, good. This is total trust.
“I am always giving in…” Then you are not in a let-go. If you give in, you are giving in against yourself. Never give in. There is no need. It is better to be defeated; it is better to be cursed than to give in. To give in means that you are reluctant but still doing something for harmony’s sake. Harmony is missing from the very beginning. If you give in to your wife, she will never forgive you; if you give in to your husband, he will never forgive you because your whole being will vibrate with antagonism. You will say something in words, it will be on your lips, but your being will deny it, contradict it. And that is what is being broadcast continuously – from your eyes, from your face, from your gestures, from everything. Your words cannot hide it.
So nothing is attained by giving in. When you give in, you lose your inner harmony, and no outer harmony is created out of it. Outer harmony comes only when there is inner harmony. If you are angry, then be angry, be totally angry. Risk all. Then you will be in harmony. This will be difficult to understand but let me say it: if you are really angry with your wife she will be happy, happier than when you give in, because you are being authentic. Who does not love an authentic person? Now she can trust you – when you are angry you are angry, you are not false, you are not pseudo. When you are loving, you are loving; you are not false, you are not pseudo. Now you are reliable.
Otherwise while you are making love you are not being reliable. You may be thinking of making love to some other women, or at least thinking of some other woman. Your wife may not be there at all in your mind. Making love to your wife you may think of other women and you will not be there. It will be felt and it will hurt because all the time your woman knows that you are false. When you are smiling you are not smiling; when you say, “I love you,” you do not really mean it. You are always giving in for harmony’s sake. You are not true. If you are not in harmony within yourself, how can you be in harmony with your wife, with your friend, with your husband, with anybody? First be in harmony with yourself – that means allowing whatsoever is to be the case.
This is the new revolution that is happening all over the world, the new psychology of man. Gone are those days of repression, gone are those repressed people. They never lived, they only pretended. They were empty gestures. There was no substance in their life.
This is your life, live it – and live it in all climates, don’t try to fix the climate. Year round you can see that sometimes it is raining, sometimes it is hot, sometimes it is winter, sometimes there is sun and sometimes it is very cloudy. That’s why the earth is so beautiful. It is not monotonous, it is rich. A man’s life should be one of many climates, of many colors. A man’s life should be a rainbow, an orchestra. It should not be a single note. A man who has only a single note in his life is a monotonous man; he is a poor man, a dull man. He will not enjoy his life; and he will not allow anybody else to enjoy their life either. Wherever he is he will be a dead weight, he will make people serious, somber, unloving, unliving. Don’t become that; that is being a sinner – at least, in my definition. That’s what I call sin.
A virtuous man is a man of many climates. A virtuous man is a man of tremendous richness. He has a whole orchestra – all possible notes – in his being. You can only love a man who has all possible notes, all the potentialities flowering. He’s always new, never old.
While angry, be angry. Don’t give in. While loving, love; while hating, hate. Just be true, in harmony with yourself – that’s what Tao is. And then a miracle happens: when you are in harmony with yourself you start being in harmony with other people and they start respecting you. You are authentic, you are a solid man. You are not hollow; you are substantial, you have a backbone.
How can a wife respect a man who always gives in? Impossible. No wife can respect such a husband. How can you respect a man who has no backbone, is always ready to crawl on the floor, always saying yes? It is impossible. This is not a true man.
Never give in, and then the miracle happens: you don’t give in and you live your life, whatsoever it brings. If sometimes it brings conflict, then that is needed. Then a storm is also needed. The storm is needed as much as silence. Anger is needed as much as compassion. Life needs all the polarities.
When the other person starts feeling that you are true, then by and by, through that respect, through that love, conflict drops. When you love a person, when you respect a person, when you see the person is true and authentic, there is less and less conflict. Between two false people there is always conflict. Conflict is a consequence of two false people being together. When two true people live together, conflict by and by disappears because they start understanding each other and there is less confusion, there is less possibility of any confusion. Things are clear, transparent. Then conflict by and by disappears. Without risking anything of your inner harmony, the conflict disappears. And then you and the other are in harmony.
The first step is to be in inner harmony with yourself. Only then can you be in harmony with others, otherwise not. If you have not attained an inner harmony how can you attain an outer harmony? The basic element is missing.
This question is from Anando. He can become a very authentic person, hence the question. He knows what he is missing; his question is not just intellectual. I understand. I have looked deeply into his being. This is his problem. Anando, you have to drop it, you have to be true. And whatsoever the cost is you have to pay it. Life must be paid for. Each single moment of beauty, of joy, must be paid for enormously. It is not free, it must be earned.
“To do one’s thing under constant threat takes the joy out of it.” Certainly, it creates misery. That’s why so many people are miserable in the world. It is very rare to come across a person who is happy because it is very rare to come across a person who has lived authentically, who has lived rebelliously, who has lived his own life and who has not bothered to make any compromise. To compromise is to poison your being. Never compromise. It is better to die than to compromise. Die if need be, but die uncompromised – then you are unpolluted, unpoisoned. Then you are a beauty. Then you have dignity.
You will have the same dignity as Jesus had when he was crucified. What was he doing, this man? Why were people so angry about him? He was trying to live his life; that was his crime. That has always been the crime. What was Socrates doing? Why were people so angry at him? He was trying to live his life.
These miserable people cannot tolerate any happy person. These miserable people are so deep in misery that any happy person creates great jealousy, creates great restlessness in their being – they cannot tolerate it. The very presence of a happy and a rebellious person shows them how unreal they are. The happy, the true person becomes a comparison.
I am not saying that by relaxing, by accepting your being, by being in a Taoist attitude, you will not have any misery – I am not saying that. You will be happy. You may have much pain; you may have to suffer many sufferings, but still you will be happy. All those sufferings will add to your taste, they will give salt to your life.
I am not saying that the path is full of roses – there are thorns, they always come with the roses. Wherever you find one rose you will find a hundred thorns. But still I say, go for the roses. Those thorns have to be suffered but it is worth it. Those roses are so valuable that the suffering is nothing. If you want to avoid the thorns you will never have roses – that’s what you have been doing, Anando, up to now. You have been avoiding thorns so you are missing the roses. They always come together. You will be miserable, simply miserable. Your misery will be empty misery.
Jesus also goes through pain but his pain is full of joy – that is the difference. There were three persons crucified on that same day – two thieves were also crucified. On either side of Jesus was a thief. They were both crying and weeping but Jesus was silent. People were throwing stones and saying ugly things and insulting Jesus as much as they could, but he was silent, as silent as if nothing were happening.
One of the thieves became interested. This was rare. He was crying and weeping, and he was not even being insulted. Nobody cared about him. All the insults were directed toward Jesus. And then he heard Jesus saying to God, “Father, forgive these people because they don’t know what they are doing.” When the thief heard this he could not believe his ears. He said, “So it seems you really are a son of God. Bless me before you go.”
Jesus said, “Don’t be worried. You will be with me in the company of God, in the kingdom of God, today.” In that moment of illumination, in that moment of understanding, the thief became transformed. He died silently, and a peace surrounded him. He was happy to die with Jesus. He became part of him. Then he stopped crying, then death didn’t matter; then he was moving into a deeper and higher life.
The other thief was crying and weeping – and dying. Both the thieves were dying but in different ways. One was simply dying; another had a vision of a higher life. One’s misery was empty; another’s misery became full of joy.
This is the difference between people. There are miserable people, painful people, whose misery is empty, for nothing. And there are tremendously happy people who are very rare, they also suffer. Sometimes they suffer more than other people because they never avoid anything, they go headlong into things.
Anando, do your thing and do it truly. Never compromise. Never compromise with anybody, not even with God. No compromise. Be yourself. That is the only prayer there is.

The second question:
Osho,
When will I be ready to cut off my hand and give it to you as a sign?
The question comes from the parable I told you – the parable about Bodhidharma and Hui Koju.

Bodhidharma sat facing a wall for nine years. People would go Bodhidharma and ask questions but he would not answer. People would ask him, “Why do you go on looking at the wall?”
And he would say, “I am waiting for the right man to come. When he comes I will turn and look at him.” Then Hui Koju came.
It was a very cold morning and snow was falling. He stood there in the falling snow, and it is said that the snow gathered all around his body, and he was freezing. One day passed and then he said to Bodhidharma, “Now I will make my offering.” He cut off one of his hands with his sword, gave it to Bodhidharma and said, “Now turn toward me, otherwise I will cut off my head.”
Bodhidharma turned immediately and said, “Wait! There is no need to go that far. So you have come. I was waiting for you for nine years. I have a message to deliver to you. Once the message is delivered I will disappear.”
Hui Koju became the second Zen master in China. The message was delivered.
After four years, when Bodhidharma was departing from his disciples, he asked his four disciples the question, “What is truth?” The first disciple answered that truth is not in the scriptures, not in the tradition, not in the words. And Bodhidharma said, “You have my skin.”
He asked the second disciple and the second said, “Truth must be experienced, it is not a concept, it cannot be thought about. It is not philosophy. It is existential.” And Bodhidharma said, “You have my flesh.”
He asked the third and the third said, “Truth is when you are not, when the ego disappears. Truth is when the mind is no more. Truth is a state of no-mind.”
Bodhidharma said, “You have my bones.”
Then he asked the fourth disciple – this disciple was the same Hui Koju who had given his hand. When he asked Hui Koju, he looked at the master, fell down at his feet and remained silent. Bodhidharma took him up, hugged him and said, “You have my marrow. And now I am ready to depart. You have all that I have. To a question about truth, only silence can be the answer.”
The others were sad but still they were saying something. Without saying anything the fourth disciple had said it. This was Hui Koju.

The question comes from this same parable. “When will I be ready to cut off my hand and give it to you as a sign?”
The first thing: I am not as gross as Bodhidharma; he was a barbarian. In fact, in China he was known as the Hindu barbarian from the south. I am not a barbarian. This is the twentieth century, sir, these things are not needed. You will have to bring more subtle gifts. A hand? What would I do with your hand? I would get in trouble with the police! So please never do that.
A thing that has been done once is meaningless now. You would be repeating it – it would not be original. It would not be original at all, it would be imitative. You would be doing it because you know the parable. It would not be coming out of your being; it is not your response.
You are also asking me: “When will I be ready to cut off my hand?” Hui Koju never asked. He just did it. You ask me, “When?” You are certainly after me. You will get me into trouble. First you ask me, “When?” Even if I say that the time has come, you would not be ready because this question is a question out of greed, not out of understanding.
A parable is always a symbolic thing. Always remember that when I tell you parables don’t be too literal. They are metaphoric. Cutting off the hand is symbolic. What is the symbol? The hand is the symbol of action. When Hui Koju cuts off his hand he says, “Sir, I am ready to drop all my activity, all my action. I am ready to drop my ‘doer-hood.’” That’s what he is saying. The hand is symbolic.
So if you can drop your “doer-hood,” that will be the real thing. The moment you are no longer a doer, immediately you become a being, you become a god. Now you are lost in your actions – doing this, doing that; you are thinking about having done this and not done that; you sometimes feel successful and very egoistic, sometimes a failure and very inferior. There is misery and happiness – you just go on. You move in a wheel.
To become a meditator means to drop out of the wheel of activities. I am not saying don’t do anything, I am saying let existence do it, you just be a vehicle. That is the meaning of cutting off your hand.
One thing more that I have never told you about this parable is that Bodhidharma gave the hand back, and Hui Koju was whole again. Now, if you cut your hand off, it cannot be given back and you cannot be whole again. Hands don’t grow like trees. You cut a branch and it grows back. No, even for a person like Bodhidharma, nature will not change its laws; it never changes its laws. Nature is very neutral, that’s why miracles never happen. Nature never gives way to exceptions. It is absolute.
This action simply means that Hui Koju gave up his activity, surrendered his activity, and Bodhidharma gave it back again because Hui Koju was no longer a doer – so he could be allowed to do. Now God, or the total, or the whole, or Tao, would be the doer through him.
These parables have to be meditated upon. They are not just to be understood literally; otherwise you will miss the meaning. They are great metaphors, they are poetic. They are not logical things, they are symbolic. They indicate something. In Zen they have a saying coined by a very great Zen master. Lin Chi said, “Don’t bite my finger. Look where I am pointing.”
Now this is biting my finger.

The third question:
Osho,
Have you yet been able to say to one of your disciples, “So, it has happened!”?
If it has not happened, it would not be true to say so, and if it has happened, it would be futile. What is the point of saying it when it has happened? Either way it is meaningless.
If it has not happened, I would not say so, and if it has happened, why should I say it? You know, I know – it would be a tacit understanding. I am not going to say to anybody that it has happened, remember. I will never say to anybody that it has happened. It is happening to many, it will happen to many; in fact, it has never happened to so many people as it is going to happen this time.
But I am not going to say anything to anybody. You would like me to say something because then you can create great politics around it. If I say to Maneesha, “Maneesha, it has happened to you,” then everybody else will be jealous. Then you will start finding fault with Maneesha. Then you will start trying to prove that it has not happened to her. How can it happen to Maneesha before you? Impossible!
Do you know that when Bodhidharma gave his robe to Hui Koju he told him a second thing? “Escape now. Take this robe and escape as far away as possible, otherwise the other disciples will kill you.” There were five hundred disciples. So four hundred and ninety-nine would be against this Hui Koju, just a simple poor man. They would kill him; certainly they would kill him. They followed him. The moment they became aware that it had happened to Hui Koju, that the robe had been given to him, they followed him. Where had he gone? He had gone into a mountain retreat, running as far away as possible because the master had told him, “Run far away.”
They got hold of Hui Koju. The greatest scholar, who had been expecting that it would happen to him, got hold of him first. He was a very dangerous man. He said, “Give me the robe.”
Hui Koju said, “You can take the robe because the robe is not the thing. You can take it.” He dropped the robe on the ground and said, “You can take it. But remember, if you are not yet capable of taking it, it will be a crime against the master.”
The scholar started trembling and shaking and perspiring because he certainly was not ready. It was his ego. He tried to pick up the robe but he could not take it, it was so heavy. It was not that the robe became heavy; he must have become too shaky, too nervous.
Remember, I say again: miracles never happen. If you ask the Buddhists they will say that this was a miracle. The robe became so heavy that the man could not take it. That’s not right. The man became very shaky, naturally. Hui Koju was standing there as a witness – a pure silence, a great meditation, a great ecstasy, watching. And he said, “Remember one thing: you will be committing a crime against the master if you are not ready for it. You can take it if you are ready.”
How can you deceive a man like Hui Koju who has become a mirror? He must have seen all this scholar’s ignorance hidden behind the so-called knowledge. The scholar must have trembled. He must have tried to take the robe but could not pick it up. He fell down at the feet of Hui Koju and he said, “I am sorry. I am not after the robe. Tell me what he has transferred to you.”
For years Hui Koju was pursued; efforts were made to kill him.
This has always been so. I am not going to say to anybody that it has happened to them because I am not interested in creating any politics. When it has happened, it has happened. You will know, I will know, and there is no need for anybody else to know about it. You will know that I have said it to you in deep silence. Not a single word will be uttered, but the message will reach you. You will know my recognition – that I have recognized you, that I have blessed you, that I have patted you on your back and I have said, “Yes, it has happened.” But it will not be in so many words; not a word will be uttered. It will be a gesture and you will understand and nobody else will understand.
This is going to be the way.

The fourth question:
Osho,
Should I throw away all my self-confidence?
Don’t think you can do it because you don’t have any.
What you call self-confidence is just a lack of it, hence you need it. A man of real self-confidence never carries much luggage. Why should he carry it? Why should he be concerned about self-confidence? He has it. Nobody can rob him of it, nobody can steal it. There is no way of losing it; you will not need to carry it. When you carry it you show only one thing – you don’t have it.
People who don’t have any self-confidence create a false self-confidence as a substitute. They are trembling inside, they are afraid inside. On the surface they pretend. Deep down there is cowardice; they pretend that they are brave people, very courageous. Deep down there is ignorance, but on the surface they are very knowledgeable. Deep down they don’t know anything; on the surface they are ready with all the possible answers to every possible question.
What do you need self-confidence for? If you are confident, self-confidence will be like a shadow to you. It will follow you. You don’t carry your shadow, you don’t look back again and again to see whether it is coming or not, you can’t get any insurance for it. You don’t care. It follows. Self-confidence is always there when you have become a self.
You are not yet a self, you are just an ego. Remember this difference between the ego and the self. The self is divine, the ego is human. The ego is manufactured by education, society, ambition, politics, morality, and all that; the self is not manufactured, it is discovered. The ego is an invention. The self is a discovery.
You have to manage the ego because if you don’t manage it, within hours it will be gone. If you don’t manage it continuously, if you are not on guard continuously, it will be lost. So you have to be on guard. Of course, it creates great tension, great heaviness in the head. You become a heavy person and you become very uptight. Your flow stops. You become frozen.
It is very foolish but it is what you have. That is why you are afraid, that’s why you ask: “Should I throw away all my self-confidence?” That which can be thrown away is not self-confidence. How can you throw away your shadow? Or can you? What are the ways to throw away a shadow? There are no ways. Nobody has ever been able to throw away a shadow. When your self has been discovered, when you have become an integrated soul and you have come to know your center, self-confidence follows like a shadow. You cannot throw it away.
A Buddha has it, a Mahavira has it, a Lao Tzu has it – you don’t have it. Hence you are always afraid it may be taken away. And sometimes you even start thinking about dropping it. It cannot be taken away if it is there; it cannot be dropped if it is there. It can be taken away only if it is not there; it can be dropped only if it is not there. This will look paradoxical but this is one of the fundamental laws of life. You think only of that which is not; that which is needs no thought to hold it – that which is simply is, on its own accord.
So, if you want to drop it, you don’t have it. So please drop it. Please drop it because it is meaningless, it is useless; it is not, it is bogus, it is a false coin.
Now I would like to make the paradox even deeper. First I say you don’t have it, so how can you drop it? Then I say you don’t have it, so please drop it. It is a waste of energy to carry it. You are just carrying an idea; it is not there. The moment you drop your so-called self-confidence, you will be able to discover your self. The false must be understood as false, only then does the real reveal itself. The false, when understood as false, is the first step toward reality. Let the false cease to be and the real will enter. Carry the false and you will not allow the real to penetrate your being.

The fifth question:
Osho,
This master-disciple game is Osho-roulette but I know the bullet is a blank, isn't it?
Yes, it is, but it kills all the same.
Just the other day I was reading somebody’s memoirs. And he wrote that once, in Sannen, J. Krishnamurti was conducting a small discussion. A few people had gathered and they were asking questions, which he was answering. Suddenly a man arose and he said, “Stop all this. It is almost as if we are blind, in a dark night, searching for a black cat which is not there.” And Krishnamurti stood up and said, “Sir, but it is there.”
Let me repeat it. Krishnamurti said, “Sir, but it is there.”
I would like to tell you, yes, the bullet is a blank but it kills. It cures, it kills, it destroys, it recreates. In fact, it kills because it is a blank; it kills because it is empty. It comes out of my emptiness; it is part of my emptiness. If you allow my emptiness to enter you, it will kill you and will revive you on a totally different plane, in a new dimension. Yes, it will be a cross, a crucifixion – and a resurrection too.
It kills only because it is a blank. It is like a blank check – the value depends on you. If you accept it totally, it has tremendous value; if you reject it, it is just a piece of paper.
You will have to write the amount on it. I simply give you a blank check. It will depend on your courage as to how much you can write on it.
And don’t be a miser when you are filling out a blank check.

The sixth question:
Osho,
Sometimes I feel really that the other is hell. What about love then and being with somebody?
The other is hell only to the extent that you feel the other as the other. There is a way to feel the other not as the other but as your extension – and that is true too, that’s what reality really is.
The other is not the other. When you love, what do you mean by love? Love means only this experience: that the other is no longer the other. What else is love? What is love all about? Love is an experience in which you feel that the other is no longer the other, the other is me; the other is my being. Maybe on the bodily plane you remain separate, on the mental plane you remain separate, but further down the centers start overlapping, merging, losing definition. That’s what love is.
The other is hell if you are only pretending love – then the other is really hell. If you are only playing a game and just trying to exploit the other as a means, then he will also try to exploit you as a means. Nobody wants to be reduced to a means; everybody is an end unto himself. Hence in the name of love so much misery arises. It is not out of love; it is out of false love, pretended love.
Love. And then you will know the other is not other. If you can love deeply, infinitely, you will by and by become aware that even the trees are not other; even the stars are not other.
This is what I call becoming a sannyasin: to fall in love with the total. That’s what Lao Tzu calls Tao: to fall in love with the total, to make love to God. That is the ultimate Tantra: to make love to God, to be in love with the whole.
Naturally, when you make love to a woman or a man it is bound to be momentary because when two small, tiny individuals make love you cannot expect more than that. Even that much happening is a miracle. If you really want eternal orgasm, a continuous orgasm, then you have to love the whole and you have to fall in love with the whole. Make love to God, then God is not the other. Wherever love comes in, the other disappears. That is the sign of love; that the other is no longer there. And when the other is not there as the other, there is heaven – paradise regained. When the other is as the other, there is hell – paradise lost.

The seventh question:
Osho,
You said that the real morality is the shadow of enlightenment. But then how is one to live before becoming enlightened?
The moment you ask how, you are asking again for a discipline. The moment you ask how, you are asking for methods, techniques. Why can’t you simply live? Are not animals living? Are not trees living and birds living without asking how? Why do you carry on continuously about everything with this how? How to love? How to pray? How to be friendly? How to be compassionate? How to be silent? How to live?
Drop the how and let life take its own course. It will. It is not waiting for any how. That’s what Tao calls spontaneity, tathata, suchness. Let life take its own course. Who are you to interfere continuously? Can’t you simply eat? Why do you ask how to eat and how to taste? Can’t you simply taste? Just eat, chew well, and enjoy.
Let life move, don’t try to manage it. You have mismanaged enough. By trying to improve you have destroyed all its beauty. With all your goals and ideologies you have poisoned your being. Be natural.
But that is very difficult for the ego. The difficulty comes from the ego, not from life. Life can be lived without any how, but the difficulty comes from the ego. The ego says that then you will be like an animal. So what? Be an animal! What is wrong in being that? Man is an animal. There’s nothing wrong in being an animal. No animal is as ugly as man. No animal has done so much violence on earth as man. No animal has destroyed nature as man has. What is wrong with animals? Have you ever heard of any animal becoming Adolf Hitler or Joseph Stalin or Mao Zedong? They have not murdered and butchered. They have not created wars. It is man who brings ugliness into the world.
The ego says you have to be higher than the animals. In trying to be higher than the animals you fall lower than the animals. Be natural, don’t try to improve, and you will find a great transformation happening. Godliness comes through nature – not through improvement, not through any effort of the ego, but through effortlessness, through deep trust and surrender.
Can’t you trust existence, which has given you birth? You did not ask that question when you were in the womb: “How to live for nine months?” You lived well, you did well, perfectly well – otherwise you would not be here. There was no yoga teacher to teach you to be in what posture, to teach you how to breathe, how to do pranayama and pratyahar, and which asana would be the best. You didn’t ask anybody. There was nobody to ask. You lived in the womb naturally and you grew. Existence was taking care, the whole was taking care, everything was provided.
Then you were born and became a child – you did not ask how to breathe, how to walk, how to talk. Everything came by and by. Can’t you trust life? One day you became a young man, youth came, and love started arising in your being. One day you will become old, life will start disappearing; one day death will come and the circle will be complete.
Why are you always trying to interfere? Tao says you should be in a wu-wei, noninterference. Let the whole do things. This is a very radical attitude; this is the greatest revolutionary attitude ever. “How?” is very childish. Yoga is for children, Tao is for grown-ups.
So don’t ask: “But then how is one to live before becoming enlightened?” Just live. And just living, I tell you, is fantastic. It’s far out!

The eighth question:
Osho,
How to be a Taoist psychotherapist within a very Confucius-oriented mental institution? In other words, how to be a nut healer instead of a nutcracker?
You can be a Taoist anywhere; nobody can hinder you, no obstacles can prevent you, because to be a Taoist means taking the ultimate risk. I am not saying that you will not be in trouble; I have never said that. You will be in trouble, certainly you will be in trouble, but that trouble is good, beneficial. It is a birth pain.
Yes, when you become natural you will be continuously in trouble –from everywhere. Nobody is natural, so everywhere you will be an odd person. Nobody will feel at ease with you in the beginning. Because you are at ease with yourself, nobody will feel at ease with you – because they are not at ease with themselves. They are very tense people. They fit with a tense person, but they are simply at a loss with a non-tense person. What to do?

Once I was traveling in a train and there was only one other passenger in the compartment. He wanted to talk to me, to somehow get into conversation with me. Seeing his restlessness I remained very cool. When he tried to ask something I simply answered with yes or no. I didn’t take any interest in him or the topic. When he offered me some pan I said, “I don’t take it.” When he offered me a cigarette I said, “I don’t smoke.” When he prepared a drink – he was a doctor – I said, “I don’t drink.”
He went crazy. He said, “Then how can I be friendly with you? How? We are going to be here together in this compartment for forty-eight hours and there seems to be no bridge.”
I said, “There is none.”
And I watched him. He started becoming crazier and crazier. He would open his suitcase and close it again and arrange his clothes and then arrange them again, and then open the window, close the window, read the same newspaper again, and in between he would look at me as if to say, “What is the matter?” I sat there cool and silent, and I enjoyed it.
After two hours he called the conductor and said, “I want to go into another compartment.” The conductor asked if there was something wrong. He said, “Nothing is wrong but this man is too silent. It hurts. It drives me crazy. He is just sitting there and I have to see him because I am here alone. And there seems to be no possibility of communicating with him.”
Now, I was not doing any harm. I had not said even a single word to him, but he had become very disturbed.

When you are silent you will find that people become very uneasy with you. Your silence brings a totally different world, a world that they are not attuned with. You bring a totally new music, a music they don’t know at all. You introduce them to a new way of being for which they are not ready.
You ask me: “How to be a Taoist psychotherapist within a very Confucius-oriented mental institution?” The whole world is a Confucius-oriented mental institution. Confucius is the master of millions, of the whole world really. And the whole world has become a mental institution. It is very difficult to find a man who is sane. Insanity is normal.
So if you are in a mental institution don’t be worried very much, because whether you are in the institution or in the world it is the same. There is not much difference – maybe a little difference of degree.
You can be Taoist anywhere because Taoism has no conditions to be fulfilled. The first thing you have to understand is: don’t think of mad people as nuts, don’t even think of them as mad. That is disrespectful. Their family thought them mad, hence they were hospitalized or institutionalized. The politicians thought them mad, the priest thought them mad, everybody thought them mad. I tell you they are only different, not necessarily mad. Certainly they are different, but who knows who is mad? Jesus was thought to be a madman, Mansoor was thought to be a madman, St. Francis was thought to be a madman, Ramakrishna was thought to be a madman. But who is mad?
They are different, that much is certain. Be respectful. Maybe by being respectful you will help them to come back, to become more alert.
This must be understood: when a person goes mad it simply shows that he is the weakest link in the group in which he lives – for example, in a family. If the family is neurotic – as families are neurotic – then the person who is the weakest in the family will become neurotic. Then through that person the whole neurosis of the family will start flowing. He will become the scapegoat. He may be weak, he may be fragile; he may be more sensitive than the others. He may be of a softer heart and softer build. But the whole neurosis of the family will start flowing through him and the whole family will start calling him mad. And they will start thinking to take him to the psychiatrist, to the institution.
He had been helpful; he had been a safety valve for the neurotic family. In fact the family was neurotic. The family’s neurosis created the neurosis of the person; he was the most vulnerable in the family. Maybe he was the most intelligent, the most sensitive, the softest of them, so certainly he became affected first. Others were harder, more insensitive, more stone-like – he was more like a rose, so he was crushed.
Then he goes to the psychiatrist and the psychiatrist is ready to label him: he is a schizophrenic, or a manic-depressive, or this or that. He is labeled. The family is happy – they were right. The man cannot say anything because the family says he is mad, and the people where he works say he is mad, and now, finally, the psychiatrist confirms that he is mad.
The psychiatrist is in the service of the society. The psychiatrist is part of the politics. Just as in the old days the priest was in the service of society, now the psychiatrist is in the service of society. Now the psychiatrist is doing the same function as the priest. The old conspiracy continues. The priests and the politicians were together – they conspired against man. Now the priest has lost his prestige, so he is being replaced by the psychoanalyst and psychiatrist. Now he is doing service and the politician is using him.
You force the person into a mental hospital. The moment you force a man into a mental hospital you absolutely fix in his mind the idea that he is mad. The idea that he is mad, which you have given him, is irreversible. Now everything will prove that he is mad – the treatment, the medicine, the doctors, the nurses, the whole atmosphere. You are hypnotizing him into madness.
If you really want to be a Taoist in a mental institute, the first thing to do is to help the person to feel that he is not mad, only different. Do you see the difference it will bring? Just the word different. Nothing is basically wrong with him; he is just not like others. Then you are not destroying his self-respect, then you are not destroying his dignity, you are helping his dignity. Then you are not giving him a hypnotic idea that he is mad, you are helping him to be dehypnotized. Help him as a person but not as a patient. Nobody is a patient. Help him respectfully, not with any derogation on your part.
Don’t label him because people cannot be labeled. People are so infinite; people are so glorious – how can you label them manic-depressive or schizophrenic? These labels are dangerous, very dangerous. Nobody knows exactly what schizophrenia is, nobody knows exactly. There is no exact definition of who is abnormal, who is mad. So don’t play with words.
Help the person to understand that he is different. Help the person to understand that he exists in a crowd that is totally different from him so he must be a little careful – that’s all. If you can bring a little more awareness into him, you will be a great blessing to him. That’s all that is needed.
In the East, we did it for centuries. In the East, in the old days, if a person was going mad they would not take him to a doctor, to a physician, they would take him to a certain sacred place, to a temple. Why? Because madness was thought to be something divine. It is beautiful to think of madness as divine. It has something in it of the divine, of divine spontaneity, of divine chaos. It has something that transcends ordinary intellect. They would take him to the temple, and in the temple he was not thought to be mad, he was thought only to be in a higher stage than most people.
People would pray for him and he would be left surrendered to God. In almost all cases people were helped. They would again become normal – whatever that means. They would come back home, they would be able to fit with people more easily.
In Japan, in Zen temples, they still do that. They don’t consider a person to be mad; they simply accept him as a person in trouble, a person who is different. They help him to be in the monastery but nobody does anything else to him. He is left alone. His needs are fulfilled. And by and by, within three or four weeks, he settles. The stirring that was inside him settles. In fact, to take a person out of his family reference and context is to help him.
Mad institutions should not be called mad institutions. They should be houses to help different kinds of people, with respect.
Don’t think of yourself as a doctor; think of yourself as a friend. Don’t think of yourself as higher than the patient. You are nobody to prescribe; you just have to understand the person and help him come to more awareness.
Many things can be helpful. Music will be more helpful than medicine. Meditation will be tremendously more helpful than anything else and in particular, dynamic meditation will be helpful. Just help him to cathart. He has gathered much rubbish in his heart which he has not been allowed to throw out anywhere. Help him to throw it out. Don’t repress him any more. His family was repressive; his society was repressive, now at least you can help.
What I call the dynamic methods of meditation can be of tremendous value to future psychiatry. Help him to bring his madness out, whatsoever he feels. If he wants to scream, let him. Don’t let him feel guilty that he is doing something wrong. It is perfectly okay. Nothing is wrong in screaming. He may have needed it from his childhood. He wanted to scream and scream and scream, and nobody allowed it. Now the scream has become too big a burden. It needs release. Let him scream. Let him cry and weep. Let him roll on the ground. By and by you will see all violence disappearing. By and by he will cool down, he will settle down. Then give him silent methods of meditation – zazen, vipassana, and other methods. First give cathartic methods, then silent methods. These two things.
Be respectful. Serve him; don’t treat him – and you will be able to treat him.

The ninth question:
Osho,
In your discourses on Patanjali, you spoke of the need to develop a third psychology – a psychology of the awakened mind which would supplement already existing psychologies of the abnormal and the normal mind. You also said that Gurdjieff had tried to develop such a psychology, but had failed to do so after Ouspensky left him.
Could you say a little more about the general form and content of your third psychology? For example, could it be taught in the way that the first and second psychologies are taught? And what benefits might be expected from teaching such a subject?
The first thing: it has content but it has no form; it is not formal. That is the first basic difference.
The second thing: it, therefore, cannot be taught as a subject. It is not a subject. You cannot make a curriculum out of it. It cannot become a textbook.
Then what can be done? In universities, colleges, schools, facilities can be made available where people can meditate. It has no form, so you cannot teach it, but it has content; it can be learned. And you cannot impose it. Meditation cannot be imposed. You can only make facilities available: a temple on the university campus, a meditation hall, underground cells where people can go and sit silently and be with themselves. You can provide dynamic meditation to allow people to cathart and then you can give them facilities where they can sit silently and be alone, centered, grounded in their being.
This cannot be a subject to be taught, it cannot be made compulsory. Only those who are interested, who have a desire, a longing, will be able to go there. You can have a guide who can give instructions on how to cathart and how to be silent and sit silently – general guidance. That too must be very vague. If you try to be very concrete it becomes a pattern, and no meditation is possible in a pattern. Meditation is a fluid phenomenon; you cannot give it a pattern. So fluid patterns can be given.
Each one has to develop his own pattern because each individual’s is different from everybody else’s. My meditation cannot be your meditation. Buddha’s meditation cannot be Jesus’ meditation. Of course, the meditation is the same, but each one will have his own way.
It is almost like when you go to a tailor. He may cut from the same material, but he will have to make different clothes for different people. The material is the same but the clothing will be different.
Meditation, the quality of meditative consciousness, is the same.
Two things are to be remembered. First, people have to be helped so that they can unconditionally throw off their repressions. Nobody may condemn them. If they want to shriek and shout and scream, they have to be allowed. If they want to jump and run, they have to be allowed. If they want to dance, they have to be allowed. If they want to go almost crazy, they have to be allowed. This is the beauty of it: when a person goes crazy on his own, he is not crazy – deep down, he always remains in control. A tremendous ability to control arises and he becomes unburdened.
When a person has become unburdened then he can start the second step – vipassana, zazen-type silent methods. Tell them to just sit silently. If thoughts come, watch them. Don’t fight with thoughts. They will come less if you have really been cathartic. Not so many thoughts will come; the traffic will be very, very slow. Ordinarily your mind is always in a rush hour but now a thought will pass sometimes and then there will be a gap. You will be more silent. Thoughts will come and go but you need not be worried. Just watch them. You have nothing to be worried about – good or bad, no judgment is needed. Just be an observer.
These small instructions and a guide who will give the instructions is all that is needed. If people bring problems, the guide can solve them. This guide must, of course, be a meditator himself, otherwise he will not be able to help. It is not that he knows about meditation and can be helpful, no. It is not that he has read about meditation and can be of help, no. But the guide will have to be a meditator.
That’s what I am trying to do here. I am not interested in the universities, in the education system, because I know that unless I have thousands of meditators it is futile, it is not possible, it cannot be done. So the first thing is to create thousands of meditators. Once I have those thousands of meditators then my interest will be in the universities. Then those meditators can go to the universities, to the colleges, to the schools, and they can create facilities there. Their presence will help and their own experience on the path will be a help to others.
The basic thing about meditation is freedom. It cannot be imposed. You cannot force everybody in the school to come and meditate at a particular time. That would destroy meditation forever.
That is what happened with poetry. Poetry is being destroyed by the universities and colleges and schools because people are forced to read it. Once they are forced they lose all interest in it. Then never in their lives will they read poetry again. Poetry is so beautiful; it cannot be forced. You should make possibilities available. Poets should be there. Poets can be called to come to read their poetry. People can ask questions and they can explain. Or you can ask poets to be there and create poetry before school children or before college and university students so they can see how poetry arises in a being, how poetry descends, how a person pours out poetry.
They can sing with the poet, they can dance with the poet, they can enjoy the poetry, but there can be no examinations. Poetry is such a big thing that examinations cannot be given on it. You can examine mathematics. It is such an ugly thing that if you destroy it, nothing is destroyed. But poetry, no, please, no. Never touch poetry. Examinations are destructive.
Just make possibilities available. Poets should travel from one university to another university. Poets should be called from one university to another university. They could just be there, and people who are interested in poetry could sit by their side and wait, sip tea with the poet and wait. If the poetry arises the students should be able to see the birth of it. Then they can sing with the poet and they can ask questions of the poet. And then the poet moves on.
Meditation will also be like that because meditation is still higher than poetry. Poetry at least has words, meditation has no words. Meditation is wordless poetry; poetry is meditation in words. Music is meditation with instruments, poetry is meditation with words, but meditation has no words, no instruments – only sound, only silence. It is the highest peak of human consciousness. You cannot teach it, but people can learn it.
So what can be done? The question is from Brian Lewis. He is a professor in England – a beautiful person. He can be of much help in creating a possibility in his own university.
But remember, textbooks are not possible and this is not subject matter, you cannot make a curriculum out of it – it has no form. It has content. Its content is godliness. That’s what godliness is all about – the content of meditation.

And the last question.
Because of Divya’s question, at least half a dozen questions have come. Now everybody wants to have a special spot for himself. I am not going to allow anything to anybody because these are imitative questions; they have not come out of your own experience. You are simply jealous of Divya. Jealousy must be dropped. Listen to the questions and you will understand.
Osho,
You are the most blatantly outrageous son of a bitch I have ever met. First you say no one is special, then you give Divya a permanent spot in the front of fronts, and bestow on her a queenship. I want a front row seat too – and I'll settle for empress!
It is from Amida.
Divya’s question was totally different. She was not interested in any row – neither first nor second. And she was not demanding. Her question was really that she felt guilty about clinging to her seat. She wanted to be freed from that possessiveness. Her question was totally different.
You have completely forgotten her question. Her question was: “Osho, why do I cling to this spot? Why can I not drop it? I have dropped everything, why not this spot? Why am I so possessive about it? Why can I not let it go?” That was really a totally different question. She was not asking for this spot, remember. She was not asking for permission to sit here forever and always, she was asking for help to drop it. Hence I have given her the spot.
To Amida, no. Your whole idea is of jealousy. Your whole idea is of competitiveness. This is ugly.

The second question:
How the hell am I supposed to find my right seat when by the time I reach the auditorium there are already three hundred and twenty-five people sitting there?
This is from Vidya. So your seat is three hundred and twenty-sixth. That is your spot.

And the third question:
Could I have the seat next to Divya?
It is from Devesh. No, never. You will have to surrender to Shiva and wherever he gives you a seat that is your seat. And I would like him to change your seat every day.
Never be imitative. Then you miss the whole beauty of it. Never ask a question because others have asked it. Can’t you even create a question which is originally yours? Even the question must be borrowed. At least be that creative. At least ask your own questions.
And never refer to anybody else because whatsoever I have said to one I am not going to say to anybody else. Whatsoever is right for one may be wrong for the other. The thing that is medicine to you may be poison to somebody else. My answer is always going to be different.
Keep it always in mind to let your own question come. Be authentic. And never become a victim. These are all victims. The spot is not important to these questions, something else is – the ego. Hence the very formulation of the question.
Devesh asked for seat the next to Divya. Do you know that Divya is going to hell? Are you ready to have the next seat there too? How long will you follow Divya and how are you concerned with Divya? The next seat? Do you want to be a carbon copy? Be an original. Existence loves originals. Carbon copies are never loved; carbon copies are ugly. Find your spot. Why next to Divya? How does Divya come into it? Never think in terms of anybody else. Here you are directly related to me, not through Divya or somebody else.
My sannyasins are not an organization. Each sannyasin is related to me. You are related to other sannyasins only because you are related to me and they are related to me. When you are not directly related to me, naturally you are related to one another – but that is secondary. Your eyes should be directly on me, nobody should come in between. You have to face me, you have to encounter me, and the encounter must be absolutely immediate and direct.
Enough for today.

============================================================

Lung Shu said to the physician Wen Chih:
“Your craft is subtle. I have an illness, can you cure it?”
“You have only to command. Tell me the symptoms of your illness.”
“I do not think it an honor if the whole district praises me nor a disgrace if the whole state reviles me; I have no joy when I win, no anxiety when I lose; I look in the same way at life and death, riches and poverty, other men and pigs, myself and other men; I dwell in my own house as though lodging in an inn, and look at my own neighborhood as though it were a foreign and barbarous country.

“Having all these ailments, titles and rewards cannot induce me, punishments and fines cannot awe me, prosperity and decline, benefit and harm cannot change me, joy and sorrow cannot influence me. Consequently it is impossible for me to serve my prince, have dealings with my kindred and friends, manage my wife and children, control my servants. What illness is this? What art can cure it?”

Wen Chih ordered Lung Shu to stand with his back to the light. He himself stepped back and examined Lung Shu from a distance facing the light. Then he said:
“Hmm. I see your heart. The place an inch square is empty – you are almost a sage. Six of the holes in your heart run into each other but one is stopped up. Can this be the reason why you now think the wisdom of a sage is an illness? My shallow craft can do nothing to cure it.”
A parable…

Once in the garden of a master there lived a monkey. And, as monkeys are curious people, he became very curious about the master. He saw the master sitting silently, doing nothing, and by and by he started coming close to him – what is this man doing? It was a mystery. Certainly, to a monkey, the most mysterious thing is somebody sitting silently, doing nothing.
Restlessness is just natural to a monkey, but resting in silence? Has this man gone mad? By and by he started coming closer to watch him. The closer he came, the more he was surprised. Not only was the man silent but the space around him was tremendously quiet. Even the monkey could feel the vibe as he came closer.
Then he started loving the man, and just to be close to him became one of his hobbies. Whenever he could find the time and whenever the master was sitting in the garden, he would come close and sit by his side.
One day he said to the master, “What do you do? Please tell me. I surrender to you. Accept me as a disciple.”
The master looked at the monkey, felt great compassion for him, and said, “I don’t do anything. You can also do it. It is non-doing. Sitting silently, the spring comes and the grass grows by itself. You simply sit silently. When the right moment comes, suddenly you are full of tremendous joy and peace and God. You are not supposed to do anything. Anything done by you is a disturbance, creates ripples, creates waves. And when your mind is wavy God cannot enter. When the mind is a quiet surface, when everything is silent and calm, God enters. He enters through the door of silence – but that is possible only when you are not a doer. So you can do it, you can try it.”
The monkey shook his head. He said, “It is impossible. I thought that if there was something I could do I would do it, but this is impossible. If you told me to fetch the moon, I could bring it; if you told me to remove the Himalayas, I could do it; if you told me to force the Ganges to run uphill, I could do it – because in the old ancient days, other monkeys like Hanuman have been known to do things like that. I am a monkey, I have the potential, I can also do it. But sitting silently, doing nothing? Sir, that is impossible. It is against my nature, it would drive me crazy. If God comes through silence then God is not for me and I am not for God.”

Human mind is nothing but a monkey. Man has not changed much. Charles Darwin says that man has evolved only on the surface – deep down man is as restless as other monkeys. Man has not evolved much. The real man is born only when your inner monkey completely disappears, utterly disappears.
To be a man means to be a no-mind. The constant chattering of the mind inside, the inner talk, the monologue, continues day and night, year in, year out, from birth to death. Whatsoever you are doing is irrelevant; it continues deep inside you. That chattering is the only thing that is irreligious, the only sin, the original sin. Once that chattering stops, miracles start happening to you. Such great mysteries become revealed that you cannot contain them. Such a vast sky starts pouring into you that you cannot believe it. It is incredible. You start expanding. Then the whole universe is something within you. Then you are not within the universe but the universe is within you. Then stars and moons and suns circle within your heart.
But if this happens without a master you will go mad. It is mind that is holding you together. Whatsoever you are – even if you are a monkey – it is mind that is holding you together. The mind is your illness and also your normality. Because of the mind you are tethered to the earth. Without the mind you would not be tied anywhere. You would be so loose and so free you might disperse. Who would hold you? What would your definition be then? Mind gone, ego goes. The ego is the center of the mind, the very heart of the monkey. Mind gone, greed is gone. Mind gone, ambition is gone. Mind gone, competition is gone. Mind gone, future and past are gone. Mind gone, Islam, Christianity, Hinduism, are gone. Mind gone – Indian, German, Chinese – nationalities are gone. Mind gone, the body is no longer you. Your own mother is not your mother, your own father is not your father, your own son is no longer your son. All relationships disappear because relationships exist in the mind.
Just think of a moment: if the mind suddenly disappears – where will you be? What will you be? You will lose all identity. You will simply melt and disappear, evaporate. It would be maddening; hence without the master the path is very risky. When the glimpse of the beyond comes to you for the first time it will shatter you, and you will not be able to see the positivity of it. You will see only the negativity of it. You will see what it has taken away from you; you will not be able to see what it has given you. Naturally you are acquainted with your past and the past is going away fast. You will simply see yourself as disappearing.
You don’t as yet have any language for the new that is being born; you don’t as yet have any concept for the new that is being born. The new that is being born is invisible, cannot be touched, cannot be heard, cannot be smelled, cannot be tasted. It is beyond the senses. You have never before known the new that is happening, so how will you recognize it? The new will not be recognized and the old will be disappearing. You will feel yourself going mad, falling apart, dying. Death will be your experience, or madness will be your experience. You will think that it is a curse that has happened to you. The blessing will look like a curse because you cannot yet see it as a blessing; your eyes are not trained for it. You can only see the curse; you can only see the negative part of it. This is what Christian mystics call the dark night of the soul – the light is so blinding it almost looks like darkness.
Have you ever looked directly into the sun? Within seconds you will go blind; you will not be able to see. It will be so dazzling. It is not dark, but the light is too much for you and your eyes are not able to take it in; they cannot absorb it. After looking at the sun for a few seconds, if you look around everywhere, you will find a tremendous darkness. If you look long enough at the sun, you will go blind.
Why is light blinding? Why? Because we have certain capacities. Only in tiny amounts can we allow the light to enter – and we can recognize only that much. Beyond that we lose recognition. That’s how it happens: when you first enter into the world of no-mind it looks like madness – the dark night of the soul, the mad night of the soul.
All religions have noted this fact, hence all religions insist on finding a master before you start entering into the world of no-mind. He will be there to help you, to support you. You will be falling apart but he will be there to encourage you, to give you hope. He will be there to interpret the new to you. That is the meaning of a master: to interpret for you that which cannot be interpreted, to indicate that which cannot be said, to show that which is inexpressible. He will be there; he will devise methods and ways for you to continue on the path, so that you don’t start escaping from it.
And remember, there is no escape. If you try escaping, you will simply go berserk. Sufis call such people the mastas. In India they are known as mad paramahansas. You cannot go back because it is no longer there, and you cannot go ahead because it is all dark. You are stuck. That’s why Buddha says, “Fortunate is the man who has found a master.”
I myself was not as fortunate as you are; I was working without a master. I searched and I could not find one. It was not that I had not searched, I had searched long enough, but I could not find one. It is very rare to find a master, rare to find a being that has become a nonbeing, rare to find a presence that is almost an absence, rare to find a man who is simply a door to the divine, an open door to the divine which will not hinder you, through which you can pass. It is very difficult.
The Sikhs call their temple the gurdwara, the door of the master. That is exactly what the master is – the door. Jesus says again and again, “I am the gate, I am the way, I am the truth. Come follow me, pass through me. And unless you pass through me you will not be able to reach the kingdom of heaven.”
Yes, sometimes it happens that a person has to work without a master. If a master is not available, then one has to work without one, but then the journey is very hazardous.
For one year I was in the state that this parable talks about. For one year it was almost impossible to know what was happening. For one year continuously it was even difficult to keep myself alive. Just to keep myself alive was a very difficult thing because all appetite disappeared. Days would pass and I would not feel any hunger; days would pass and I would not feel any thirst. I had to force myself to eat, force myself to drink. The body was so nonexistent that I had to hurt myself to feel that I was still in the body. I had to knock my head against the wall to feel whether my head was still there or not. I would be a little in the body, but even then, only when it hurt.
Every morning I would run for five to eight miles, and every evening I would run for five to eight miles. People used to think that I was mad. Why was I running so much? Sixteen miles a day! It was just to feel myself, to feel that I still was, not to lose contact with myself – just to wait until my eyes became attuned to the new that was happening.
I had to keep myself close to myself. I would not talk to anybody because everything had become so inconsistent that even to formulate one sentence was difficult. In the middle of the sentence I would forget what I was saying; in the middle of the road I would forget where I was going. Then I would have to come back. I would read a book; I would read fifty pages, and then suddenly I would remember, “What am I reading? I don’t remember at all.” This was my situation.

The door of the psychiatrist’s office burst open and a man rushed in.
“Doctor!” he cried. “You’ve got to help me. I’m sure I’m losing my mind. I can’t remember anything – what happened a year ago, or even what happened yesterday. I must be going crazy!”
“Hmm,” pondered the shrink. “Just when did you first become aware of this problem?”
The man looked puzzled, “What problem?”

This was my situation. It was difficult to complete even a full sentence. I had to keep myself shut up in my room. I made it a point not to talk, not to say anything, because to say anything was to say that I was mad.
For one year it persisted. I would simply lie on the floor and look at the ceiling and count from one to a hundred then back from a hundred to one. Just to remain capable of counting was at least something. Again and again I would forget. It took one year for me to gain a focus again, to have a perspective.
It happened; it was a miracle. There was nobody to support me; there was nobody to tell me where I was going and what was happening. In fact, everybody was against me, my teachers, my friends, my well-wishers. All were against me. But they could not do anything, they could only condemn, they could only ask what I was doing.
I was not doing anything! Now it was beyond me; it was happening. I had done something: unknowingly I had knocked on the door – now the door had opened. I had been meditating for many years, just sitting silently doing nothing, and by and by I started getting into that space, that heartspace, where you are and you are not doing anything, you are simply there, a presence, a watcher.
You are not even a watcher because you are not watching – you are just a presence. Words are not adequate because whatsoever word is used it seems as if it was being done. No, I was not doing it. I was simply lying, sitting, walking – deep down there was no doer. I had lost all ambition; there was no desire to be anybody, no desire to reach anywhere – not even God, not even nirvana. The buddha disease had completely disappeared. I was simply thrown into myself.
It was an emptiness, and emptiness drives one crazy. But emptiness is the only door to godliness. That means that only those who are ready to go mad ever attain, nobody else.
But if you have a master things are simple. He can hold your hand when you are losing all track of your being. He can become your support. If you love your master, that love will be the last link. Every link disappears, but that link remains. It disappears only when you have attained your own perspective, your own clarity. It is just like an umbilical cord. The child lives through the mother in the womb for nine months, and if you cut the umbilical cord, he will die. He lives through it. That is the only link.
In exactly the same way, if you love the master a subtle silver cord arises between you and the master – a very invisible phenomenon to others but very visible to the disciple. He can almost touch it. You become joined together with your master from your navel. The master is your mother; the master is your womb. And this umbilical cord, this invisible silver cord, remains nursing you till you are ready and the pregnancy is ripe, until you are ready to be reborn and you can breathe on your own.
The master is a must. If you can find one, you are fortunate. Then he will interpret for you and the darkness will look like light; the illness will look like a new wellness; he will transform the curse into a blessing. In fact, it is a blessing but you interpret it as a curse. He is not doing anything; he is simply showing you what the case is.
With this background, listen to this story.
Lung Shu said to the physician Wen Chih:
“Your craft is subtle. I have an illness, can you cure it?”
This man must have been like me – unfortunate. He must have been working without a master. He thought that he had an illness. It is natural, that’s how it appears – it looks like an illness. The old hold on reality is gone; your old intelligence no longer functions, your old memory no longer functions, your old identity is no longer there. You cannot say, “Who am I?” Your name, your address, has all become irrelevant. You don’t belong to anybody, you also don’t belong anywhere. For the first time you are an outsider in this world; you are a stranger. You are unrelated, uprooted – like a tree which is uprooted from the ground and has started dying.
When you enter this inner emptiness, this state of no-mind, for the first time, you are uprooted from the earth. Before you can grow your roots into the sky, if there is nobody to make you alert to the blessing that is going to happen to you, there is going to be a time gap, an interval, in which there will be much suffering,. If there is nobody to give you hope, then the dark night of the soul can become your grave.
Lung Shu said to the physician Wen Chih:
“Your craft is subtle. I have an illness. Can you cure it?”
“You have only to command. Tell me the symptoms of your illness.”
“I do not think it an honor if the whole district praises me nor a disgrace if the whole state reviles me; I have no joy when I win, no anxiety when I lose; I look in the same way at life and death, riches and poverty, other men and pigs, myself and other men; I dwell in my own house as though lodging in an inn, and look at my own neighborhood as though it were a foreign and barbarous country.”
The man must certainly have been in terrific trouble, in great anxiety. He could not relate to people any more. He had lost the language to relate.
What was happening? First he said, “I do not think it an honor if the whole district praises me nor a disgrace if the whole state reviles me.” He was losing his ego. It is the ego that feels good when somebody praises you and feels bad when somebody disgraces you, insults you. You live through it, you judge your life through it – it is the way you relate to people. You say that you love somebody because somehow he buttresses your ego. You say that you hate somebody because somehow he displeases you, he disgraces you, his presence is humiliating. The way he talks, the things he says, are hurting your ego. They don’t nourish you; they starve you. You hate the person.
Sometimes it happens that you do not even know the person, you have just met him for the first time, but immediately you hate the person because somehow his vibe is against your ego. The way he walks, the way he looks at you, the way he talks – he is trying to have the upper hand. Maybe it is not conscious, but you feel that he is trying to prove that he is superior to you. Somehow he makes you feel inferior. You hate him. Whenever a person makes you feel superior, you like him, you love him; you say that he is beautiful.
Your ego is your criterion. Once you drop the ego, who is your friend and who is your enemy? Once you drop the ego, what is right and what is wrong? Once you drop the ego, how can you know what to do and what not to do? How will you be a sinner or a saint? Once you drop the ego you drop all duality – you become one. That oneness drives you crazy.
There is a beautiful parable in the life of a saint in Maharashtra, Tukaram:

One day he came home – he was a poor man, a very poor man – he was coming home. Somebody had given him ten sugarcane sticks. While coming home he met many beggars and children on the road, and he distributed the sugarcane sticks. He kept only one for himself; nine he gave away. He was very happy, happy because he could give something, happy because he had something to give, happy because when he gave those sugarcane sticks to the beggars they thanked him, happy because the children were very happy – they laughed and enjoyed them and they ran to their homes with their sugarcane sticks.
He came home very happy – very, very happy. He told his wife the whole thing, “Somebody presented me with ten sugarcane sticks. I distributed nine and one I brought for me and you.”
Of course, as wives do, she became very angry. They were poor and these ten sugarcane sticks would have been nourishment for them. For days they had been hungry, and here was this fool – he had distributed them. She became so angry that she took the last sugarcane stick and started beating Tukaram. She hit him hard on his head. The stick broke in two and Tukaram laughed. He said, “So you are a dualist. I believe in the one, you believe in two. Good. So now there are two sticks; you can have one and I can have one. But I thought that we were one so I thought one stick would be enough.”

Your understanding is different. The mind of man converts everything into two. The energy that you call light and darkness is one, but you call it by two names: darkness and light. The energy that you call life and death is one, but you call it by two names: life and death. The energy that you call hate and love is one, but you call it by two names: hate and love. You are Tukaram’s wife.
This whole human world exists in duality. Language depends on duality, expression depends on duality. When a person starts feeling that he is one – when the ego disappears and the very phenomenon of duality disappears – then he feels at one with the trees, at one with the birds, at one with the rocks, at one with the river, at one with the moon, at one with the sun. Certainly the person will start feeling that something has gone wrong. Now who am I?
In this state if a lion jumped on you, you would not be worried at all. It is possible that you might even enjoy the whole thing – the lion eating you – because you are not separate from the lion. You will adjust perfectly well. You will enjoy the fact that the lion is hungry and he is eating you. You will become the lion. There is no duality.
But in this state, in the beginning, one naturally thinks, “Have I gone mad?” No enemy, no friend, praise means nothing, disgrace means nothing.
Just the other night a young man asked me, “Osho, can I displease you?” I said, “If you like, you can do it. But you will not be able to displease me because you are not able to please me either. To please me or to displease me is impossible. What can you do to displease me and what can you do to please me? To me both are the same.”
“I do not think it an honor if the whole district praises me nor a disgrace if the whole state reviles me.” The man was disturbed, very disturbed, uprooted. What was happening? People used to insult him before and he used to get in a rage. Now nothing happened. Had he become impotent? Had he lost all energy? People used to praise him and he used to feel happy, but now nothing was happening. Now, even if people brought him garlands, nothing happened.
Or, if sometimes they insulted him and threw shoes at him, still nothing happened. Once it happened in a public meeting in Baroda that somebody threw a shoe at me. He may have thought to displease me. I asked him to give me the other shoe too because what was I going to do with only one? He became very embarrassed. He was very puzzled. Later on he wrote a letter to me: “What manner of man you are? I insulted you and you asked me for another shoe!” He was not expecting that. But when it happens for the first time you become disoriented. You don’t know now what is what.
The second thing: “I have no joy when I win, no anxiety when I lose.” Comparison was disappearing, competition was disappearing, jealousy was going – they are all shadows of the ego. When the ego goes, the shadows cannot linger long; they have to follow suit. They go with the ego, they come with the ego. They are companions of the ego.
“I have no joy when I win, no anxiety when I lose.” What is there to lose in life? And what is there to win? All that you need cannot be lost. Your essential-most core can never be lost. And the essential-most core cannot be achieved; once you start looking into your being it is already there. You are already that which you were always thinking to gain and attain; and it is something that cannot be lost, cannot be robbed. Nobody can take it away. It cannot be destroyed because it is your very nature. When you start moving into the dimension of ultimate reality, there is nothing to win and nothing to lose. Comparison, jealousy and competition go with the ego, as shadows of the ego.
The third symptom: “I look in the same way at life and death, riches and poverty.” Equanimity is born. When ego is gone and ego shadows are gone, samyaktva, equanimity, is left. You start looking at things but you don’t think “This is bad and this is good, this should be and this should not be, all is good or all is bad.” All is alike. That is the equal eye, equanimity, what in India we call samyak drishti – the eye which sees everything as equal, the eye which sees the small as the big and the big as the small, the worthless as valuable and the valuable as worthless, the eye which sees gold and mud as the same.
Life and death, riches and poverty, all looked the same to this man – and he was very disturbed. What was happening to him? Had he lost interest in life, or had he died somewhere in his being?
The fourth symptom: “I dwell in my own house as though lodging in an inn and look at my own neighborhood as though it were a foreign and barbarous country.” When you lose your mind, certainly you become a stranger. Now you don’t have any common language with anybody else. Now your language is silence, and people cannot understand silence. And you cannot understand their words. It takes time to get attuned to your inner silence and then to come back to your mind and start using it again. It takes time – sometimes years, sometimes a whole life. One has to learn from ABC.
Once your mind is gone you have to start using it again if you want to relate. That’s why Buddha says there are many people who become realized but there are only very rare people who become masters. A master is one who has become realized and has again entered the world of the mind, has again become proficient with language, has again become capable of using the mind.
The realized person is one who has gone beyond the mind but who cannot relate again to the people who are lagging behind. The master is one who has gone beyond the mind and has become capable of using the mind again. Now the mind is not using him, he is using the mind, he is the master.
Great effort is needed to come back, great compassion is needed. Unless you love people tremendously, when you attain your buddhahood, who cares? Why bother? Why not remain silent? Why not enjoy the beautitude that has happened to you, the blessing that has come to you? Why bother with foolish people? They are not going to understand anyway; they are only going to misunderstand. At the most they will not understand, at the worst they will misunderstand. And they are going to create unnecessary problems for you – they crucified Jesus, they poisoned Socrates, they killed Mansoor.
Mansoor could have remained silent; he could have avoided it all. That’s what others told him. In those days, in that part of the world where Mansoor lived, there were many enlightened people. Enlightenment comes like a wave – when it comes, then many people ride the wave. There were many enlightened people, Junnaid was one. Junnaid told Mansoor al-Hillaj, “Stop talking, keep quiet, otherwise they will kill you.” There were other enlightened people; they all came to Mansoor and told him, “Keep quiet! These Mohammedans around are dangerous!”
But al-Hillaj wouldn’t listen. He started shouting from the house-tops, “I am God! Ana’l haq, I am the truth. I have attained. Come and have a taste.” He started offering his cup of tea to everybody. People were enraged. Who is this, saying that he is a God? To people it looked like the ultimate in egoism. Somebody calling himself a god? This seemed to be the last straw – this man had become a megalomaniac; he thinks he is a god. They were very offended. They killed him; but even while they were killing him, Mansoor was laughing, and the last thing that he said again was, “Ana’l haq! I am God!”
He was a master. He was trying to help people. A master is one who has gone beyond mind and come back. A master is one who has gone to the peak and traveled back to the valley to take others to the peak. Not every enlightened person is a master. In one thousand enlightened persons only one becomes a master. To go to the peak is very arduous but to come back from the peak, back to the valley, is far more arduous. And it is a thankless job! You go to so much trouble and nobody is even going to thank you. They will curse you. They will say, “Why did you come back? Why won’t you allow us to rest? Why do you bring such great challenges to us? Why don’t you keep your peak to yourself? Why are you shouting and disturbing our sleep? We are happy wherever we are. Don’t bring these dreams about the peak to us.” They become angry.
One can understand their anger. You disturb their life. They are settled in the valley, enjoying a thousand and one trips. Of course, all are dreams, meaningless, but at the moment they look meaningful; at the moment even the dream looks real and they are absorbed in it. Then comes a man from the peak back to the valley, and he starts shaking everybody up and he becomes an alarm and it disturbs everybody’s sleep. Somebody was having a beautiful, sweet dream – he becomes angry because you disturbed his dream. He has to take revenge. “Why don’t you go to your peak? If you have attained, go. Forget us. We don’t bother you, so why should you bother us?”
Those few people who have come back to the valley are the rarest. Their compassion is infinite. To attain to God is just selfish; to bring it to others is service. Buddha has insisted again and again that while you are meditating, always remember compassion. Don’t forget compassion. It is very easy to forget compassion while you are meditating, so you must continuously remember it. When you have come to the fulfillment of your meditation, don’t forget compassion. Bring it back to people. Grow in compassion and meditation so simultaneously that when meditation brings you home, compassion takes you back to the valley. Takes you back to the foreign lands where barbarous people dwell, where they will not understand your language, where there is more possibility that you will be crucified. But that is nothing – for an enlightened person to be crucified is nothing. It makes no difference. If crucifixion can help people, he will love to be crucified. Whatsoever can help people he would love to do.
There is every possibility that Jesus helped those people who were going to crucify him. There is every possibility that Judas was not against Jesus but was an agent from Jesus. There is every possibility that Jesus planned the whole thing – because those people were so fast asleep that unless something very sensational happened they would not wake up.
The crucifixion was something really sensational. For two thousand years it has not allowed many people to go back to sleep again. It has been the most sensational thing in the whole history of humanity. Jesus left the deepest mark. Buddha did not leave such a deep mark; neither did Mahavira, nor Patanjali, nor Lao Tzu. Jesus left the deepest mark. It is as if, with the crucifixion, history split in two: before and after. All that was before Jesus became irrelevant and all that came after Jesus took on a new significance.
The Christian calendar is the most important calendar. There are other calendars, but no calendar is as important. Jainas have their calendar – their calendar starts with Mahavira – but it is not important. Hindus have their calendar – their calendar starts with a great emperor, Vikramaditya – but a king is just a king, nothing compared with the Christian calendar.
With Jesus, history simply split into two parts. With Jesus, something of tremendous value entered into human consciousness. And that happened because of the crucifixion. His blood is still alive, his blood still shouts, his blood still calls people. If he had not been crucified, he might have been forgotten. Many people have been forgotten, completely forgotten. There is every possibility that he conspired with the conspirators, that he helped them.
But when for the first time the glimpse enters your being you will feel: “I dwell in my own house as though lodging in an inn and look at my own neighborhood as though it were a foreign and barbarous country.”
That is because you lose your old language and the new one must be learned. It is arduous to learn the new language; it needs real effort to learn the new language – because when you have attained to the inner silence, if you make a word the word melts and disappears. You try hard to create a word, but you cannot create it – it disappears. For a man who has attained to the innermost silence all language is as if one is writing on water, you have not even written it, and it has gone.
The fifth symptom:
“Having all these ailments…”
Naturally the man thinks he has become very ill, these are ailments…
“…titles and rewards cannot induce me, punishments and fines cannot awe me; prosperity and decline, benefit and harm cannot change me…”
When equanimity happens, when you have become samyak drishti when you have attained to the equal eye… Jesus says, “Attain to one eye, and if you can attain to one eye your whole body will become full of light.” When you start looking at things as if they are the same – nothing is inferior, nothing is superior, the dunghill and the diamond have the same value, or same nonvalue, no actual difference exists – then this fifth state, transcendence, comes.
“…titles and rewards cannot induce me, punishments and fines cannot awe me, prosperity and decline, benefit and harm cannot change me… Things happen but I remain transcendent, I remain aloof, nothing touches me.” One has become a lotus. The lotus is in the water but the water does not touch it, the lotus comes out of the mud but is beyond mud, beyond all mud. Can you find anything like the lotus? It is difficult – that’s why in the East the lotus has become the symbol of enlightenment itself. Buddha is depicted sitting on a lotus. Vishnu is standing in a lotus. And the ultimate state of consciousness, sahasrar means a one-thousand-petaled lotus.
The lotus is a symbol, a metaphor, for transcendence. You move but nothing touches you – that is what Zen people mean when they say, “When a master walks in a river the water does not touch his feet.” He is transcendental. He lives in the world and yet he lives not in the world. This is not an illness; it is a great siddhi a great achievement. But when it happens for the first time it looks like an ailment.
The sixth symptom:
“…joy and sorrow cannot influence me.”
When joy and sorrow cannot influence you, you suddenly feel that you have become a desert. Your whole life consists of joy and sorrow – you don’t want sorrow, you hanker for joy. Your whole life exists on these two wings – joy and sorrow. When joy and sorrow both disappear, or both become meaningless, or you have attained the equal eye, equanimity, you have attained transcendence, joy and sorrow look alike. Whatsoever comes is okay – then you will feel that you have become a desert. This is the state which in India they call veetraga. This is one who has gone beyond attachment, detachment, like, dislike – one who does not know at all what is beneficial, what is harmful, one who has become a child again.
“Consequently…”
…the seventh symptom:
“…it is impossible for me to serve my prince, have dealings with my kindred and friends, manage my wife and children, control my servants. What illness is this?”
The seventh sign means freedom. When you are completely free of the ego and all the shadows that the ego brings in, when you are free of all duality, when you are free of all distinctions and you start living in a world which is one energy, nothing lower, nothing higher; when Devil and God lose their definition, embrace each other, fall in love, make love to each other; when life and death meet and become one; when the whole world is one – in that state you are free. But first the freedom will look as if you have gone utterly mad.
“…it is impossible for me to serve my prince…” It is impossible to serve anybody now. “…have dealings with my kindred and friends…” It is impossible now. They will think you are a madman, and to you they look like phantoms, ghosts, not real.
“…manage my wife and children, control my servants.…” In this state you cannot serve and you cannot control. You are not – so how can you serve and how can you control? Freedom means you are not; freedom means to be free from one’s self. Freedom does not mean that you have become free; freedom means that you are no more; freedom means that you have become free of you. Now there is nobody; just a deep emptiness exists.
This emptiness will look empty to a person who has no master. It looked empty to me also. There is no way to go back, so one is simply helpless. One cannot go back; one does not know how to go ahead because there is no longer any ahead – all paths have disappeared. This is the moment when Tao arises. That’s why I say “the pathless path.” Tao is the pathless path. This is the moment when all paths disappear; you look back and there is nothing.
There is a beautiful Buddhist story in China:

In a certain town a very beautiful young lady suddenly arrived out of the blue. Nobody knew where she came from; her origins were completely unknown. But she was so beautiful, so enchantingly beautiful, that nobody even thought about where she had come from. People gathered together, the whole town gathered; and all the young men, almost three hundred young men, wanted to get married to the woman.
The woman said, “Look, I am one and you are three hundred. I can only be married to one, so each of you do one thing. I will come again tomorrow; I give you twenty-four hours. If one of you can repeat Buddha’s Lotus Sutra, I will marry him.”
All the young men rushed to their homes; they didn’t eat, they didn’t sleep, they recited the sutra the whole night, they tried to cram it in. Ten succeeded. The next morning the woman came and those ten men offered to recite it. The woman listened. They had all succeeded.
She said, “Right, but I am one. How can I marry ten? I will give you twenty-four hours again. The one who can also explain the meaning of the Lotus Sutra, I will marry. So try to understand it because reciting is a simple thing. You are mechanically repeating something and you don’t understand its meaning.”
There was no time at all – only one night – and the Lotus Sutra is a long sutra. But when you are infatuated you can do anything. They rushed back, they tried hard. The next day three young men appeared. They had understood the meaning.
The woman said, “The trouble still remains. The number is reduced, but the trouble remains. From three hundred to three is a great improvement, but again I cannot marry three persons, I can marry only one. So, twenty-four hours more. The one who has not only understood it but tasted it too, I will marry that person. So in twenty-four hours, try to taste the meaning of it. You are explaining, but this explanation is intellectual. Good, better than yesterday, you have some comprehension, but the comprehension is intellectual. I would like some meditative taste, some fragrance. I would like to see in your presence that the lotus has entered you, that you have become something of the lotus. I would like to smell the fragrance of it. So tomorrow I will come again.”
Only one person came, and certainly he had achieved. The woman took him to her house outside the town. The man had never seen the house; it was very beautiful, almost a dreamland. And the parents of the woman were standing at the gate. They received the young man and said, “We are very happy.”
The woman went in and he chitchatted a little with the parents. Then the parents said, “Go. She must be waiting for you. This is her room.” They showed him. He went, he opened the door, but there was nobody there. It was an empty room. But there was a door entering into the garden. So he thought maybe she had gone into the garden. Yes, she must have gone there because on the path there were footprints. So he followed the footprints.
He walked almost a mile. The garden ended and now he was standing on the bank of a beautiful river – but the woman was not there. The footprints also disappeared. There were only two shoes, golden shoes, belonging to the woman. Now he was really puzzled. What had happened? He looked back – there was no garden, no house, no parents, nothing. All had disappeared. He looked again. The shoes were gone, the river was gone. All that there was, was emptiness – and a great laughter.
And he laughed too. He had gotten married.

This is a beautiful Buddhist story. He got married to emptiness, got married to nothingness. This is the marriage which all the great saints have been searching for. This is the moment when you become a bride of Christ or a gopi of Krishna.
Everything disappears – the path, the garden, the house, the woman, even the footprints. Everything disappears. There is just laughter, a laughter that arises from the very belly of the universe.
But when it happens for the first time, if you have not been led slowly, slowly, you will go mad.
This Buddhist story says that he was led slowly, slowly. The woman was the master. The woman is symbolic of the master. She led him slowly, slowly. First, recite the sutra; second, understand it intellectually; third, give a sign that you have lived it. These are the three stages. Then she led him into nothingness.
The master leads you slowly, slowly; makes you by and by ready. Lung Shu was not fortunate enough to have a master. He had come to the emptiness, to the ultimate emptiness but he thought that it was an illness.
“What art can cure it?”

Wen Chih ordered Lung Shu to stand with his back to the light. He himself stepped back and examined Lung Shu from a distance facing the light. Then he said:
“Hmm. I see your heart. The place an inch square is empty – you are almost a sage. Six of the holes in your heart run into each other but one is stopped up. Can this be the reason why you now think the wisdom of a sage is an illness? My shallow craft can do nothing to cure it.”
This is the difference between modern and ancient medicine. Ancient Chinese medicine, including acupuncture, is not as gross as modern medicine. Neither is ancient Indian medicine, ayurveda, as gross as modern medicine. Modern medicine is concerned only with the physical; it knows nothing of the beyond. Ancient Eastern medicine is more concerned with the metaphysical, with the paraphysical. Now a few insights in the West are gaining strength slowly; radionics, Kirlian photography, acupuncture and ayurveda are entering Western consciousness.
Ancient Eastern medicine was not just medicine, not just a cure for the body, but a cure for the soul. The East says that the body only shows the symptoms – the symptoms are not the real illness. And the symptoms should not be treated directly. The illness should be treated directly then the symptoms will disappear. The allopathic approach is to treat the symptom and to think that the illness will disappear. That is not possible; that is going from the outer to the inner, which is not possible. What happens? It becomes a sort of repression.
Maybe the whole Christian tradition of repression is the cause. The whole Western mind is repressive. So wherever a symptom is found, suppress it. The symptom is suppressed and the illness is not treated at all. The illness remains within so it finds another way to come out. You treat one illness and another illness is born; you treat that, and a third one is born.
In the East, we have never been much interested in the symptoms. The symptoms are not to be treated; the person is to be treated. One thing more, the East knows that illnesses are not always illnesses – there are a few illnesses which are blessings. When a person moves beyond the body, the body will never be healthy in the same way it was before, it cannot be because a distance has happened between the innermost being and the body. The bridges have been broken. That’s why an enlightened person will never be born again. He cannot enter the body again because the bridges are broken. So the enlightened person, once enlightened, can never come back. Then he is gone forever: gate gate para gate; gone, gone, gone forever – gone to the beyond whence there is no coming back, gone to the point of no return.
The thing starts happening in this life. If you become enlightened, you become loosened from your connection with your body. The body can never be as healthy as it was before, cannot be healthy in the same way that it was before. Those illnesses are not really illnesses; they are simply symptoms that your inner being is being transformed. Something of tremendous revolution is happening within you; a radical change is happening within you. So the body will go through many changes.
This physician, Wen Chih, must not have been only a physician; he must have been a man of great insight. What does he say? He says, “I see your heart. The place an inch square is empty.” This is the beginning of enlightenment. The man is just one step below. One step more and his whole heart will become an empty space; for the first time he will have what is called heart space. Ordinarily your heart is cluttered, cluttered with a thousand and one things: useless, useful; essential, nonessential; discarded rubbish. Your heart is cluttered – it has no space.
Unless the heart has space, God cannot enter you. He comes only when the space is ready, when you have the room ready for him – your heart is the room.
According to the Taoist mapping of inner consciousness there are seven holes. That is exactly the same as the seven chakras. Each Taoist hole is concerned with one chakra of Yoga. There are seven chakras: muladhar, svadhisthan, manipura, anahat, vishuddhi, agna, sahasrar. These seven chakras of Yoga are concerned with each hole in the heart. When you pass through one chakra, then one hole opens in the heart; when you pass through the second chakra, the second hole opens in the heart; when you pass through the third chakra, the third hole opens in the heart. In Yoga they have not talked about those seven holes because that will make it very confusing and complex. There is no need. One map is enough.
The Taoists have not talked about the chakras because there is no need – their map is also enough. When one hole opens, you have passed through one chakra; when another hole opens, you have passed through another chakra.
This man has six holes, only one is still blocked. That means in Yoga mapping he has reached the agna chakra, the third eye – that’s why he has become one-eyed. He has passed beyond duality, he has transcended. He is just below the seventh. If he passes to the seventh, his seventh hole will be opened. When all seven holes are open in the heart, you disappear because you are nothing but the furniture that is cluttering the heart. Once all blocks disappear, then those seven holes are not seven because there is nothing to divide them. They become one hole. The heart space is created.
This is what Buddha called emptiness, anatta, nonbeing. This is what Buddha called shunya, zero experience. And when your heart has become a zero then nothing is missing. Your seventh chakra has opened; you have become a lotus. All one thousand petals have opened, your fragrance is released. You have become a buddha.
The physician was really a rare man and had a rare insight into Tao. In fact, in the ancient days, a Hindu physician, an ayurvedic physician, had to go through Yoga. You will be surprised; you will not see what the relevance is. Not only did he have to go through Yoga, he had to study poetry. In the old days the Hindu physician was called kaviraj, the poet. This is nonsense! Why should a vaidya, a physician, be called kaviraj, a great poet? What has poetry got to do with illness? What has poetry got to do with treatment?
It has a function. Man is not just physical, man is not just prose. He has poetry inside. Man is not just that which appears to the eyes, man has an invisible realm of poetry, song, dance, celebration. The Hindu ayurvedic doctor had to understand the subtle layers of the poetry of life, the song of life, the rhythmic flow of the inner being. And he had to be a great adept of Yoga too.
The same was the case with Taoist physicians. They had to go through deep meditation because in the old days many people were searching. The world was not as poor spiritually as it is now. It is materially very rich today, it has never been so rich; but it is spiritually very poor, it has never been so poor. The world was spiritually very rich and millions of people were searching; millions of people were coming close to innermost reality. Naturally they had to go to the physician when things like this happened.
It was an everyday thing, it was not rare. The physician often came across such people. They were not really ill but had moved within themselves so much that their body was suffering, their mind was suffering. Or at least it looked like suffering. So the physician had to tell them that this was not a physical illness.
“I see your heart. The place an inch square is empty. You are almost a sage.” Notice, he says “…almost a sage” – just on the brink of it, almost a sage, not very far, the goal is just around the comer, very close by, within reach, one step more and the journey will become complete.
“You are almost a sage. Six of the holes in your heart run into each other but one is stopped up.” Just one. He is still holding on to something of his individuality, still holding onto something of the ego – the last remnant, the last shadow, the last mark of the ego.
“Maybe that’s why you think …the wisdom of a sage is an illness. You have come upon a treasure, the greatest there is, you are blessed, but you think that you have an illness. That may be the cause,” the physician said. “One hole is still closed and because of that you may be holding this wrong notion that you are ill.”
This man needed a master. For this man a master would have been the only physician there could be. Buddha said again and again, “I am not a philosopher, I am a physician.” So said Nanak, “I am not a philosopher, I am a physician.” The great sages have been physicians – better to call them metaphysicians because they treat not the physic but the metaphysic, the beyond. Or call them paraphysicians – they don’t treat the body, they treat the soul. They don’t treat the form but the innermost emptiness that is covered by the form. Your body and mind are just forms. You are empty.
But if you are close to a master you will never feel it as emptiness. The moment it happens the master will help you to understand it and it will start looking like fullness. It is fullness; it is not emptiness, but it is so new that you feel it as emptiness because all that you have known is no longer there. So you feel as if all that you have known has gone and everything is empty.
Just think, in your room you have much furniture. Once I stayed in a very rich man’s house. As it always happens, rich people don’t have much taste. It is very difficult to have both taste and money; it is a rare combination to be cultured and to be rich, to have a higher flight of the soul and to hoard money. It is very difficult to manage both. It rarely happens, and then only by accident.

This man was very rich. He was a bidi king, one of the biggest bidi manufacturers in India. And, naturally, when you manufacture bidis you cannot have much taste. I stayed in his house. He had given me the best of his rooms, but it was very cluttered with furniture. He had all sorts of furniture in there; in fact, there was no room and to go in and out was difficult.
He asked me, “How do you like the room?”
I said, “There is no room at all. There is no question of liking and disliking. Somehow I managed to enter and somehow I managed to leave. There is no room at all.”
He said, “What do you mean?”
He had gathered all designs of furniture, antique, modern; all sorts of things – radio, TV – everything was there, but there was no room. His concept of the room was these things.
He asked, “But what is missing here? The TV is here, the phone is here, the radio is here, the fax is here – what is missing? Just tell me and we will order it.”
I said, “You don’t understand me. Your concept of the room is nothing but the list of the furniture here, and my concept of a room is of the emptiness that is within those four walls.”

The word room means emptiness. So if the furniture were removed completely, when this man came into the room he would say it is empty because to him his room is the furniture: the fax, the TV set, the radio, and this and that. That is his concept of a room. If everything is taken out, he will say, “What has happened to this room? Everything is empty. This is just empty.” This would no longer be a room for him.
To Lao Tzu this would be a room; to me this would be a room. Now one can expand in this room, one can be in this room, there is space, there is spaciousness.
So when for the first time your mind goes off you suddenly feel empty because all that noise was what you used to feel you were; that was your concept of your being. When the mind goes off suddenly you will feel empty.
I have heard about a man who used to take care of a watchtower…

It is an old story, maybe a hundred years old. In those days each watchtower had a gun and the gun used to go off every five minutes continually, twenty-four hours a day. That was the only way to give signals to the ships passing by.
This man used to live there, he used to sleep there, and although the gun would go off each five minutes he was never disturbed. For thirty years he lived there.
Then one day something went wrong and the gun didn’t go off. He was fast asleep; it was the middle of the night. He jumped up and said, “What happened? What went wrong?” He felt very uneasy.
His mind had become accustomed to the gun going off each five minutes. It was no longer noise, it was his atmosphere, it was his mind, it was part of his mind. Now suddenly the gun was not going off and because of that his sleep was broken. But the noise of the gun had never broken his sleep.

This is how it happens: when whatsoever you know about yourself suddenly stops, you feel empty. It is not empty. It is full of silence. It is a new fullness; it is a totally new well-being. Godliness is descending on you but you cannot feel godliness. You go on groping for your old furniture and it is not there and you become very afraid: “What has happened to me? Have I gone mad?”
“I see your heart,” said the physician. “The place an inch square is empty. You are almost a sage. Six of the holes of your heart run into each other but one is stopped up. Can this be the reason why you now think the wisdom of the sage is an illness? My shallow craft can do nothing to cure it.”
This parable is very relevant to my whole life. I was also taken to a vaidya, to a physician. In fact, I was taken to many doctors and to many physicians. Only one ayurvedic vaidya told my father, “He is not ill. Don’t waste your time.” Of course, they were dragging me from one place to another. And many people would give me medicines. I would tell my father, “Why are you worried? I am perfectly okay.” But nobody would believe what I was saying. They would say, “Keep quiet. You just take the medicine. What is wrong with it?” So I used to take all sorts of medicines.
There was only one vaidya who was a man of insight – his name was Pundit Bhagirath Prasad. His daughter lives here in Pune and is married to a physician. That old man has gone but he was a rare man of insight. He looked at me and he said, “He is not ill.” And he started crying and said, “I have been searching for this state myself. He is fortunate. In this life I have missed this state. Don’t take him to anybody. He is reaching home.” And he cried tears of happiness.
He was a seeker. He had been searching all over the country from this end to that. His whole life was a search and inquiry. He had some idea of what it was about. He became my protector – my protector against the doctors and other physicians. He said to my father, “You leave it to me. I will take care of it.” He never gave me any medicine. When my father insisted, he just gave me sugar pills and told me, “These are sugar pills. You can take them just to console them. They will not harm you, but they will not help. In fact, there is no help possible.”
This man, Wen Chih, must have been a man like that. He said: “My shallow craft can do nothing to cure it.”
You have to go through it. Although you will be in search of somebody who can help, remember that the help will not be a cure – nobody can cure it. The help will only be able to help you to understand what is happening, to help you accept it, and fall en rapport with it so that the process becomes speedy. Then the one who is almost a sage becomes a perfect sage.
Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
Jesus, Buddha and T. D. Suzuki have been my masters for five years now. Whenever I had a problem I would call on Jesus' name for help. Now you are my master. What can I do with the rest of them? Jesus says a man can only serve one master. He will either love one and hate the other, or hate the one and love the other. Please comment.
The first thing: to be a disciple does not mean to be monogamous. To be a disciple simply means to be ready to learn. A real disciple becomes connected from one master to every other master possible. Your master becomes a link to you of all the masters of the past, present and future.
But the human mind is very narrow. We turn everything into jealousy and possessiveness. At least, don’t do that with a master. It is difficult for you to conceive of how you can love two masters, but the problem arises because you consider two masters as two. If you really love me you have loved Jesus through me, you have loved Buddha through me, you have loved Zarathustra through me. If you have really loved me and you have seen me, you have seen all the masters. If you have not loved and have not seen me, then problems will arise. Then there will appear to be a choice – whether to choose Jesus or Buddha or me.
If the question arises, that means you are not yet a disciple; you are not related to me at all. If you are related to me, then there is no problem. Then suddenly you will feel that you are related to all known and unknown masters for the first time. They will all become alive through me. That is the meaning of a master. If a master closes your mind and makes you narrow, he is not a master at all.
Remember, you can still call on Jesus; you can still call on Krishna. There is no competition between me and them. In fact, my whole effort here is to make you able to call on them more intensely. When you call Jesus, you have really called me; when you call me, you have really called Jesus. These are just names. Jesus is an emptiness, the emptiness we were talking about just the other day. His whole heart – all seven holes of his heart – are open. He is a door. So is Buddha, so is Krishna. How can you make a distinction between two emptinesses? Can you?
I have heard…

A small boy was playing in the garden when his father came home tired from the office. The boy was very jubilant and he asked his father, “What do you do in the office the whole day?”
The father was so tired that he was not interested in the kid’s question, so he said, “Nothing.”
The boy stood there, puzzled for a moment, and then asked, “But how do you know when you are finished doing it?”

If you do nothing, how do you know when it is over? If you do something, you know when it is over because there is a definition. But “nothing” has no definition.
If Jesus is nothing and Buddha is nothing and I am nothing, where do you make a definition? How do you mark where your master ends and Jesus begins? There is no fence between me and Jesus, so if you enter me you have entered Jesus, Buddha, Krishna, Lao Tzu – you have entered us all. If you enter Jesus, you have entered me. So drop these foolish ideas.
Certainly it is easier for you to relate to me. I am here alive, present; Jesus has not been here for two thousand years. Whatsoever you know about Jesus is not about Jesus but about the things said about him. Whatsoever you know about Jesus is not direct, is not immediate. Two thousand years of corruption, two thousand years of distraction, two thousand years of interpretation have changed a lot. The meaning of choosing a living master is that you can know the dead masters too. Jesus cannot be known directly – two thousand years are standing between you and him, millions of screens, much smoke. Whatsoever you know about Jesus is doubtful; it is not certain. It cannot be certain. Even while you are facing me whatsoever you know about me is doubtful, so what can you say about Jesus, and what about Krishna after five thousand years?
Krishna has naturally been corrupted more than Jesus because Hindus are great scholars. Jesus’ followers were very simple people – a fisherman, a farmer, a woodcutter. Even if they had wanted to corrupt Jesus they couldn’t have. They were not efficient enough. They were not knowledgeable people. But with Hindus there are the brahmins and the pundits. Krishna’s lot was far worse because of all these brahmins and commentators and interpreters – two thousand years of commentaries.
The Bible doesn’t have a single commentary, but the Gita has one thousand commentaries. Now if you want to know what Krishna said, it is almost impossible. You will go mad if you go through all the one thousand commentaries. And those are just the famous ones; I am not talking about all the commentaries. If all the commentaries were counted, there would be thousands and thousands. If you went through all these commentaries, you would simply go crazy because they say such diverse things which are diametrically opposite to each other. How can you connect with Krishna?
The only way to connect is to find a living master to whom you can surrender: a living master who is still in the body, whose emptiness is still shrouded and enshrined in a body and a mind, whose inner space is still in flesh. Through him you will have a taste of emptiness; through that taste you will know all such people who have ever existed on the earth – because the taste of emptiness is the same.
Just think of it in this way. When you enter a poor man’s cottage, a hut, the walls are one thing, but when you go into a palace the walls are of marble. When you go into a poor man’s hut the walls may consist only of bricks, or maybe just of leaves and bamboo. But the inner space of the palace and the hut are the same. The walls differ – the palace has marble walls, very costly, and the poor man’s hut has bamboo walls – but the emptiness that is surrounded by the palace walls and by the hut’s walls is the same.
The space is the same. Krishna speaks one language, Buddha another, Jesus another still, but this is language. The meditation, the inner experience, is the same.
If you have chosen – let me say this – if you have chosen me you have chosen them all. Through me you will be able to understand all those who have lived before and all who are going to live after. I can even promise about the future because the taste of emptiness is never going to be different. Many more enlightened people will walk on the earth – tomorrow, the day after tomorrow, centuries after centuries. We don’t know their names but that doesn’t matter. Whenever there is an enlightened man on the earth the taste will be the same. Try to taste me. The taste is so clear – it is the taste of hot chilies – you cannot miss it!
“Jesus, Buddha and T. D. Suzuki have been my masters for five years now.” Good, they prepared you to come to me; otherwise you would not be here. Feel grateful, feel thankful. Always remain thankful to them; otherwise you would not have gotten here. They have prepared the path. Sometimes it happens that if you had come to me five years earlier, you may not have understood a word. Suzuki must have prepared you; Krishnamurti must have helped you. They have given you a direction; now you can understand me better.
Let me tell you one very beautiful story:

Master Tennen Tanka, a great Zen master, once visited a temple and stayed there for the night. The abbot of the temple was very happy because Tennen Tanka was a very famous master; it was a great blessing to the temple that he had come.
During the night Tennen did something which was unbelievable to the abbot. It was a cold night and Tennen burned a wooden Buddha to create a fire. The abbot of the temple was shocked. When he saw the fire in the temple he rushed in and found that a great Buddha statue was missing and the head was there, half burned. He cried, “What have you done? Are you mad? You have burned my Buddha!”
Tennen laughed and poked the ashes with his staff. The abbot asked, “What are you doing now, you mad man?”
Tennen said, “I’m trying to find the relics of the Buddha” – the bones, or what the Hindus call flowers.
It was the abbot’s turn to laugh. He said, “You are certainly mad. A wooden Buddha has no relics.”
Tennen asked, “Are you certain?”
The abbot said, “Yes, I am certain. How can a wooden Buddha have relics?”
Then Tennen said, “Bring other Buddhas too. Your temple has many, and you need not have so many. The night is cold and I am shivering. Look, the living buddha is shivering and the wooden Buddhas are sitting on their pedestals. Bring them.”
The abbot could not do it, but Tennen brought another two Buddhas and threw them in the fire. At that moment the abbot became a little doubtful about his having said that a wooden Buddha has no relics. Then he started feeling guilty. Had he not said that, at least two Buddhas would have been saved. Then he felt guilty. This man was mad but what was he doing here and why didn’t the abbot stop him? But he couldn’t. He himself had said that a wooden Buddha had no relics so what would be the point in stopping Tennen?
A great doubt arose in him and, the story says, therefore the abbot fell into hell.
But not Tennen. He had burned the Buddha yet he never fell into any hell – he reached nirvana. And the priest, the abbot, is suffering in hell.

A strange story, very illogical. If Tennen had gone to the seventh hell, we would have understood. It serves him right. But Tennen is in nirvana, sitting with Buddha himself, maybe taking a cup of tea, gossiping. And the abbot is suffering in the seventh hell. These Zen people are strange. What type of stories do they make?
But there is logic in it, great logic in it. The logic is that when Tennen burned the Buddha there was no doubt in his mind, not a single doubt. In fact, it was not a Buddha at all, it was just wood. What nonsense to call wood Buddha. Just because you have carved a form in it does not make it a Buddha. Because he was so certain, he could bring two more statues and enjoy the fire – and the night was certainly cold.
I am all in favor of what Tennen did. He did well. Buddha must have enjoyed it in nirvana! Sitting there in his moksha he must have enjoyed it. This man was doing well, perfectly well. That’s what he had been teaching his whole life: don’t look for the formless in the form, don’t look for the message in the word. Go deeper. Enter into the formless. Don’t look for the soul in the body. Go deeper. Reach the inner emptiness.
And that’s what Tennen had done. When he poked his staff in the ashes, what was he saying? He was saying that this was simply a wooden body; there were not even bones in it. So what can be said about the soul? This is just wood, dead wood. He was absolutely certain; his certainty was utterly absolute.
But the abbot doubted. He became a little doubtful. “What have I said? Have I committed a crime?” He must have shivered deep in his bones. He must have trembled. That fear, that doubt, that trembling, threw him into hell.
If you have really come to me, the problem of what to do with Jesus and what to do with Krishnamurti and what to do with Suzuki will never arise. If the doubt arises, it simply shows that you are still on the way – you have not yet arrived. You are just in the middle, hanging in limbo, between the past and the present.
If you come close to me, you will see all the faces that you have ever loved. Sometimes my face will be that of Krishnamurti. Those who are close, they know. Sometimes my face will be that of Krishna. Those who love me, they know. Sometimes my face is that of Buddha. Those who have really surrendered have seen it.
You are still a little far away, you are still wavering. The past pulls you back. You cannot go headlong. If you come really close, the question will dissolve on its own and you will not need to do anything with Jesus or Buddha or Suzuki or Krishnamurti. And remember, they have prepared you.
In this story of Tennen there is another part. I would like to share that too.

It is said that when Tennen himself was a seeker he went to a great master whose name was Ma Tzu. Ma Tzu looked into his eyes, shook his head and said, “No, no, I am not your master – at least, not now. Go to Sekito.” Sekito was a master who was an opponent of Ma Tzu. His monastery was on the opposite hill and he was an opposing master. Ma Tzu said, “No, no, I am not your master – not yet. Go to Sekito. He is your master.” He didn’t say, “He will be,” he said, “He is.”
So Tennen went to Sekito.
Now get the delicate and subtle taste of it. Because Tennen had accepted Ma Tzu as his master, he had to follow his advice. He couldn’t say, “I will not go. You are my master.” That would have been foolish, disobedient. He said, “Okay, master, if you say so, I can go anywhere. Sekito is my master.”
The others who were present thought, “Poor chap, where is he going? He should have insisted on staying. He should have forced himself. He should have waited at the door and fasted and insisted that Ma Tzu was his master and that he would stay with him. Poor chap. Where is he going?” But Tennen was really innocent. He said, “Okay, if you say so I can go anywhere. If you send me to hell, I will go there.”
He went to Sekito. For three years he served the master – meditated, served, meditated, served. After three years Sekito said, “Now you are ready. I am going to initiate you into sannyas.”
Tennen came, bowed down at his feet, and said, “Yes, master, you initiate me.” Not a single doubt arose in his mind, “What is happening now? If he initiates me, what about my master, Ma Tzu? In fact, I am his disciple. He has sent me here and now I am getting into trouble. This man says he will initiate me.” Sekito shaved his head. All Buddhist bhikkus have to be shaved and Sekito told him to repeat the vow of a Buddhist bhikku.
He said, “Whatsoever I say, you repeat it.” But when Tennen heard the first sentence, he closed both his ears and ran away laughing.
Buddhist monks have to take a vow, a traditional vow: “I will never commit any crime, I will never commit anything illegal, I will not steal, I will not murder, I will not do this and that” – a thousand and one things; it is a long list. The moment Sekito told him, “You take this vow,” Tennen put his hands over his ears so he wouldn’t hear, laughed, and escaped.
And Sekito’s disciples said, “We had always thought that he was a little mad.”
Somebody followed him, caught hold of him outside the ashram and asked, “What is the matter?”
He said, “I have never committed any sin. How can a man commit a sin? The whole teaching of the Buddha is that all doing is false, illusory. I have never committed anything wrong and how can I commit it in the future? What type of nonsense is this vow? I am going to my master and I am going to hit him hard. Why did he send me to such a fool?”
He rushed to his old master’s monastery but the master was not there. When he went into the temple only the Buddha statue was sitting there. He jumped onto Buddha’s shoulders and he sat there mounted on them. And he was so mad that a few disciples of Ma Tzu came and looked in from outside and said, “He looks mad. Sitting on Buddha!” They rushed to the master and they said to him, “A queer monk has come and has mounted the shoulders of the wooden Buddha. What shall we do?”
Ma Tzu himself came to see. He recognized the young seeker and he recognized his awakening too. He said, “You are so innocent. You are nature itself, Tao itself. Tennen means nature, Tao, innocence. And now I am your master and you are my disciple.”
Tennen came down from the wooden statue, fell at the master Ma Tzu’s feet and said, “I am grateful to you for giving me my monk’s name.”
The master said, “Now I am your master and you are my disciple. Those three years were needed with Sekito. Those three years were a must.”

So, being with me should make you feel grateful to whomsoever you have been with before. I am not saying this only about Krishnamurti, Jesus, Suzuki and people like that, I am saying it about even the ordinary people you have lived with – the parents you were born to and the friends and enemies that you had and the teachers under which you studied in school, college, university. They were all part of your growth. If a single one had been missing, you would not be here.
So feel grateful to your parents, to your friends, to your enemies, to your masters, to your teachers; feel grateful to all your relationships that have existed in the past – because this is the culmination of them all.
So don’t ask such a question: “Now you are my master. What do I do with the rest of them?” No, that is in bad taste. Worship them. Continue to worship them; continue to be grateful to them.
“Jesus says a man can only serve one master.” You have misunderstood Jesus. When he said that, he was not saying that you cannot serve two enlightened masters. He was not comparing two enlightened masters; he was not saying you can serve only Jesus or Buddha or Krishna – he was not saying that. Christians have interpreted it in that way; that you can serve only one master, and if you believe in Jesus you have to believe in Jesus absolutely, you have to believe that Jesus is the only door, the only begotten son. Others may be good, saintly people but not real enlightened masters.
This is absolutely a misinterpretation of Jesus’ saying. When Jesus said you can serve only one master, look at the context. He was talking about either serving money or serving God. That was the context. Either serve the world, the worldly desires of greed, ambition, politics; or serve God – meditation, desirelessness, peace, silence. You cannot serve two masters. That was his reference. You cannot serve both mammon and God together.
A person cannot be religious and political together, not even a person like Mahatma Gandhi. Nobody can be religious and political together. If you are really political, religion will be a pretension; if you are really religious, you will not bother about politics. Who bothers? Or at the most, politics will be a pretension. A person cannot be both together because politics needs ambition, desire, competition, jealousy. All the poisons are needed. Religion says drop all the poisons; purification is needed.
When Jesus said you cannot serve two masters, he meant you cannot serve the outer and inner together. He was not comparing Buddha and Krishna and himself.
Beware of misinterpretations. Whenever you are reading the words of Jesus, Buddha, Lao Tzu, be very careful. Your mind can play tricks with you. Your mind can color them with your own prejudice.
Now I understand why this problem arises. This problem arises because our minds are very narrow, monogamous. You can love only one woman; you can love only one man. Even mothers think that they cannot love all their children in the same way. If you insist, they will say yes, that one is a favorite. This is because of the narrowness of the mind. You think love must be directed. Love need not have any direction, love need not be a relationship, love can be just a state of your being. In fact, one is satisfied only when one becomes love, not loving – when one becomes love.
The greatest, the deepest longing inside your heart is not to become more loving; the deepest desire is to become love. What is the difference? When you are loving, of course you will be loving to somebody – and when you are loving to somebody, others will be in the shadow. When you focus your mind on one thing, everything else goes out of focus. When you are looking exclusively at one thing, everything else is excluded, bracketed out. Love can be a concentration, then it is monogamous; but love can be meditative, then it is not monogamous. When love is not monogamous, then it is religious, spiritual.
You are listening to me. You can listen with concentration, as it is taught in the universities. Concentrate! Out of fear and greed you concentrate; otherwise you will fail the examination, you will not come first, you will not get good grades, you will lose the possibilities of a good job and money and a car and a good house – this and that. So you concentrate because of fear. That’s why the closer the examination comes, the more the students are able to concentrate; the fear and the greed are becoming more actual, they are becoming solid realities. Concentration is from fear and greed.
Meditation is totally different. When you concentrate you close your mind to everything else. Meditation just means openness, relaxed openness. It is not concentration. While listening to me, you are listening to the birds singing in the trees too. The wind passing through the trees singing its song – you are open to it too. The airplane passing by, or the train – you are open to it too. This is meditation: you are simply open, available, conscious, available, all doors are open.
Not that you are only listening to me, that would be very poor; these birds singing in the trees are background music to what I am saying. They enrich it, they are not distractions. They don’t distract your mind. They distract your mind only if you are concentrating – remember it. Distraction is only a by-product of concentration. If you are concentrating, the bird disturbs you because it distracts you. The bird will not distract you if you are not concentrating. If you are simply available here, whatsoever happens, you are available, open, with all the doors open. If it starts raining, you are open; if a storm begins, you are open; if the clouds thunder, you are open – whatsoever happens you are open. Then your openness is total.
Yes, you are open to me too because I am also happening here. I would like to tell you that if you are open in this way, your understanding will grow. But if you are concentrating on me, your knowledge will grow. If you are concentrating on me, on what I am saying, then you will cling to the words. That’s why one concentrates – so that not a single word is missed. You go on holding onto the words. You don’t want to miss a single word. But you are missing all of life.
If you are simply open here, meditatively open, you will listen to what I am saying in just the same way as you listen to the birds as they sing. Then both will enter you together and you will have no choice – you are choicelessly silent.
Then your understanding will grow. You may not remember what I have said, but you will understand what I have said. Then you may not be able to go and reproduce what I have said – you may say that you have completely forgotten it – but you have absorbed it, you have digested it. It will show in your life though it may not show in your knowledge. It may not be possible for you to give a discourse on me, but it will transform your life in a subtle way. The next time you are angry you will suddenly find the quality is different. The next time you are making love to your woman or your man you will find the quality is more meditative; it is less sexual. The next time somebody insults you, suddenly you will find that nothing is disturbed, you are not hit by it, it has not touched any wound. The next time you are standing before the mirror you will start laughing at yourself.
You have laughed at others but that is violent. When a man starts laughing at himself he is becoming a little wiser. Then he knows the whole ridiculousness, one’s own stupidities. And when a man starts laughing at himself he is becoming less ridiculous, he is becoming more and more aware, alert – that’s why he can laugh. He can see his own foolishness. And when you can see your own foolishness you have become wise. Only fools are not aware that they are fools; wise people are always aware that there are a thousand and one stupidities. The wiser you become, the more aware – aware about everything.
Listen to me in a meditative way and love me in a meditative way, then my love will not distract you from Jesus, Krishna, Buddha. Then my love will make all your loves enriched, my love will enrich your life. I am here to enrich you, not to impoverish you. Without Jesus you will be a little poorer, certainly a little poorer. Such a beautiful person as Jesus should not be forgotten, should not be thrown into oblivion. Such a beautiful man as Buddha…
Humanity has suffered very much because of this monogamous mind. The Buddhists will not think of Jesus at all. The Christians will not think of Buddha. What a calamity! What a curse! If a Christian can love Buddha too, his Christianity will go very deep; if a Buddhist can also understand Jesus, he will understand Buddha far more, far better. If you can understand Mahavira and Mohammed and Zarathustra and Lao Tzu all together, and you can love them all together as different expressions of the same divinity, certainly your life will be the life of an emperor. Right now it is just the life of a beggar. A Christian is a beggar, a Hindu is a beggar, a Mohammedan is a beggar – I want you to become kings, kings of kings.
All these people have sung the same song, the song of all songs. Languages differ, expressions differ, gestures differ, but the content is the same.

The second question:
Osho,
Isn't there a possibility, sir, that people will misunderstand you?
You say a possibility? Every possibility, sir! At the best they will not understand me; at the worst they will misunderstand me. It is happening every day.
Just the other day I talked about being natural and authentic in your relationship. So one sannyasin outside the camp jumped on another sannyasin and they beat each other. They thought that I had said it – I said be natural. They must have been feeling angry, they must have been feeling antagonistic to each other – they must have been carrying it.
Now I have said be natural, and I have said don’t worry about the consequences – so they were fighting about a woman and they were at each other’s throats. The woman was sitting and looking at the whole affair. She seems to have understood better.
There is every possibility that I will be misunderstood. These words are dangerous. Whatsoever I am saying is like a sharp sword. If you are not very alert, aware, you will cut off your own head or somebody else’s. It has always been so. Jesus or Lin Chi or Bodhidharma have all been misunderstood.
In fact, Zen has become so appealing in the West, not because people understand it, but because it has the greatest possibility of being misunderstood. No other religion has that much possibility. It has the most potential. You can misunderstand Zen so easily; it does not take much intelligence to misunderstand it. To misunderstand Hinduism a little intelligence is needed; to misunderstand Buddha a little more understanding is needed; to misunderstand Jainism you will really have to be very intelligent. But to misunderstand Zen, no, nothing is needed. Anybody is capable of misunderstanding it.
Listen to Lin Chi, the founder of Rinzai Zen in Japan: “No effort is necessary, do nothing special. Just move your bowels, urinate, put your clothes on, eat your meals, and when you are tired go and lie down. The stupid may laugh at you but a wise man will understand. He who exerts himself is surely a fool.” Now the beat generation has understood it perfectly well – the hippies and the yuppies and all of them. They say that they are doing their thing, and Lin Chi says that this is the way.
You have not heard another saying of Lin Chi. It is fortunate that hippies don’t know about it, otherwise there would be great danger. The other saying is: “On the way, kill anything you meet, kill the buddha, kill your master, kill your parents and relatives. Only then can you be liberated.” Now this is certainly an open license to murder! It is very fortunate hippies have not heard about it because it is very easy to misunderstand such a great statement.
“Kill everything that you meet on the way.” “The way” means the way of meditation. When you go in and you are meditating, whatsoever comes in on the way, kill it. Don’t shirk it. Because whatsoever you allow on the way will become a hindrance. You are seeking emptiness, you are seeking no-mind – then anything that is allowed will be part of your mind, even if Buddha is there. When a Buddhist sits, the Buddha is there – Lin Chi was a Buddhist so he knows about Buddha. When you are a Buddhist and you sit in meditation, then everything disappears except Buddha. All is gone. He remains in tremendous glory, with great luminosity. But that must be thrown out also, out of the way. Otherwise that will hinder your path.
A Hindu knows. When everything else has gone, then Krishna is still standing there with his flute, playing.

Ramakrishna knew it well. When everything went and his mind was becoming almost – I say almost – empty, Kali would be standing there. He had loved the idea of Kali so much that it was difficult for him to push Kali aside, impossible. Push Kali aside? No. Even to think of it seemed sacrilegious. But that was the barrier. When he was learning the last meditative step from Totapuri, Totapuri said, “You have to kill this Kali. This won’t do. This woman is too much of a hindrance. Gather courage.”
Ramakrishna closed his eyes. He wanted to kill her because he knew well that only this barrier remained. But when he closed his eyes he forgot. The woman was so beautiful – the mother of the whole universe – she was so enchanting. He completely forgot about Totapuri and all the nonsense he had been talking about.
Totapuri was sitting in front of Ramakrishna and he knew that he had forgotten because his eyes started swelling with tears and tears and he started swaying and dancing. Totapuri said, “Stop! Again! Again you are doing the same thing!”
And Ramakrishna opened his eyes and he said, “It is difficult, master. It is very difficult, it is impossible. I can kill my mother, I can kill my father, I can kill my wife, I can kill myself, I can kill you – but Mother Kali? The very idea simply disappears when I close my eyes and she is there, luminous, in all her glory. The very idea is not there. I forget again and again, I am sorry.”
Then Totapuri said, “This is the last time because I cannot stay any longer. Enough of your stupidity and your Kali.” He rushed out. In the street he found a piece of glass which he brought in. And he said, “Now close your eyes. The moment I feel that your tears are coming and the Kali has come I will cut your forehead with this piece of glass, hard. Blood will start coming. When I cut your forehead, remember that you have to cut the Kali in two.”
Ramakrishna said, “But how will I cut and with what?” Totapuri said, “How will you cut and with what? How did you create the Kali? By imagination. If you can create Kali by your imagination, create a sword by your imagination. Or take the sword that Kali carries in her hand. Borrow it and kill her!”
The master was harsh and he threatened to leave immediately if his instructions were not followed. So Ramakrishna closed his eyes and started swaying. Totapuri cut his forehead so hard that the mark remained for the rest of his life. When his forehead was cut he remembered. In a single moment of courage he took the sword from Kali’s hand and cut her in two. She fell, one part on one side, another on the other side, and the emptiness between the two opened.
For six days Ramakrishna was in samadhi. After six days, when he opened his eyes, the first words that he uttered were, “The last barrier has fallen.”

Now this is what Lin Chi is talking about – the last barrier. So he says, “On the way kill anything you meet. Kill the Buddha, kill your master, kill your parents and relatives. Only then can you be liberated.”
You could become murderers. But please don’t kill anybody at the gate. You may be carrying this idea for many days.
What I am saying here must be understood very, very delicately, softly. Don’t bring your foolishness into it. Otherwise, rather than being helped by it, you will be destroyed by it. Truth is dangerous. If you can’t take help from it, it will destroy you. Truth is dangerous because it is potential, it is powerful, it is fire. You are playing with fire when you come close to truth. If you are not alert, you will be burned. A little mistake and you will be burned.

When Moses saw God on Mount Sinai he committed a little mistake. When he saw God he naturally rushed toward him. But God shouted, “Wait! Take your shoes off. This is holy ground.” Moses had forgotten to take his shoes off.
Now this is simply symbolic. The Jews have never been able to understand the meaning of this. Shoes protect the feet. Your mind is the shoes of your soul. As shoes protect the body, the mind protects the soul. The Jews have always thought that God was worried about their shoes. What nonsense! The whole earth is holy ground because everything is full of God. No, he was not talking about the shoes; in fact, even he is wearing shoes. That’s why we cannot show where God is – where will we show him? He is everywhere. Even if I point with my finger – “there is God” – he is in the finger too.
You cannot point out where God is, no. The shoes are a symbol. Just as shoes protect the body, the soul is protected by the mind. “Throw your shoes away,” means, “Throw your mind away, Moses. Don’t rush at me through your mind, otherwise you will be burnt.” If you rush to God through your mind, it means that you will interpret. You will bring in your prejudices, your ideas, your thoughts. Naturally you will miss.
Then God said, “Go back and tell your people that nobody is to come onto the mountain while I am here. And tell the priests particularly because they may try to come.”
Moses asked, “But why?”
God replied, “If they come, they will be burnt. They will be burnt utterly. Go down and tell your people that nobody is to come. And tell the priests particularly that they are not allowed because they are the most irreligious people. They are pretenders. They may think that because they are priests they are needed, that when God is here they should come, but they cannot see me.”

In old Tibet there is a saying that if you see God and you are not prepared, you will die. Truth is dangerous. And what I am giving to you here is truth, bare truth, naked truth. I am not even dressing it up in any way. So you have to be very, very careful. Your responsibility is great. If you cannot understand what I am saying, then please know that you don’t understand; but don’t interpret it in your own way. Keep your shoes off, otherwise there is every possibility that you will misunderstand, that you will misinterpret. Then your whole life will go in a wrong direction.
Walk very carefully and cautiously. You are on holy ground.

The third question:
Osho,
I would like you to answer me, to tell me something, but I don't know the question.
Even if you know the question, the answer cannot be told. And when you don’t even know the question, then it becomes even more impossible.
What question can be answered? If answers were enough to answer questions, all questions would have disappeared long ago. But not a single question has disappeared. In fact, each answer creates more questions. No answer has been able to dissipate questions; each answer has created ten more questions. Humanity has more questions now than ever; five thousand years of thinking have created millions of questions, and not a single problem is solved. That’s the whole story of philosophy.
Bertrand Russell has written in his memoirs: “When I was young and I went to university, I went to study philosophy with the idea that it would answer my questions. But when I came out of university I started laughing at the whole ridiculousness of it because my old questions remained the same. They became more sophisticated, that is true, but they remained the same. From university I got a million more questions. Not a single question was answered and millions more were created.”
No answer is possible because really the question is not a question. When a question is there, you may be able to feel it correctly or not correctly. When a question is there, it simply shows that there is some block in your consciousness. The question is not the thing, it is the block. It shows that you are not flowing as you should flow, that something is going wrong. It is not only the question; it is a question of the energy going wrong. Something is missing in your life, something that is needed, very much needed, and you are groping for it but you cannot say what it is.
That is the situation. You say, “I would like you to answer me, to tell me something, but I don’t know the question.” In fact, even those who ask so many questions don’t know what they are asking. That’s why you go on asking again and again and again but still you feel you have not asked the real question yet.

A great, sensitive soul, Gertrude Stein, was on her deathbed. Suddenly she opened her eyes. Her friends were all around and she asked, “What is the answer?” They were puzzled because she had not asked any question.
Somebody asked, “But what is the question? You have not asked a question.”
She opened her eyes again and she said, “So, okay. What is the question?” And then she died.

We don’t know what was in her heart.
Yes, that is the situation with man: you don’t know the question, you don’t know the answer; you don’t know exactly what you want to ask. You go on asking many things and you get many answers, but no answer fits because, in fact, the question has not yet been asked.
Unless you ask the real question, how can any answer help? But that real question is not an intellectual thing; let me tell you, that real question is, “Who am I?” All other questions are just formulations of this basic question.
Somebody asks, “What is God?” but that is not a real question. Since you don t know yourself, how are you supposed to know God? Somebody asks, “Who created the world?” but that is meaningless. You don’t even know how you came into existence, so what can you say about the world? First try to solve your own mystery. Encounter it.
So the basic question of all questions is, “Who am I?” How can you answer that? Can somebody else answer it for you? That is not possible. How can I say who you are? If you cannot say it yourself, how can I say who you are? Whatsoever I say will just become information in your head.
I can say that you are God and you will carry this idea that you are God, but again and again you will feel that this is not right – because somebody insults you and the God becomes very angry. And then you feel, “What type of God am I?” Somebody takes your woman and you want to murder him and then you think, “What type of God am I?” You see a beautiful woman going by and lust arises in you and you say, “What type of God am I?” Then you see a car and you want to have that car and you think, “What type of God am I? Hankering for a car?” There are so many small things, very small things, so small that you even feel embarrassed if you have to talk about them. They are very small things – there is not enough salt in your dhal and God is furious; the tea is cold and God throws the tea, the kettle and everything on the floor and becomes mad.
Now trouble arises because Buddha, Jesus, Krishna, me all go on saying, “You are God.” The answer is right but you are not at the point where you can get it. You are not ready for it.
The more you look into yourself, you feel yourself more like a dog than like God. You simply become puzzled about all the great things that have been said about you. Have they been said about you? These Upanishadic seers, they say that you are Brahma. You? Are these people just mad, saying things and not knowing what they were talking about? You and Brahma? Not possible. You don’t accept it, you cannot; it is impossible. Hence you have created God in your own image. The Bible says God created man in his own image, but the truth is just the reverse. You cannot trust this idea that God has created you in his image because that will create many difficulties in your life. You have created God in your own image.
If you look at your Gods – look at the Jewish God. The Jewish God said, “I am very jealous.” How beautiful. This seems to be a man-created God. The Jewish God said, “I am a very Jewish, jealous God. If you don’t follow me, I will destroy you, I will throw you into hell. And don’t worship any other God. I am the only God.” The Mohammedan God and the Christian God are very jealous. “Destroy all other gods. I am the only God.” This seems to be very human; it doesn’t look very godly. God seems to be very political, he doesn’t seem to be very religious. He cannot tolerate other gods? God should be more nonserious, more playful.
Hindus have playful Gods, but when you see the Hindu Gods play, you will find human faces. Brahma created the world and created the first woman and fell in love with her – his own daughter – and started chasing her. A very Hindu God! More like Hindus than like God. Chasing his own daughter! And the daughter became very afraid – naturally. She started rushing about, hiding herself in different forms. She became a cow, and the God became a bull – definitely a Hindu God! When the woman became a cow, the God became a bull; she tried all the animal forms. That is how all the animals were created. She became a bitch so the God became a dog. This seems to be a more human idea. Rather than you thinking that you are God, you would like to think that God is human.
If you look at Hindu Gods, they are very afraid. Sitting in heaven, Indira is always afraid. If some poor rishi starts meditating deeply, his throne starts trembling. Indira becomes very afraid. He sends beautiful girls to corrupt the rishi. Now the rishi has not done anything, he was just meditating, but Indira sends beautiful girls to corrupt him. He is afraid for his own status. If this rishi attains to the ultimate, he may become the next Indira, or he may claim Indirahood. These Gods are very jealous, very ordinary.
If you read the Hindu Puranas you will be surprised. The stories seem to be about man, not about God at all.

Brahma and Vishnu once went to see Shiva because there was some trouble. In the first place, trouble should not exist in the world of the gods – but there existed some trouble. Some political party must have been creating some trouble and they could not figure out what to do. The asuras, the devils, the opposition political party, have always been creating trouble for the gods.
So Brahma and Vishnu went to Shiva because he may be able to help. Shiva is a dangerous fellow. This is just like politicians who go to hooligans when they cannot manage! Shiva is the god of death. He is dangerous. And he has very dangerous company – ghosts and all sorts of Beelzebubs and devils and shaitans around him. They are all his disciples. So he may be needed. Whenever there is some real problem he is needed.
They went to see him. Shiva’s guard, Krishna, tried to stop them but nobody felt good about the guard. You don’t; nobody does. They pushed the guard aside. They said, “Krishna, you keep away. This is urgent, it is an emergency.” They pushed the guard aside and rushed in. Shiva was making love to Parvati. Now that was not very polite of them, to rush in, but the problem was such that they didn’t bother about courtesies. They stood there but Shiva is Shiva; he didn’t bother about them at all. They were standing and he said, “Okay, stand.” Hours passed and he went on making love and making love and they got fed up, and they said, “Stop!” But Shiva wouldn’t listen. Parvati was very embarrassed. She closed her eyes. Since then all women have made love with closed eyes. Shiva was so involved that he was not really aware that somebody was standing there.
Vishnu and Brahma felt very offended. This was a great insult. So they cursed Shiva: forever and ever he would be remembered by his sexuality – hence the lingam and yoni, the symbol of Shiva. The lingam and yoni are male and female sexual organs. That became symbolic of Shiva.

These are very human stories. Can you improve upon them? It is impossible. They are very human stories; too human, all too human. Rather than thinking that you are a god, you create God in your own image. No, if I say that you are God, that answer won’t help – you will have to find your own answer.
The question is existential; you will need an existential answer. The question arises out of your being; only out of your being can the real answer come. You will have to go deep inside yourself. First ask: “Who am I?” Ask: “Who am I? Who am I? Who am I?” Let this question penetrate every fiber and cell of your body and your mind. Let your whole bodymind vibrate with the question: “Who am I?” It will take months, sometimes years, but it pays off. Let your whole being vibrate with one question: “Who am I?” Let this question sink so deep that whatsoever you are doing the question remains vibrating deep down: “Who am I?” Walking, eating, talking, listening, the question goes on pulsating deep, deep down: “Who am I? Who am I?” By and by the question will no longer be verbal, it will be just a feeling – “Who am I?” – not verbal, not the words: “Who am I?” It will be just a question mark in your being, just a questioning, a quest.
And then one day, when your total being is so full of the question that your whole being has become a question mark, the answer will come. It will not be verbal, it will not be somebody saying, “Listen, Tushita” – the question is from Tushita – “Listen, Tushita.” Nobody will say that. Suddenly something explodes, as a seed explodes, as a bud opens. And you will be full of the fragrance. You open your eyes and all questioning will have disappeared, all problems will have disappeared. Then you will live the life of no problems. Only then will you live, only then will you fully be. Then everything will be a benediction. Each breath will be a blessing – and all, all will be nirvana, all will be God.
That is what is needed deep down in you, Tushita. You ask: “I would like you to answer me, to tell me something, but I don’t know the question.” It is good that you don’t know because if you know the question, it is bound to be the wrong one. This is the question. But don’t use it as a question because the answer is not going to come from the outside; the answer is hidden in the question itself. The question is a seed, the outermost core of the answer, and the answer is the hidden tree in the seed. Take the question as a seed and become the soil for this seed. A “skullful soil” will do, your head becomes the soil – that is what I call “skullful soil.” Only one question, only one question, only one question – you become pregnant with the question. And the pregnancy becomes so deep that you cannot forget it in any moment. Even while you are sleeping it will be there. Even in your sleep, the question will continue in your dreams: “Who am I?” Not so much in words, remember – again I repeat, not so much in words – but the question will be there: “Who am I?” pulsating, streaming, moving, moving deeper and deeper and deeper. And one day it reaches to your very core. It hits your heart, the inner space, the heart space. And then something opens.
If you can ask rightly within your own being, you will come to the right answer. That is the only answer – the one you come to yourself.

The fourth question:
Osho,
Having been touched, can I pass through the whirlpool of you very fast? Since nothing pleases or displeases, will I cease to be in contact with you and your love by no longer wearing orange and the mala?
First, you ask: “Having been touched, can I pass through the whirlpool of you very fast?” That shows you have not been touched. I have touched you but you have not been touched because those who have been touched don’t want to pass through it at all. You can ask Taru. She will say she does not want any nirvana.
If it is a question of choosing between enlightenment and me, those who have been touched will choose me. Because of this choice they will become enlightened. If you are still choosing enlightenment against me, you will not achieve it, at least not through me. You will not achieve it. You are in such a hurry you have not been touched. You are simply greedy.
This person took sannyas only one week ago. You are in too much of a hurry. You don’t understand what you are saying. You don’t understand what you are seeking. You don’t understand where you are. You don’t understand to whom you are talking.
You say: “Having been touched, can I pass through the whirlpool of you very fast?” If you have been touched, you will want to reside in this very whirlpool forever and forever. You will not want to get out of it. If you have been touched, you have fallen in love. Who wants to get out of love? If you want to get out of it, it simply means you are not in love at all. You just want to go through it; maybe you can gain something. You are not a sannyasin. You have taken sannyas but you are not a sannyasin. You have orange clothes and the mala and nothing else. Your heart has remained uncolored. When the heart is uncolored, whether you keep the mala and the orange or you don’t, doesn’t matter. Even if you keep them you are not in contact with me. So dropping them doesn’t matter. You can drop them.
I will not say this so easily to others when I see that their heart is getting colored, dyed in my color. I will not easily say to them, “Drop your mala and clothes.” I will not say it at all. But to you I can say it because you only have the mala and the clothes and nothing else. The “plus” is missing – hence the question.
You ask: “Since nothing pleases or displeases, will I cease to be in contact with your love…” You are already out of contact with me. Do you think you are in contact just by being here? Do you think you are in contact just by listening to me for four or five days? Do you think you are in contact just by breathing in the meditation and jumping a little? Then you don’t understand at all. Contact takes time. Contact takes your commitment, needs your commitment. If you are not committed to me, how is the contact possible?
When I say, “Nothing pleases or displeases me,” I am saying it about me. It will not displease me at all if you all drop orange – it will not displease me at all. It has not pleased me that you have taken orange.
That is not a problem. If nobody comes here, I will be as happy as I am now. If the whole world comes here, I will be as happy as I am now. My happiness is my inner quality. It does not depend on you; I am not dependent on you. My happiness is mine. That sometimes hurts you too. You would like me to be dependent on you. You would like me to go after you and say, “Don’t do it. It will hurt me very much.” You would like me to persuade you because it will help your ego to feel more inflated. But my happiness is an independent phenomenon. I am simply happy – not for any reason at all. You or no you doesn’t make any difference.
But it will make a great difference to you. You can drop the clothes – it will not make much difference to me at all, but it will make a difference to you.
You ask: “Will I cease to be in contact with your love by no longer wearing orange and the mala?” As far as my love is concerned, it will go on showering on you because it is unconcerned with you. Please try to understand it. When I am showering my love on you it is not a concern of mine. It is not that I don’t shower my love on you, or I do shower my love on you – as if it were a choice. It is not a choice. I am not showering love on you – I am love. When you are not here, then too it is showering; when I look at the trees, then too it is showering; when I look at the rock, then too it is showering.
You are not special. I am not doing anything special to you. It is just the way I am. It is very ordinary. It is simple. I am alive in front of you; not because of you. If you go away, I will not die. You are not the cause of my breathing. You will go away, I will breathe – breathe with the trees, breathe with the stars. Even if stars go away and trees go away, that will not change anything because I am not causally related that way. My love is the same way. I am not showering it on you. Yes, it is being showered but nobody is showering. There is nobody to shower it. I am love.
But it will make a great deal of difference to you. If you drop the mala and the orange, you will become closed. You will not be able to receive it. It can be raining but if you turn the pot upside down, the clouds will go on raining. They don’t depend on the pot being right side up, they don’t wait for it; they will go on raining. It is irrelevant whether the pot is right side up or upside down. Whether or not it is upside down doesn’t matter, the rains will go on falling. But if the pot is upside down it will not collect any rainwater. Or, if it is right side up and closed, then too it will not gather water. Or, if it is not closed and gathers water but has leakages, then too it will miss. The clouds will go on showering. They are not particularly addressing their water to a particular pot.
I am not addressing my love particularly to you. It depends on you. If you want it to get into your heart, you will have to remain open.
These clothes and the mala are just gestures, symbols that you are open to me, that you show from your side that you are related. From my side there is no relationship possible. All relationship is from your side. There is no master here, there are only disciples. The master is dead. A master is a master only when he is not. The day I came to know, that same day I disappeared. It is an absence; it is an emptiness, a nothingness here.
If you want to receive this nothingness, you will have to be causally related to me, you will have to be open to me. These orange clothes and mala are nothing. They are just gestures, but very significant as far as you are concerned.
Does it matter to me whether you wear orange or not? How is it related? To you it matters a lot because you live in these small things. You are still your clothes because you are still your body. The mala and the locket mean much to you because you still think of yourself as the picture. When you look in the mirror you think that this is you. To me it makes no difference. It is not my picture because there is no possibility of getting a photograph of me. All that you will get will be only of the form, and I am not the form. That is the whole message.
So, if it pleases you, drop wearing orange and the mala – but think before you do that, meditate over it. The first foolish thing you did was to become a sannyasin – you must have become a sannyasin without thinking about it. Now this will be a second foolish thing – to get out of it without thinking. So please, at least, when you are going to do the second foolishness be a little more alert.

I have heard about Mulla Nasruddin. He took his pay one month and there was a ten-rupee note extra. The accountant must have made a mistake. But he was happy.
Next month there was a ten-rupee note missing so he immediately complained. The accountant said, “Mulla, what about the other time when I gave you a ten-rupee note more? Then you didn’t complain.”
Mulla said, “Listen. When a mistake is committed once, it is okay. But when it is committed twice, I complain.”

So remember it. You have committed a mistake once; now don’t be so foolish again.

The last question:
Osho,
When I feel compassionate it is my holier-than-thou attitude; when loving, too sad and serious; when playful, it irritates. Should I kill myself and lessen other people's misery?
Good idea! Really good! But again with a wrong basis. You ask: “Should I kill myself and lessen other people’s misery?” Again you will feel holier than thou. Even after you have killed yourself you will roam like a ghost and haunt people, and you will say, “Listen, I killed myself for you.”
Live for yourself, and if you want to kill yourself, kill for yourself. A man can be allowed to kill himself for himself if he has lived for himself – never before it. Because if you cannot live, if you cannot even live for yourself, how can you kill yourself for yourself? It would be impossible.
Life is the first step, death is the second. Death is a higher phenomenon. Those who are not able to live rightly cannot die rightly. How can you die rightly when you were not even able to live rightly? You missed primary school and you are trying to enter university. You will not pass there. Life is simple, death is very complex. First, live.
But your life seems to be wrong. You say: “When I feel compassionate it is my holier-than-thou attitude.” Compassion must not to be directed toward others. Real compassion always feels happy when somebody accepts your compassion, your love. He has made you grateful. You have to thank him. When somebody accepts your love, you have to thank him. He could have rejected it – then what? He could have said, “No, I don’t need your compassion” – then what? But he gave you a chance to show your love. He helped you to flower. You have to be grateful.
Ordinarily we think he must be grateful that we showed him so much love. Nonsense. By showing your love to him he may not have flowered, he may even have been crushed. But you have flowered. The real gain is yours. The real gain is for the one who loves. It may be the other’s, it may not be the other’s; it depends – but the real gain is always for the one who loves. The loved one may not gain anything, may even be harmed. Love can become suffocation. Love can kill the other. So many children are killed by their mother’s and father’s love, and so many husbands are killed by their wife’s love, and so many wives are killed by their husband’s love. People suffocate each other and they say, “We love you.” And the more they love, the more they suffocate you; they don’t allow you any freedom.
Love is not necessarily a blessing to the other, but it is always a blessing to the one who loves. So the lover should feel grateful. Drop this attitude of being holier than thou. You are not obliging anybody else. When the flower flowers and the perfume is released to the winds, the flower does not feel that he has obliged anybody. When the sun rises and millions of flowers open and millions of birds sing and the whole earth becomes awake, the sun does not feel that he has obliged anybody. It is his nature. He is happy in being himself.
Your compassion seems to be wrong-rooted. You are thinking in terms of serving people. You are a dangerous person, you are a do-gooder. And these are the most mischievous people on the earth. You can become a mahatma. Avoid it. Enjoy that you love, that you have compassion, that you serve somebody – enjoy it. It is an opportunity to flower, to bloom.
You say: “When loving, I feel too sad and serious.” Yes, because when you are loving and somebody loves you, being compassionate is simple. When you are compassionate you don’t take anything from the other. In love you have to take something from the other. That hurts you. You? How can you take anything from the other? It is difficult enough to give, it is far more difficult to take because in giving, the ego is fulfilled, but in taking, the ego is hurt.
Hence Patanjali says in his Yoga Sutras: “Neither give nor take.” He does not mean don’t give and don’t take because then life would not be possible. He has given the Yoga Sutras. No, he doesn’t mean that. He means this: in giving, don’t think, “I am giving,” and in taking, don’t think, “I am taking.”
You will be surprised that in Hindi we don’t have any equivalent word for “Thank you.” Dhanyavad is the word used but it is artificial, it has been created. It has been created to translate thank you. Otherwise in Hindi we don’t have any word for thank you. This is something. The society which has existed for thousands of years – the oldest society in the world – has no word for thank you. Why? Because it is always God who gives and God who takes, so who are we to take or give a thank you? That is the meaning of it. Who are we? We are just instrumental. In Hindi, if you say thank you to somebody, dhanyavad, it sounds a little awkward, it sounds a little out of place.
Can you think of thanking your mother? I have never said “Dhanyavad” to my mother. I have everything to thank her for but I have never said thank you and I cannot say it. That word simply seems meaningless. She has not thanked me, she cannot. The word seems meaningless.
When you say thank you to somebody it means he has done something to you, he is the doer. Then when you do something to somebody, you wait for the thank you. You are waiting silently: “Give the thank you.” Otherwise you will get angry.
In Western society, thank you is very common. People are very false. Even a son can say thank you to his father and to his mother. In the West it seems cultured; in the East it seems uncultured. Just to think of saying thank you to your mother is impossible. It cannot even be thought of.
It is always God who takes, God who gives. Sometimes he takes from my side, sometimes he gives from my side. Sometimes he becomes a giver and sometimes he becomes a taker but it is always he. So who is there to thank and to be thanked? Nobody. It is one reality. That is the meaning when Patanjali says: “Don’t take, don’t give.” He is saying: “Let God be the giver, let God be the taker – you don’t come into it.”
It is difficult to give because of the holding mind, but it is not as difficult as to take. Because when you take, it hurts. It hurts very much. You have to take something from somebody. It makes you sad. You are on an ego trip.
“When loving I feel sad and serious, when playful, it irritates.” Yes, an egoistic person cannot play. How can you fall so low as to be playful? Playfulness is for children, un-grownups. Playfulness is for foolish people. A serious person like you – how can you be playful?
It happened during one camp…

Two sannyasins were found playing cards. A great political leader, one of the oldest MPs in India, was also in the camp and those two sannyasins were sitting near him. He could not believe it. Sannyasins playing cards? He rushed to me. He was a very old man, seventy-five, renowned all over the country. It was late in the night, eleven o’clock. He knocked on my door and he said, “What is happening? What type of sannyasins have you created?”
I said, “What has gone wrong that you have to come in the middle of the night?”
He said, “Two sannyasins are playing cards.” Now what is wrong with it? Who else can play cards if not sannyasins? But he said, “I thought the whole idea was that they should be serious seekers.”

They are seekers, but why should they be serious? Have you ever heard of any person who has been serious attaining to God? God is very playful. Can’t you see that all of existence is playful, celebrating? If your mahatmas go to God, they will not like him very much. They will say, “What do you go on doing? Why do you go on creating butterflies? Why in the first place are there so many flowers? Why so many trees? Why so many stars? Why?” God is excess. You exceed all limits only when you are playful. God is extravagant. God is very luxurious. That’s why in India we call him Ishwar. Ishwar means the ultimate in luxury. It comes from the word aishvarya, which means the ultimate in luxury. Play is ultimate luxury. Poor people work, rich people play.
When a person becomes such a total player that he plays at whatsoever he is doing – his whole life is play – then he is the richest man in the world. He may not have a single paisa; that is not the point.
Just look at me. What I am saying to you is not a serious phenomenon. I enjoy it. It is play. I play with these words. I play with you. And I would like you also to be playful here. It is not a serious place. This ashram is not a serious ashram – in fact, the very word ashram means where you rest and play. The very word ashram means rest, relaxation. I can understand; you are on a big ego trip. So the playfulness irritates you.
“Should I kill myself and lessen other people’s misery?” Please don’t do that, otherwise you will haunt other people. Right now you are in the body so you cannot do much harm. If you become a ghost… You will become a ghost because such people have never been heard to go to heaven, and I have heard that recently even the Devil has started rejecting them. Hell is too full of these people.

Just a few days ago a politician died. Naturally he knocked first at heaven’s door. He was thinking that he would be received there. But the gatekeeper said, “Sir, this is not the place for you.”
He said, “I am a great politician, a great leader.”
The gatekeeper said, “I know that, but leaders and politicians are never allowed in this place. You go to the other place.”
He was reluctant; this was not VIP treatment but what was to be done? Now he was alone and a nobody. Very reluctantly he went to the other place. The Devil looked at him and said, “No, enough! We have enough of them, these politicians.”
So the politician said, “What do you mean? Do I have to go back to New Delhi? No place in heaven, no place in hell, so have I to go back to New Delhi again?”

Nowadays a ghost is not allowed anywhere. You will haunt these people. If you live, live for yourself; if you die, die for yourself. Never let your life be the life of a martyr. Always let your life be the life of a lover, not a martyr. Let your life always be a celebration, not a sacrifice.
Enough for today.