---
title: The Last Testament Vol 1 01
series: The Last Testament Vol 1 01-30
talk_number: 1
url: https://oshoworld.com/the-last-testament-vol-1-01
language: English
duration: 01:32:18
author: INTERVIEW WITH THE WORLD PRESS
scraped_at: 2026-01-03T09:29:27.723382+00:00
---
Ken Kashiwahara
Good Morning America, ABC– TV, United States
Osho,
First of all, thank you very much for speaking with us tonight.
A number of years ago you adopted a vow of silence. Recently, you have decided to speak out to your supporters and then to us here today. Why have you decided to speak out now?
I live spontaneously; I never decide anything beforehand, I keep tomorrow open. If I feel like speaking, I speak. If I feel like being silent, then there is no other way than to be silent. And I never ask myself “why,” because no “why” is answerable. All answers are arbitrary. So I simply go on floating with the river, never asking where it is going, why it is going, where it is going to end. And this is my basic approach to life: a total let go.
Was there a reason that you decided to adopt the vow of silence in the first place, or was there also no reason?
There is never any reason, I don’t live by reason. I simply allow things to happen. I don’t know why I became silent. I don’t know why I started to speak again, but I enjoyed being silent and I’m enjoying being out of silence again. I don’t know about tomorrow. I may be silent, I may be speaking. I may not be here at all.
When you went before the Immigration Service for a visa as a religious leader, the comment was made by the officials of the service that, how could you be a religious leader if you didn't speak? Did that have any influence on you at all?
No, nothing influences me. Nor do I want anybody to be influenced by me, because the very fact of being influenced is a kind of mental slavery. I keep myself totally free from influences, and I never influence anybody, never try to convert, convince anybody.
I am – for the first time – one who can claim to be religious. The whole past and its religions have been pseudo, false. To me religion has a totally different meaning. There is no God, there is no heaven and hell. All those past religions have exploited man with fear of hell and greed for heaven, and all those religions have kept man retarded, dependent on God – a big daddy somewhere above who is taking care of you. This made man irresponsible, this made man unintelligent.
My religion is basically centered around consciousness, silence. Silence has its own way of communication. Just as words speak, but can be misunderstood – they are misunderstood – silence also speaks. It can be misunderstood. To understand silence, the other side, the receiving side, should also be silent. Then there is a meeting of the hearts. Something starts falling into tune, harmony, a kind of synchronicity. Nothing is said, nothing is heard, but everything is understood. Lovers know it; just sitting side by side saying nothing, something goes on moving between them.
Osho,
If you were to explain to someone listening and watching who knows nothing about you or your religion… What is your theology, what is your belief, what do you stand for, what are you trying to achieve?
I have no system of belief. I have no catechism like the Christians, and I don’t have any dogmas, principles, theology. If somebody wants to understand me he will have to learn meditation, learn being silent and sit with me, live with me. There is no other way. All those belief systems are nothing but a process of conditioning you.
A belief simply means you don’t know, still you believe. My effort here is that you never believe unless you know. When you know there is no question of believing; you know it. I destroy all belief systems and I do not give you any substitute. Hence, it is not easy to understand me.
You have no philosophy of life?
No philosophy of life. I have life itself. There are people who have philosophies of life, but they don’t have any life.
Your philosophy, if there is one, has been expressed in “the three L's,” love, life, laughter. Is that a philosophy of life?
No.
Could you explain that?
It is just a consequence of being silent and in tune with existence: love arises in you, life becomes abundant – laughter too, for no reason, just because this whole existence is so hilarious. This is not philosophy, this is the consequence of being silent.
Is it to enjoy life and not worry about tomorrow?
There is no tomorrow. If there is a tomorrow, you cannot stop worrying about it. Tomorrow never comes, it is a process of worrying. Nor is there any yesterday. One is no more, one is not yet. All that is in our hands is the present moment, now, here. And this is a miraculous experience. If there is no yesterday, no tomorrow, and this very moment you are silent, all worrying disappears. All imagining, dreaming, projecting disappears.
And it is not that you have to enjoy this moment. That rejoicing arises out of this moment. But you are never here, you are always somewhere else. You are never in the now, you are always then. Otherwise, everything is available but you are absent. I want my people to understand a very simple fact – not a philosophy, something existential, not philosophical – be present to this moment and then see what happens.
Osho,
Let me ask you about something you said a moment ago. You said you didn't believe in controlling people, and have no control. But do you not have either control or tremendous influence over three hundred and fifty thousand of your followers?
I don’t have any control. I don’t give these half-million people who love me any discipline. I don’t give them any commandments. I insistently emphasize that they are not my followers, but only fellow travelers. It is up to them to go a few miles with me or not to go. If they join with me, I’m happy; when they depart, I say goodbye.
If they look to you, they worship you, would they then not do whatever you tell them?
From my side, I am trying that there should be no worship. They should not be influenced by me. But if they worship and if they go on being influenced, they are not understanding me.
Osho,
Who is the “Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh”? How did you become the “Bhagwan”?
The word bhagwan means “the blessed one.” When people started feeling my blessing throbbing in their hearts… When they started feeling that something has happened to me of immense value, which they would like to share; they started calling me “Bhagwan.” I could not deny it because it was a fact, I was the blessed one.
How did you know that you were the blessed one?
How do I know when I have a headache? I know it.
When did you know it?
Thirty-two years ago.
How did you know it?
That question is absurd. When you are sick, you know. How do you know? When you are healthy, you know. How do you know? That “how” is absurd, you simply know it.
Was there a vision?
No, there is no question of vision. Vision is always objective, of something else. It was an experiencing. Not even an experience, but experiencing. I was full of it. I was it. And since then, not for a single moment have I been otherwise. It was not something that happened and disappeared. It was a transformation. It has remained with me.
Did you know as a child, for example, that you would become “the enlightened one”?
No. I never knew, not even for a single moment before. But I was searching from my very childhood. I was seeking and trying in every possible way not to be influenced by any religion, by any ideology; because if I already have a faith, am already believing, the search stops. The inquirer has to be very alert and aware that no belief enters into his being. He has to remain open and agnostic, knowing perfectly well that he does not know. From that space of not knowing, the search, the seeking, arises. But who can say when it is going to be fulfilled? It is unpredictable.
Osho,
Do you consider yourself a god?
My God! There is no God, so how can I consider myself a god? God is the greatest lie invented by man.
Why?
Because man feels so helpless, so afraid of death, so burdened with life’s problems. Because he has been raised by a father, by a mother, and those were the beautiful days; no responsibility, no worry, somebody was taking care of him. That psychological childhood is projected into all the religions: God becomes the father. And there are a few religions in which God becomes the mother. It is a simple psychological projection of a child. It has no basis in reality.
And whenever you are afraid, whenever you are in trouble, you start seeking help. No help ever comes. Even Jesus on the cross was waiting for the help to come, and finally got disappointed and shouted, “Father, have you forsaken me?” A great doubt must have arisen in him, a great question. Nothing is happening, and he was believing all these years that God would come to save him, his only begotten son. Nobody came. Jesus Christ must have died in utter disillusionment. I don’t have any illusion, I cannot be disillusioned.
But he also said, “Father, forgive them for they know not what they do.”
That was again the same mind. I call Jesus’ mind sick.
Why?
Because his whole life, whatsoever he was teaching and doing, was just nuts. Only a crackpot can claim to be the only son of God. And then, preaching to people that he is the savior, and whosoever is with him will be saved, and whosoever is not with him will fall into hell – eternal hell, all these things… His behavior: he cursed a fig tree because he and his disciples were hungry and there were no fruits on the fig tree. In fact, it was not the season; it was not the fault of the fig tree, but he cursed the fig tree.
I cannot conceive of this man as sane. And this prayer to God, “Forgive these people because they know not what they are doing,” is again out of that same arrogant, egoistic idea. I don’t think that it is out of compassion. It is the emphasis of Christians for centuries that out of compassion he prayed even for his enemies. But let me repeat his sentence, “Forgive these people because they know not what they are doing.” In fact, it was not an act of compassion; he was still condemning the people that they knew not, and he knew.
But haven't there been some teachings handed down from Jesus which form the basis of much that is good in civilization today?
Nothing. Not a single thing has come out of Jesus which has helped humanity in any way. All those teachings have proved not blessings, but curses. They are beautiful words and because they have been repeated so often, you have – and everybody has – forgotten the implications of them.
He says, “Blessed are the poor, for theirs is the kingdom of God.” It looks beautiful, but basically it is ugly. It is a consolation to the poor. It is an exploitation of the poor. It is giving false hope to the poor, and the ultimate result is that the world has remained poor.
Who would not like to inherit the kingdom of God? Jesus says that even a camel can pass through the eye of a needle, but a rich man cannot enter through the gates of heaven. Now this man is responsible for all the poverty in the world. He is condemning richness, he is condemning the creativity which can make the world rich.
I am all for richness in all dimensions, and I cannot say, “Blessed are the poor.” That is just what Karl Marx said: the opium of the people. It is possible to use beautiful words, but if you go into the implications… What are the Christians doing today and what have they done for two thousand years? They will open orphanages, they are against birth control, they are against abortion.
Some of them.
Those who are not will soon be expelled. They are being expelled. And those who are… For example the pope himself is against abortion, against birth control. He is against the greatest revolution in humanity – the pill. Population goes on growing, poverty goes on growing, and who is responsible for it? I think these people are criminals.
The pope?
The pope. He should be behind bars.
Why?
Teaching such stupid things to humanity: go on producing children, they are gifts of God. He is responsible for Ethiopia, he is responsible for poor India. Anywhere poverty happens, these people are responsible. On the one hand, they go on increasing the population, which is already too much, in the name of God. But the real thing is that they can convert only the poor to Christianity. I have never seen a single rich man being converted to Christianity in India; beggars, orphans, prostitutes – these people get converted.
Is there any part of Christianity, Hinduism, Buddhism, any of the established religions that you think are good?
Nothing. I want to be completely finished with the whole past, I want it to be erased completely. I want a discontinuity with the past. Only then the new humanity is possible; and a new world, and a new man. So I categorically say everything is wrong. And the proof is there: the whole world is in a mess. These are the people who have given to the world principles, ideologies, systems on how to live. This is the outcome of Buddhism, Hinduism, Christianity, Mohammedanism. This is the outcome.
Osho,
You say the whole world is a mess. What is it that you're trying to create in man, in the world?
I’m simply saying that there is a way to be sane. I’m saying that you can get rid of all this insanity created by the past in you.
How?
Just by being a simple witness of your thought processes. That’s my method of meditation. It is not a prayer because there is no God to pray to. It is simply sitting silently, witnessing the thoughts passing before you. Just witnessing – not interfering, not even judging, because the moment you judge you have lost the pure witness. The moment you say “this is good,” “this is bad,” you have already jumped into the thought process. It takes a little time to create a gap between the witness and the mind. Once the gap is there, you are for a great surprise: you are not the mind, you are the witness, a watcher.
This process of watching is the very alchemy of real religion, because as you become more and more deeply rooted in witnessing, thoughts start disappearing. A moment comes when there is no thought at all. You are, but the mind is utterly empty. That is the moment of enlightenment. That is the moment when for the first time you become unconditioned, sane, a really free human being.
Osho,
Am I going to… Yes, I am… I got fascinated by it, sorry.
Since you came to this country a number of years ago, there have been a lot of things written – alleged – about you and the Rajneeshees. Since this is the first time you're speaking in public, I'd like to get you to set the record straight about some of these things that have been said.
For example, it has been written and people have talked about you as a “free sex guru,” believing in promiscuous sex with violent encounter sessions and mind control. True or false?
Do you think sex should be charged for? Should it not be free? Should it be paid for?
To me, sex is a simple, beautiful, natural phenomenon. If two persons want to share the energy with each other, it is nobody’s business to interfere. And to say “free sex” implies that you want sex also to be a commodity, that it has to be purchased – either from a prostitute for one night or from a wife for the whole life, but it has to be purchased and paid for.
Yes, I believe in free sex. I believe that sex is everybody’s birthright to share, to enjoy. It is fun. There is nothing serious about it. The people who have been talking about me as teaching free sex are really pathetic, they are sexually repressed people.
I think what they were implying is the image of wild sexual orgies going on.
No orgies are going on. And if people should want an orgy, it is nobody’s business. If a few people want group sex, what is harmful in it? If two persons can enjoy, why cannot ten persons enjoy together? Once we think of sex as natural, joyful fun…
That’s why I call the pill the greatest revolution since fire was discovered, because the pill has freed sex from all nonsense, seriousness, marriage, legalities. It has made man enjoy sex for the first time as man, and unlike the other animals who are in a biological bondage.
No orgies are happening here, but I am not prohibiting them. It is up to the people; if they feel like having an orgy, so far so good. But these people are also conditioned by your society. They also have the idea of relationship: one to one. They also have the monopoly, monogamy, planted in their minds.
Is that not good?
It is absolutely unnatural. Man is not a monogamous animal at all. He is polygamous and everybody knows it. You may have the most beautiful wife, but that does not mean you don’t get attracted to other women, that once in a while you don’t dream about other women. Somebody may have the best possible husband. That does not make any difference. Man is by nature polygamous. Monogamy is enforced on him.
Are you saying that man should follow his polygamous instincts?
He should simply follow nature wherever it leads. Polygamy is perfectly good. In fact, there is no need for monogamy or polygamy. I’m a little further ahead. I see the relationship of love or sex as an absolutely free phenomenon.
Osho,
You seem to be saying – and I believe you've suggested before – that people should not have any so called “Western hang-ups” about sex. Recently you predicted that AIDS will kill two-thirds of the world's population, and you told your followers to engage in celibacy or have sex with one partner. Why?
AIDS is a totally new phenomenon, and the old religions are again responsible for it.
Responsible for AIDS?
For AIDS.
Why?
They are responsible for everything that is wrong. Homosexuality and all kinds of perversions were created by religious people, by teaching celibacy. Now to force men or women to remain celibate is taking them against their biology, chemistry, physiology – their whole nature. It is impossible for them. They will find some way, and it will be perverted.
Nuns were kept in one monastery, monks were kept in another monastery. There are monasteries still where no woman has ever entered. Now these monks are the original homosexuals. These nuns are the pioneers of lesbianism. All kinds of perverted things have brought AIDS as the ultimate result.
I’m not telling my people to be celibate because celibacy has any spirituality. I’m telling them: if you can be celibate without any repression – just out of sheer understanding – you are not going to be rewarded in heaven for it, you will just be careful about your health. That is enough reward. But if you feel that celibacy is difficult for you, then use all possible methods to protect, to prevent AIDS, it is going to kill the larger part of humanity.
Why do you believe that?
Because it is spreading so fast. And it will spread; just one contact with a person who has AIDS is enough, and then those contacts will go on spreading. Just the other day I was looking into it because we are having a festival; fifteen thousand people are going to come here from all over the world. Now it was a problem, many people could bring AIDS and destroy the whole commune.
We tried to find out: two sannyasins had it confirmed, and we asked them how many other contacts they had. One woman had fifty contacts; those fifty people may be carrying AIDS and may be having other contacts. That’s why I have said to remain with one partner. It is nothing to do with monogamy, it is just pure hygiene, health. I am saying it on medical grounds, there is no religious basis to it.
Osho,
Let me move on to another subject: again in keeping with some of the things that have been written and said about you and the Rajneeshees, and that is the fear when people see your bodyguards carrying weapons – submachine guns – and rumors that there are large caches of weapons here on the ranch. Is that true? And if so, why are the weapons kept here?
I’m not a man like Jesus Christ, I will not carry my cross on my own shoulders. And I’m not suicidal – Jesus must have been suicidal. I love life, my people love life. I’m not afraid of death; I will enjoy death as much as life, but my people don’t want me to leave the body now, and they have every right to protect me. I’m not going to prevent anybody who is going to assassinate me. Why should I prevent my people from protecting me?
If the assassin is free, I’m not going to interfere. And the people who love me and want to protect me, I’m not interfering with them either. This is something between those who love me and those who hate me. This is their business, I am simply out of it.
Yes, there are guns, but not as according to the rumors. Those rumors are too exaggerated.
Large numbers of guns?
No, not large numbers.
Do you expect to be attacked? Are you afraid of attack?
I am not afraid of anything. I have been attacked many times before, I can be attacked at any time. I’m not concerned about it, but my people are concerned. Who am I to prevent them if they love me and want to do something? And I have around me one of the most intelligent groups of people.
Jesus had only twelve fools – uneducated, unintelligent, fishermen, carpenters – and he himself was uneducated, uncultured. When he was crucified they all escaped; they were not in love with Jesus, they were hoping that through Jesus they would enter paradise, and enjoy paradise.
I give no hope to my people, no promise to my people. They are not going to gain anything as reward.
So why should they stay here?
They stay here because meditation is its own reward. There is no other reward beyond it.
Osho,
In fact, recently you seem to be painting a very pessimistic future of the world and mankind, when you warned that a cyclone of destruction both natural and manmade will hit the world, and that the Osho religion will provide a “Noah's ark of consciousness,” allowing your supporters to survive.
It is not pessimistic, it is simply factual.
Could you explain that? What does that mean?
It simply means, that all the centuries that have passed have been bringing this day closer and closer. Religions have been talking about peace – and fighting and killing and murdering, burning people alive. On the one hand they will say God is love, on the other hand they will be burning living people. Christians have been killing, Mohammedans have been killing, Hindus have been killing. It is a strange phenomenon that Buddha was born in India, but in India there are no Buddhists. For twenty-five centuries there have been no Buddhists. They had to escape because Hindus were killing them.
But what are you saying will happen with this cycle of destruction?
We have destroyed the harmony of nature through our unguarded scientific experiments. We have now, in the hands of politicians – who are the most mediocre people in the world – such immense energy to destroy, that they can destroy this whole earth seven hundred times. Now if just one politician goes nuts, that’s enough – and they are all nuts… So I am not painting a pessimistic picture of the future. I am not a pessimist, neither am I an optimist; I am simply a realist.
Osho,
A moment ago you said that you were not pessimistic; yet, if I may read another quote wherein you said, “This world is not worth saving. Once in a while I think it will be better if the Third World War happens and destroys this whole stupid humanity.” Isn't that pessimistic, very gloomy?
This is optimistic!
Why?
Because if something has gotten so rotten, it is better to be finished with it.
You think the world should be destroyed?
The world has become almost a madhouse. If we cannot change people’s consciousness, if we cannot destroy the boundaries between nations, the boundaries between colors, and the boundaries between religions – if that is not going to happen…
I am trying on my own whatsoever I can; but one cannot simply forget reality. The world is divided into nations, into religions, all fighting and trying to kill each other. One cannot forget America and Soviet Russia, ready to destroy the whole world any moment. This is simple realism. As I see it, this humanity, if it is not going to change, is not worth saving.
But you, as a religious leader, shouldn't your role be one to enlighten and to help to change…
That I am doing.
…rather than to say the world should be destroyed?
…that is part of my effort, that makes the thing emphatically clear: either change, or the world is going to be destroyed. So your change is absolutely necessary. It is not something that can wait: “Tomorrow we will change.”
Osho,
Let me go back… I know we're running out of time.
When you first got here to Oregon, your supporters said that you wouldn't take over the town of Antelope. Yet now Rajneeshees are in control of the town and the residents there have charged that they were forced out. There have been suggestions that perhaps the Rajneeshees really want to take over the entire state of Oregon. True or false?
I want first to make it clear that I am not a Rajneeshee. You should ask Rajneeshees – that is their problem. I am an outsider. I am just a guest here, not even a resident. I am not even living in the City of Rajneeshpuram, but outside the city in a guesthouse. I am not a Rajneeshee, I don’t belong to any organization. Now, whatsoever they are doing, you should ask them.
Well, would you want to see them take over the state of Oregon?
I would like them to take the whole world! – because I feel that they can manage this world better than anybody else. But I am not interested. I am not a politician, and that is not my concern.
Osho,
There is a perception that you and your religious following are extremely wealthy. Is it true, where did the money come from?
My people are rich. In fact, only the very rich, educated, intelligent, cultured can understand what I am saying. Beggars cannot come to me, poor people cannot come to me; the gap is too big. They can hear me but they cannot understand me. So it is natural: I am the rich man’s guru.
Isn't that a contradiction with the traditional perception of a life of austerity led by religious leaders and ascetics?
I simply think those traditions just rubbish. There is no question of contradiction; I am simply against them. I don’t want to be consistent with them, I want to drop all connections with the past. They have done enough harm.
My conception of a beautiful, flowering being is not that of austerity, it is of luxury. He will enjoy all that is beautiful in the world – great paintings, great music, poetry. I don’t conceive of him standing on his head in the hot sun of Oregon, fasting, slowly destroying himself. To me, all religions of the world up to now have been sadomasochistic. My religion is, for the first time, life-affirming.
Osho,
One thing I think people on the outside remember about you when they read stories or see you on television is the fact that you own so many, or have so many Rolls Royces. Why is that?
How many?
Eighty?
No.
Forty?
Ninety. And they are not so many.
Why do you need ninety?
I don’t need even a single one. And they don’t belong to me, either. But my people want 365, one for every day. And I go for a drive only for one hour. But if my people want it, if they are happy and rejoice doing it, I don’t want to destroy their joy. It is perfectly okay.
Couldn't you tell them to give their money for something else, other than for Rolls Royces?
All other religions are doing that. Let them do that as their work, let me do my work. All other religions are looking after the poor. At least leave me alone to look after the rich.
Osho,
There have been fears expressed, as you know, ever since you first got to Oregon, that Rajneeshpuram might turn into another Jonestown.
That’s absurd.
Are there any similarities between you and Jim Jones?
There is only one thing between me and Reverend Jim Jones, and that is of absolute opposition. He was a Christian, and Christians are too cowardly to take the responsibility for whatsoever happened in Jonestown. From Jesus till this Pope the Polack, all are responsible for it, because Christianity is a death-oriented religion. The cross is its symbol.
There is nothing in common between me and Reverend Jim Jones, everything is opposite to him.
People think the power you have over your followers…
I don’t have any power. I don’t have any position. I don’t even know my people by their names.
But you see them out there every day as you drive by.
I see them, but I don’t even know their names. I don’t relate with them personally, I don’t talk with them personally. What power? I don’t have any power.
You can see that they're devoted to you.
That is their thing. I am not exploiting their devotion for any power for myself. I could have declared myself the only begotten son of God, then it would have been a power trip. But I say I am simply an ordinary man just like you. And I emphasize it again and again so that my people can understand that if this experience can happen to me, it can happen to them, too. It is nothing special, it is absolutely natural and ordinary.
So you see no similarity between Rajneeshpuram and Jonestown?
Not at all. But I see every similarity between Jonestown and the whole world.
That the whole world will end up like that?
They are trying. Seventy-five percent of national incomes is going into making more and more weapons, nuclear weapons. Even poor countries are trying to create nuclear plants. They are all in tune with Reverend Jim Jones. Except Rajneeshpuram, the whole world has a similarity with him. This is the only place absolutely opposed to destruction. We believe in creativity; we don’t believe in the creator, we believe in creativeness.
And my people are creative, they have changed the shape of this desert. With all the hindrances from the state, the government, the politicians, the religious people; still, they have changed it into a small, beautiful oasis. If no barriers are created, we can make it one of the most beautiful places in the world.
Osho,
A number of Oregonians have expressed a concern, however, that you will eventually attract up to one hundred thousand people to live in this city; and that it's simply a matter of time before you call all three hundred and fifty thousand of your supporters to come here to live.
I may.
You may?
Yes.
When?
Anytime. Tell the Oregonians that their fear is perfectly right; tremble, have nightmares, I can call my followers anytime.
And you may do it.
But I may not.
Some environmentalists say that this land simply can't support that many people, that it would hurt the land if that many people lived here. Are you concerned about that?
The people who say these things, have they ever come here? Just four years ago there was no water; we managed two big lakes, small ponds all around – enough water. And we can create more lakes, more water, we can make more land ready to be cultivated. It is only a question of effort, devotion, and the joy of creation. Those people are simply jealous, lazy, lousy, and nothing else. And it is our problem, not their problem. If my people die because there is not enough water, because the land cannot support them, then it is my problem, not their problem. I will not come to them for help.
Osho,
Why do you feel you engender such hostility on the part of your neighbors and other Oregonians?
There are no neighbors. We are alone here, and we want to be alone here.
People in nearby towns.
We don’t want even to relate.
Why do you think there is this hostility?
It is not hostility. It is simply that we want to be left alone.
No, on the part of some people who live in Oregon, some Oregonians.
Now that is their problem, and you have to ask them. We don’t have any hostility toward them. All that we want is to be left alone to do our thing. They are hostile because this land was available here for fifty years, and they could not make anything out of it. And within four years we have made a beautiful place where five thousand people are joyously living, luxuriously and comfortably living. They are simply jealous and hostile because they know we can manage to have one hundred thousand people here. And to them, number is power. To us, there is no question of any power trip.
Isn't it really because you're different that they don't understand you? That people dress alike, wear various shades of red, wear beads?
There are so many other reasons besides. There was a time when the Christians were treated by the Jews the same way; just to be a Christian was enough to be a criminal.
Osho,
Why do your people wear various shades of red? Why do the people here wear various shades of red and beads?
I want them to be recognized, by me and by other people. I want them to face the world…that they have dropped out of it. I want them to be clearly individual; that they don’t belong to this rotten world around. The day I see that there is no need, they will wear all the colors. It is nothing spiritual, nothing religious; it is simply an identification card put all over the body.
Osho,
There have been those who have accused you and the people living here of obscuring the line between church and state. Is this a religious city, or is it a city that should, for example, qualify for school aid? What are your views on the separation of church and state?
This is not a religious city; the city has its own functions, religion has nothing to do with it. Religion is an individual phenomenon. It has nothing to do with the streets, the houses, the maintenance of the city. Religion is purely individual. The city is taking care of the collectivity of the community. They are two separate dimensions, they don’t overlap, they don’t meet anywhere.
But everybody living here believes and follows you.
Nobody follows me because I don’t have any followers. If somebody is walking behind me, that does not mean he is a follower. If somebody feels that what I am saying is true and experiences it as true, what does the city have to do with it? The truth of the individuals living in this city is their private experience. The city is for other purposes, mundane. It has nothing to do with religion.
What I am saying is true only about Rajneeshpuram, that there is no mixing of state and religion. About the outside world that is not true; everywhere state and religion are mixed. Otherwise, why should the Bible be in the courts for somebody to take an oath? What does it mean? Every Bible should be thrown out of every court; it is mixing it with religion.
And do you think the people who are presidents, premiers, governors, are not prejudiced in favor of some religion? Are they capable of discriminating, so that when they are in the office they are no longer Christians? It has not been our experience here.
Osho,
Let me go back, if I can, a number of years, because there have been some things written about it. Why did you leave India?
For health reasons. I never wanted to leave; India may be poor, may have its troubles and problems, but it has a beauty of its own.
There were stories at the time that you were forced out. Is that true?
That is nonsense; I can go back there, nobody can force me out of anywhere. If Oregonians cannot force me out of Oregon, do you think Indians can force me out of India?
Osho,
Do you plan to leave Oregon?
No, I never plan anything. But I can leave any day, or I may never leave.
Do you think the Immigration Service is hoping you will leave the country?
They are waiting, perhaps. They can wait… And if I don’t want to leave, I will not leave. I will go on fighting till the end, I will not leave. If I want to leave – even if the whole of America begs me to stay here – I’m not going to stay a single moment. Nobody forced me out of India; in India I was living with my commune, ten thousand sannyasins were living with me. It was my health that was getting worse and worse.
Osho,
Are you recovered now? Are you better?
Not completely. I am feeling better, but it is just on the boundary line; at any moment a small thing, and the trouble can arise.
Osho,
What does the future hold for you and for Rajneeshees?
I never think of the future. We are happy now.
Osho,
I must tell you that I am not feeling well tonight because I've stopped smoking.
I knew. You must be feeling nervous; one hour more, and you will be in a nervous breakdown. Smoking is a difficult thing for people to stop.
Osho,
Very! It's very bad for you, because of what you were talking of before – it takes over control of you. Never mind for the health reason, but for that reason alone, people shouldn't smoke – says he now!
Can you tell me a little bit, just briefly, of your daily routine, what you do here?
I am a very lazy man. I call myself the lazy man’s guide to enlightenment; I don’t do anything. In the morning I have started talking again, as I was doing for thirty years. I love it, it is not a lecture, a prepared speech, or anything. People ask questions, and whatsoever spontaneous response happens in me, I tell it to them. And because I am not concerned at all about any consistency, I have made it clear to my people never to say, “Yesterday you said this, and today you are saying this, and these seem to be contradictory.” I always insist whatever I am saying right now is the truth.
You've been described as a person of contradictions. Are you?
I am. Because life is full of contradictions and I am in tune with life.
I am not in tune with Aristotle. Aristotle, I think, is a disease; I call him “Aristotle-itis.” Life is very different, it is not a logical system. Now, modern physics has come across facts which baffle all the scientists, because they contradict Aristotle’s logic and Euclid’s geometry. They have no obligation to perform according to the logic man has created. They just go on their way doing their thing in their own way. I am not a logician, and I have never claimed that I am not a man of contradictions. “I am big enough…” as Walt Whitman once said, “I am big enough to have all the contradictions in me.”
And yet, there is a possibility that all those contradictions may become a deep harmony. They may not remain contradictions, they may become complementaries to each other. That’s how it is in existence; that’s how it should be in life.
Now, give him his cigarettes!

[Following is the text of an interview given on the same day by telex]

Jo McManues
Western Mail, Australia
Osho,
Why after all these years have you decided to speak with the press?
I am a spontaneous person. I live moment to moment. There is no question of deciding because I am not a doer at all. Things have been happening in my life. I go on witnessing them; I am a watcher on the hills.
Osho,
Are you planning on coming to Western Australia to visit or to resettle and live here?
I never plan anything, so everything is possible.
For people who don't understand or accept the Rajneeshees' teachings, what would you say to give them a clear understanding, and is it important to you that non-sannyasins do have an understanding?
I have no teaching as such. My function is that of a deprogrammer. I destroy people’s so-called belief systems but I do not give them another substitute program. I want them to be completely free to act on their own.
As far as the people who do not understand me are concerned, I do not care a bit. What is happening around me is simply beyond their intelligence and it is not my responsibility.
The public has focused strongly on the fact that you have many Rolls Royces and live a luxurious lifestyle. Why do you have so many cars and what do you say to the critics of your lifestyle?
I do not say anything to my critics. That is part of my lifestyle – to live undeterred in absolute freedom without thinking of any consequences. I am the poorest and the richest man in the world because nothing belongs to me. As far as the Rolls Royces are concerned you should ask my disciples around the world, because according to them they have managed only ninety Rolls Royces, which is not enough – they are planning for 365 Rolls Royces.
I believe that not to live a luxurious life is only for the retarded. To me, the blessed are not the poor but the rich. Religion happens only as a flowering of ultimate luxury. The poor man’s religion is a poor religion. And the whole world of religious leaders, political leaders, social workers – they are all trying to help the poor; nobody is looking at the poor rich men. I am the only one who is caring for them.
Rajneeshees I have met have a seemingly inner peace. What would you say is the reason for this?
It is not just that my people are seemingly at peace, they are peaceful; and once you are freed from your past and its garbage, you can also be immediately in the world of peace, serenity, and blessedness. It is a natural phenomenon which your culture, society, religion, civilization, educational system all have conspired to destroy – because a peaceful individual cannot be enslaved by the vested interests, neither can he be oppressed and exploited.
And remember, the moment you are free of the past you are also free of the future, because the future is nothing but the unlived past projected. These two are the causes of your disturbed neurotic life. Once past and future disappear, there is only this moment, the now and the here – these two words are the only reality. Your gods are bogus, your heaven and hell are religious fiction. My people are finished with all this nonsense, hence they are at tremendous ease, every moment at home. They are not going anywhere because they know that whatever is, is here and now.
Osho,
Many people in Australia are afraid Rajneeshees will brainwash them and their children. Why are so many people so afraid and how important is it to you that non-sannyasins understand Rajneeshees?
They should be afraid because that’s what actually we are going to do. We do complete mindwash; brainwash is nothing compared to it. As far as I am concerned I do not care whether anyone understands me or not. It is his problem not mine. If he understands, he will go through a transformation. If he does not, then I am not going to interfere in his life, which is nothing but hell.
Osho,
What is the basic philosophy of the Rajneeshee religion? And is it a religion?
It is not a philosophy, because philosophy is nothing but intellectual gymnastics. The truth is not to be discovered by argumentation, the only way to know it is to be utterly silent. And the philosopher’s mind is full of junk which prevents him from knowing the truth. The truth is not something outside, it is our innermost being.
It is not an ordinary religion either. I call it a religionless religion, to emphasize the fact that I have nothing to do with the past pseudo-religions. It is religionless also because it has no belief system, no catechism, no holy book, no god, no prayer. Its trust is not theological but existential.
We love existence, we do not worship any man-invented god. We dance with the wind, but we do not pray in man-made churches. We are utterly contented with the flowers, with the rivers, with the stars…and it is more than one can contain, the beauty of it, the blessedness of it.
Osho,
Why is it that Rajneeshee communes around the world have no problem to be financially successful?
It is simply the result of understanding that life is to be lived in totality, intensely, intelligently, without any fear, without any guilt. Once you are free of guilt, the idea of sin, the fear of hell, the greed for heaven, your intelligence starts functioning at its peak. It will create everything that you need, all the comforts, all the luxuries.
I say to my people that a camel may pass through the eye of a needle but a poor man cannot enter into paradise. I stand for all dimensions of luxury. Money is only one dimension; there are also scientific creativity, art, poetry, music, and these are all always available for an authentic courageous man. My communes around the world are proving this simple fact.
What do you say to people who criticize you and your followers because you seem to do little or nothing for suffering people in the world?
I say to those critics, it is up to you: if you want to serve the suffering people why are you wasting time criticizing me and my people? – just go to Ethiopia.
The people who are suffering in the world are suffering because of themselves. They have lived stupidly, they don’t listen to reason. They go on producing children. The poverty in the world is created by these suffering people themselves. We don’t take any responsibility and we don’t have any time or energy to serve idiots. We don’t have enough time to live our own life.
The starving nations like Ethiopia or India are still listening to people like the Catholic pope or the Hindu shankaracharya, that birth control is sin, that abortion should be made illegal. Now these are the people who should go and serve the people in Ethiopia or anywhere else. They have to accept the responsibility of it.
I am in favor of complete birth control for at least twenty years, so that the population of the world can be reduced to one-fourth. But the great servants of the people will not allow it to happen, because if there are no poor people, no orphans, no starving nations, what will happen to these people like the polack pope, Mother Teresa, et cetera? Just for their glory they need the world to remain in poverty.

============================================================

Erich Widdeman & Rainer Weber
Der Spiegel, Hamburg, Germany
Osho,
I don't know what Sheela has told you about the way we like these discussions to go. We do a complete write-up, edit it, and then send the text to you or to your confidants to be reedited. These interviews are not meant to be question and answer, but rather a controversial discussion. For you, it is an opportunity to get rid of prejudices against you and your religion.
There will be a couple of questions which have been asked many times before, for which I apologize.
No problem. You just ask whatsoever you want, and in whatever way you want. And a question may have been asked thousands of times, but I have not given the same answer again and again and again. My answer has been different a thousand times. So you need not be worried; this is my business. You just ask.
That might be one of the reasons you're being judged by the public so controversially, because your answers are not always the same on the same subjects.
But I am controversial! It is not a judgment of the public, it is the reality.
You say that it is not your answer that changes, it is the reality that changes?
Yes. It is reality that changes, and I change with reality. I am certainly controversial. There is nothing wrong about the public thinking me controversial.
Is there anything you are really angry about? Any controversial issue?
No.
You're beyond all this controversy?
I just enjoy it.
Your followers call you “Bhagwan.” How should people who do not belong to your group address you?
They have to address me as Bhagwan.
What does Bhagwan mean?
The blessed one.
What is the difference between the meanings of “the blessed one,” “the enlightened one,” and “the awakened one”?
There is no difference.
So it's also true that a blessed person is a continuous laughter?
That’s true.
And also every enlightened person is a continuous laughter?
That’s true.
Osho,
Would you please for our audience give a brief rundown of your biography and your first enlightenment? What happened, and how?
I don’t have any biography. And whatsoever is thought to be biography is utterly meaningless. On what date I was born, in what country I was born, does not matter. What matters is what I am now, right here.
Osho,
Something that matters, for instance, for the American immigration authorities is whether you were adopted by an Indian gentleman who is an American citizen, for instance. Could you elaborate on that?
Everything has been explained to them. All the documents have been given to them. Now it is for them to decide. If they decide against me, I am going to fight up to the Supreme Court.
That means they have not yet accepted the explanation?
For four years those lousy people are just sitting there, doing nothing – no decision this way or that.
Osho,
I understand that your real estate agents have started purchasing property in the Himalayas. Is that true? Do you plan to move?
No, I don’t plan to go anywhere. I am going to be here.
Whatever happens?
Whatever happens.
But you are still buying property in the Himalayas?
That is my Indian followers making a commune, just as I have communes all over the world.
For their own use?
For their own use.
Osho
That means whatever happens, you have decided to fight to stay here?
I will fight to the very end.
Will it be a hard battle?
It is going to be.
Will it be just a legal battle, or will there be other means involved?
I would like it to be legal, but if they force me, everything can be involved.
That means even armed resistance?
Not from my side.
But from the side of your sannyasins?
No, not from my sannyasins’ side either, that is my side. But if anybody tries to be violent in any way with us, we are not nonviolent people. We are neither violent nor nonviolent, we are simply human beings.
But if violence erupts, you are…
We will answer tit for tat.
Osho,
Okay, that's a very straightforward answer.
What do you do all day?
Nothing, just nothing.
Where do you do nothing?
Just sitting in my room, in my chair, enjoying myself.
And writing books? Did you write all the books that carry your name?
I have never read any of my books.
That means you have ghost writers?
No, those are my discourses, and my sannyasins edit them. They are published but I have never read them. What is the point? – they are my words.
Osho,
How come just now somebody has published something called The Osho Bible? That's a big title for a book.
Bible simply means “the book.” It is not a big thing.
Well, it also has an allusion toward the founder of a religion. Are you about to found a new religion?
I am the founder of the only religion. All other founders were all hocus pocus.
Why is yours true?
Because I find them all – Jesus, Mohammed, Buddha, Mahavira – you name the person and I will show you why he is not the founder of a religion, but is simply exploiting people’s gullibility.
Would you explore that with Jesus?
Jesus, in the first place, knows nothing of religion. He never meditated in his life; whatever he was doing was prayer. Prayer means you have already accepted the existence of God, to whom you are praying. Your prayer is based on a belief, and all beliefs are ignorant. Knowing is something else. If you have experienced a headache, then you know it; but if the whole world goes on talking about headaches and you have not experienced it, just for etiquette’s sake you may believe in it. But that belief is ungrounded.
And they also take an aspirin.
If you believe too much, perhaps you may take an aspirin, then things become worse than before! Jesus’ whole ideology is based on belief.
Where I suppose yours, I think…
…is on experience. I don’t say to my people that you have to believe in anything that I say. I explain my experience, you can try to experience. If you find it right there is no question of believing in it – you know it. If you find it wrong, of course, there is no question of believing it, either.
Osho,
Apparently your religion does not have a set of dogmas.
No.
However, are there some sentences which might help us to understand the essence of your religion?
No.
Well, for example, you teach selfishness.
Yes, because it is natural. And I teach to be natural.
Yes, lion eats man. So do you teach the survival of the fittest?
It happens. It is not a question of my teaching.
When you say it happens, you are never concerned with whether these things are good or bad?
There is no question of good or bad; there has never been a question of good and bad. The fittest survives, and the fittest writes all the histories and all the judgments. And of course he is right; might is right. And being German, you will understand it better.
Well, you maybe understand it as well, as you occasionally have a strong preference for Hitler.
I love the man! He was crazy.
So are you, you have said.
I am more crazy than him.
That's why you are a bigger or greater man than him?
No, not bigger or greater – just crazier.
Osho,
Last time when we talked to Sheela, I wanted to have some clarification of a sentence in which you said, “Hitler, in the end, failed because he was only a tool in the hands of higher powers.”
Don’t bring in Sheela or anybody. Only I am here; be direct.
She said, “Ask this question to Osho,” which I have now done. Could you explain this sentence to us?
Ask directly, don’t bring anybody in. Don’t make it unnecessarily complex, ask directly. Why are you afraid of asking the question directly? Are you afraid of people in Germany?
Not really.
No? Just ask directly.
It was only a polite reference to Sheela.
Don’t be polite to me, because I will not be polite to you.
I was only being polite to Sheela.
Sheela is no longer concerned here.
Okay. The question is: “Hitler was an instrument in the hands of magical powers. This is why he was victorious only up to a certain point.” What does this mean, and who are these magical powers?
Adolf Hitler was very much concerned about astrology. He was not listening to his generals on where to attack, when to attack. Rather he was listening to his astrologer on what was the right time, and what was the right place. The generals were puzzled because astrologers have nothing to do with military science. But for five years continuously he went on winning, simply because the leaders of the opposite nations – Roosevelt, Churchill, Stalin – were following the rules of military science, and he was just going according to something which is not part of military science. They could not conceive where he was going to attack. They could not conceive where they should gather their forces. Finally, Churchill had to import astrologers from India to England.
Apart from military aspects, how would you judge him morally and politically?
Morally, he was as moral as Mahatma Gandhi.
As Mahatma Gandhi?
Yes, because I consider both absolutely immoral. In fact, he was more a Hindu than Mahatma Gandhi himself.
In what respect?
In his life, in his way of living.
Because he was a vegetarian?
He was a vegetarian.
But he was not nonviolent, as Mahatma Gandhi was.
Mahatma Gandhi was also not nonviolent.
Just wait a bit, let me finish with Adolf Hitler. He was a vegetarian, he was an early riser in the morning, and went early back to sleep. He remained a bachelor almost his whole life – he married only three hours before he died. He was not a drunkard, he was not a smoker. He was a puritan in every possible way and he lived a life of discipline, living just as a saint lives in a monastery.
You asked me if Gandhi was nonviolent. That was a political strategy – but he was not nonviolent. He declared that after India became independent, armies would be dissolved. But when India became independent and he was asked about armies being dissolved, he remained silent. He was really a cunning man; his secretary said that it was his day of silence.
Osho,
May I bring your attention back to Adolf Hitler: is it true that you have a certain amount of anti-Semitism in common with Hitler? There was a joke related by Sheela… I don't know whether it's true: you are supposed to have told the joke of a tiger who stuck his nose into the ass of another tiger, and when asked why he did it he said, “I just ate a Jew and I want to get rid of the bad taste.” Is that true? Is the joke properly related?
It will be good if you don’t bring Sheela or anybody in between me and you. Be direct.
Did you tell this joke? Is that your joke?
I cannot remember. For thirty-three years I have been speaking constantly, two hours in the morning, two hours in the evening. Perhaps there is no single individual alive who has spoken as much as I have spoken. So, ask the question!
Do you like Jews or don't you like Jews?
I love them – what is the question of liking? I have among my sannyasins more Jews than anybody else; almost forty percent of my sannyasins are Jews.
From Israel, or American Jews?
From America, from Israel, from Europe, from Germany.
That means you don't have any national, any racial prejudices?
I don’t believe in the very concept of nations, or religions. I don’t draw any line between one human being and another. And if I have told any joke which you think is anti-Jewish, then I have also told jokes which are anti-Hindu, anti-Mohammedan, anti-Christian. In fact, I have been telling jokes which are against me! Jokes are just jokes, they are not a philosophical standpoint.
Osho,
You said your religion is the first and last religion. So after you there will be no more need for any religion anywhere?
Yes.
Does that apply to after your death?
I say it is the first and last religion for the simple reason that I don’t consider old religions authentic religions. They were pseudo; they pretended to be religions, but they were not religions.
Because they were religions for the poor?
No, because they were religions of superstition. Not a single religion has been able to prove God’s existence. Not a single religion has been able to give any proof for heaven and hell.
That doesn't mean God doesn't exist, if you can't prove that he exists.
It does not mean that, it simply means you cannot go on worshipping something for which no evidence exists in the whole history of man.
Osho,
So, maybe for an outsider it is correct to put the core of your religion into the words: “Find your own ego, find your own self.”
No, not your own ego, but your own being. And there is a great difference between the two – not only different, but they are absolutely contrary to each other. The ego is the false idea in you, created by the society: you are a Jew, you are a Mohammedan, you are a Nazi, you are a communist, you belong to this family, this is your holy book, this is your name, you have to remain attached to your tradition, convention.
All these things contribute to your ego. Out of a combination of all these your ego is created. Your being is not given to you by the society, church, education, family – nobody. Your being you bring with you when you are born; it is existential.
Is this why you have said… And probably have done… Is this why you have said, “I have to destroy all your egos”? – meaning the egos of your followers.
Yes.
So, the twenty or thirty people sitting right behind me have no ego anymore?
You can just look and see.
Well, they don't really look like it, but you're still working on it, aren't you? I mean, if this is your aim, your target…
Do you, the teacher, notice that somebody's ego has been crushed, disappeared, vanished, or whatever happens?
Yes, I immediately recognize it.
You sense it?
Yes.
Does your pupil sense it?
[to those sitting there] When did you all realize your egos had been destroyed?
My disciples are at several stages of development. Somebody’s ego has completely disappeared, somebody’s ego is just on the boundary to disappear, somebody’s ego is still trying to survive, somebody else is trying not to let it go. So they are at all stages. But I try to explain to them where they are, and where they have to move from there.
Osho,
Would you agree to call this method of treating people totalitarian?
No, because I am not giving them orders to follow me. I am simply sharing my experience. I have not called them here, they have come on their own. It is their decision to be with me; it is not my decision that they should be with me.
So how do you make people give up the family, their property, their home?
I don’t.
But you must have an idea why they are coming here. They give up everything they had before, just to be close to you. They even give up their personality, and what are they getting for it?
Whatsoever they feel around me, they are on their own accord ready to leave everything behind. But I have never told a single person to leave his family or leave his job. I am not in favor of renunciation. All the old religions were in favor of renunciation; they were telling people to leave the family, to remain celibate. They were telling people to move to the monastery, they were taking people out of the society. I have never told anybody to do anything on my order. But if, being with me, they start feeling that something that they are carrying is stupid and they drop it, that is their business.
Osho,
The vast majority of your followers are coming from Western civilizations – from the United States, from Western Europe – but hardly anyone is coming from your own home country, hardly any Indians. Or am I wrong?
India is a dead country.
Mentally or physically?
Both.
You call a country with such a big cultural tradition mentally dead?
It had once, but for two thousand years – slavery.
Osho,
What happened to the tax case, by the way? Is there any new development?
I have no idea because I have never paid any tax. I have no income, either.
You have no income?
No income.
What are you living on then?
Just my friends – I am their guest. I have been a guest for thirty-five years continuously – in fact my whole life. In the beginning I was a guest in my family, and after that I have been a guest in other families.
Osho,
Just one more question concerning the motivation of people coming to join you. I have the feeling that principally frustrated Western youth are coming, who seem to be the more obedient kind of customers, who don't ask too many questions. Aren't the Indians, for instance, more practically minded?
Do you think you are an Indian? You are from the West.
No. I don't feel to be the kind of frustrated Westerner but maybe the percentage of that type of people…
Do you see anybody here more frustrated than you?
No, no.
Go to the commune and see if you can find a single frustrated person.
Not here, but they seem to be dissatisfied with Western civilization.
They are dissatisfied because they are intelligent people. Only buffalos don’t get frustrated.
There are a number of intelligent people in your own home country, too, why don't you attract any of them?
I’m telling you, India is a dead country. Everything which is born has to die one day – even civilizations are born and they have to die. But it is very difficult for people to drop the corpses of the ancient past; their glory, their tradition. They go on carrying the corpses on their shoulders. They are very traditional, very orthodox, and completely closed to anything new. They have the idea that their scriptures have all the truth that is possible. There is no need for them.
We have the impression that the majority of your followers are – I don't mean it negatively – dropouts from Western civilization.
No.
I read a book by Andres Elten, and he described the feeling that he was completely dissatisfied with Western civilization, and…
Will you call Jean-Paul Sartre a dropout?
Who?
Jean-Paul Sartre. Will you call Bertrand Russell a dropout?
In the Western sense, ja.
Bertrand Russell, a dropout?
In the Western sense, ja, I would call him a dropout.
In no sense can you call Bertrand Russell a dropout. On the one hand you give a Nobel Prize to the man, and on the other hand you call him a dropout.
Well, life is full of contradictions. By dropout I mean…
I understand perfectly what you mean. Anybody who is intelligent, is a little aware of the situation of the world, of the society, of the family, is bound to be a dropout. Dropping out is absolutely positive. If the house is on fire you run out of it – that is not escapist.
Osho,
But you feel that your way is the only way to salvation?
No, I don’t say that I’m the only savior, or the only salvation, but…
What alternative would you suggest then?
I don’t suggest any alternative.
Well, you called for the creation of what you call a new man.
I simply explain to them what I have experienced, and if they feel themselves somehow falling into a kind of synchronicity with me, then it is up to them – whether they want to be with me or go back to their home. I never persuade anybody to be here, I never prevent anybody from going; it is all up to them. This commune is completely free.
But yet, you say you are trying to form the new man.
I am trying to form a new man, which is just an idea. It is not that a new man can be made like a sculpture. I am just explaining what a new man should be.
There have been many explications by Lenin, by Marx, even by Adolf Hitler, but no one ever managed to create the new man.
Because all their ideas were not right, they did not fit with existence, they all failed.
What's the difference between your new man and Nietzsche's superman?
The superman is a fascist idea. A new man is not superior in any way; a new man is really the most ordinary and simple man. Just try to understand one thing: that I want man to live naturally, ordinarily, without trying to become superior, without going into a pilgrimage toward paradise. Just here and now, and enjoy whatsoever life gives to you. Be creative, be intelligent – but this is not making you a superman. Nietzsche’s superman created Adolf Hitler and the whole stupidity that followed. The new man is not the superman.
Osho,
What happens if you die? Will there be a successor?
Who cares?
Your followers.
That is up to them.
Will they vote for one? Will there be an election?
I have nothing to do with it. The moment I die…
How will he be chosen?
You have to understand me: I don’t care.
So you have no responsibility whatsoever for your church?
No responsibility whatsoever, because every responsibility makes them slaves, and then I am totalitarian.
Osho,
Once you said when you go, “many of you will go with me.” What do you mean by that?
When did I say it?
I don't know when you said it, but I read it in one of your scripts. It was, ”If I go many of you will go with me.” Does that mean that if you die that others will have to follow?
No. If you have read it somewhere, you must have read it wrongly, out of context.
Osho,
That's a very interesting question because it keeps cropping up in The Osho Bible, as well. You are strongly for what you call death control – euthanasia. You say that a man has the right to go to the medical board to be freed from his body.
Yes.
So that's why I'd like to keep to this topic. Also, your first enlightenment started with a…
You are not keeping to any topic at all, I am trying to keep you.
I have to entertain my readers, not only you.
I am not concerned with your readers, I am concerned only with the truth that I can impart to you.
What's truthful about death control then?
Once there is birth control, there has to be death control. It is just the logical consequence of birth control. If you try to control birth you are only trying to control one end – what about the other end? You are preventing new children being born, it becomes absolutely necessary that people should not be just vegetating in hospitals. They want to die; if they want to die, this is their birthright. And medical facilities should be provided to these people.
I think I have the very point here. The Osho Times quoted you just recently, saying, “I teach you to realize suicide so that you can go forever.” What does that mean, does that mean you are teaching suicide as part of your religion?
I am simply saying that nothing is wrong with death. It is as beautiful as life. If you have lived, and you feel that now life has no more to give to you, and you feel that you are tired, exhausted and spent, then what is the point of being forced to drag on because an old idiot, Hippocrates, created a medical oath for doctors that they should always try to save the man? The man wants to die; he is hanging between life and death, and they go on trying every way to keep him alive. Who are you?
Would you also commit suicide, under certain conditions?
If I feel like now there is no work for me, I will. There is no problem in it. I am master of my own self: nobody is to control me.
And would you encourage someone else to follow you?
No, I never encourage about anything. I simply explain myself, I never encourage anybody.
You are a great admirer of the Dutch painter Vincent van Gogh. You said something like, “He committed suicide for the simple reason that he had painted everything he had wanted to paint. To the whole world it seems like suicide, not to me. To me it simply seems a natural end. The painting is completed, life is fulfilled.”
Yes, absolutely.
By the way, would you like to own a painting by van Gogh, in addition to your ninety Rolls Royces?
No. I own nothing.
But who is there to decide whether this euthanasia should be done? It's an important question – maybe not for you – but if death control is exerted, who should do it? A committee of doctors? A lawyer? A politician?
Politicians, certainly not. Legal experts have no business in deciding about life and death. But the medical profession should be freed from the Hippocratic Oath; that their function is just to save, whatsoever the situation. Their function is to serve, whatsoever the condition. If the person is still capable of living a meaningful life, if he is still wanting to live, if he has still the lust for life, help him. But if a person has nothing to live for and he is telling you that it is time for him to be freed from this body…
You keep saying you have no influence, and you're not trying to influence people, but you keep writing thick books, and you're holding interviews.
I will continue, but I am not trying to influence anybody.
But can't you understand that people are afraid of what you do? Someone said in an interview, “If Osho told me to commit suicide I would immediately take a gun and kill myself.” Isn't that an evil kind of influence?
What he is saying is from his side. He is not saying that I am going to tell him to, because I don’t tell anybody even to drink a glass of water or a cup of tea!
There are other means of influencing people, just…
No, I am not. I am consistently making them alert not to be influenced by me; I may be wrong. What that man has said is his trust.
There is a book written by you, the title is Dying for Enlightenment…
That’s perfectly good.
But don't you think that people might feel encouraged by such a title, and what it contains?
No, that dying means the death of your ego.
The death, enlightenment through death?
Yes, that means the death of your ego, not the death of you.
Osho,
Another thing you try to destroy is conscience.
Yes, the conscience that has been created by the society; because that is the only way to free the consciousness – and these are two different things, except in the French language. In French, there is only one word – conscience – for both consciousness and conscience. But they are two different things. Consciousness the child brings with himself. Conscience is given by the society, the family, the educational system and everybody else.
Isn't it conscience that refrains people from going round hurting other people?
It is conscience that has been creating all the wars in the world and killing millions of people.
Maybe there are different types of conscience.
All the consciences: Mohammedans have done that, Hindus have done that, Christians have done that. All the nations have been… For three thousand years there have been five thousand wars in the world, and they are still preparing for the third, total war. This is the conscience of your presidents, of your prime ministers, of your leaders, of your popes, of your priests. A man of consciousness cannot do anything wrong. It is impossible.
Osho,
Is Mother Teresa a woman of conscience? I mention the name because I have a quote…
Can’t you find anybody better?
It's very good for a start, that remark; and you called her, by God, criminally minded and idiotic!
Yes.
Do you think that's the right thing to call someone who dedicates her life to helping the miserable in the world?
The people who devote themselves to helping the miserable keep misery alive.
They are trying to fight it, at least.
No. They are simply exploiting misery for their own glory. Misery can be destroyed completely, but it cannot be destroyed by Mother Teresa. Mother Teresa wants more orphans, Mother Teresa wants more poor people so that she can convert those people to Catholicism. It is sheer politics.
There are plenty of poor people, plenty of miserable people in India.
All the religions have been exploiting and doing the same thing. I don’t make any distinction between those religions.
You wouldn't approve good-heartedness as…?
No, not at all. I approve only of one thing: if you have plenty – abundant life, joy, anything – and you want to share it, and if that sharing is a joy to you, share it. It does not matter with whom you share. Whether the other person is rich or poor, Hindu or Mohammedan, Western or Eastern, if you are full of fragrance, you will share it. There is no other way. When the cloud is full of rain water it showers.
I do not teach serving the poor, I teach destroying poverty. And we have the means in our hands to destroy all poverty. But the politicians will not allow it, the priests will not allow it, because they will both disappear with poverty, remember.
Who is “we” – mankind, or the Rajneeshees? You say “we” have all the means in our hands.
I mean the intelligence of mankind. I am not a Rajneeshee.
I still find it difficult to accept the fact that it would be a big step forward for mankind if conscience is destroyed.
All that conscience has done up to now has been simply ugly, destructive. We need a better concept – and that is consciousness. Consciousness is a purification of your being through meditative methods; that’s my whole work. Then whatever a conscious man does is right. Then there is no question of choosing for him.
He may kill?
If he feels it right, he may kill.
That's quite far away from civilization as we understand it.
You are not civilized, and where is civilization?
Right here in America.
Nowhere does civilization exist. It is just an idea that humanity has been hoping for. What exists is barbarism with clothes covering it, masks hiding the real faces of people. But true civilization does not exist.
Osho,
Did I really understand you correctly? Anybody who has reached consciousness may kill if he feels like it?
I am saying the man who has become totally conscious cannot do anything wrong. Whatever he does is right, there is no question of choosing right and wrong.
Disregarding the effect on the community?
There is no question for him; he sees where the door is, and he moves. He has eyes of his own, he does not need to borrow eyes and insight from others.
That means in practical terms, if it comes to the worst, and the Oregon police sends many police to get you out of here because of legal reasons, you would resist by means of arms – even at the risk of killing people?
We will decide in the moment. We never plan.
But if it happens, you would be prepared to kill people?
No. We will see in the moment what we can do; whether it is right to stand before them with our chests open and tell them to kill us and prove that they are civilized, and prove that they are democratic.
Yes, provided this is a civilized democracy.
It is not.
The American society is not democratic?
No society anywhere is civilized as yet.
That means you wouldn't approve of an independent judgment of an Oregonian judge if he decides to expel you…
I have seen their judgments.
That means you wouldn't approve – if they decide to expel you, you would resist?
I will resist, certainly.
By any means available?
Certainly.
Even at the risk of creating bloodshed, like Jonestown?
It does not matter, nothing matters: if somebody is being nasty to innocent people who are not doing any harm to anybody, then, whatever happens…
Yes, in a democracy it's up to the judicial authority to decide what is harmful and what is not.
We will go on fighting up to the Supreme Court of America, and even if we see that…
So, if you lose there?
Then we will fight.
With the arms you are collecting already?
No, we don’t have arms to fight America.
So what are the arms for? I read a quote somewhere, I think it was from a Senator. He said: “They have arms for a combat regiment, like a combat regiment in Vietnam.” What are the arms for?
Just two dozen arms for the police, which are declared to the government? You think they are enough to fight America? Then what is the Soviet Union doing?
You mean the two dozen guns you have.
They are just cowards.
They said it's enough for a regiment in Vietnam.
No. They are absolutely absurd.
You are such a loving community, why does your police force need arms?
We are such a loving community, that’s why. We don’t want this loving community to be destroyed by idiots. In four years in this commune, no crime has happened, no drug has entered, no theft has happened, no murder has happened, nobody has been raped, no violence. These few arms and policemen are part of the Oregon government.
In case a crime did happen, do you have the judicial means to deal with it?
We have every judicial means, we have four hundred sannyasins who are legal experts. Perhaps nowhere else would you find such a big legal firm. And these four hundred legal experts are going to fight to the very end.
Osho,
How in your community is deviation treated? If somebody does something the rest of the community doesn't feel right, what happens?
He is taken to the hospital.
Against his will?
Otherwise he is told to leave. If he does not want to live here in communion with people, he is free to leave. If he wants to live in communion here, and if the community feels that something is wrong in him, he goes to the hospital. And in four years nobody has resisted, nobody has been taken to the hospital forcibly.
Osho,
You perform your own marriage and death ceremonies, would you please describe them to us?
I do not perform anything, my people do everything. I am just a non-doer – just good for nothing. My people do everything. If they want to perform marriage, they will perform marriage. If they want to perform divorce, they will perform divorce. It is up to them, their business – nothing to do with me. I am completely an outsider. Let me repeat: I am not a Rajneeshee, I don’t even live in the City of Rajneeshpuram. I live outside in a guesthouse, I am not a resident.
Well, at least they don't put you a “dog tag” on your arm, like they do with other visitors.
I’m not a visitor.
What I'm trying to say is that it seems simply stylish and very coquette to say, “I have nothing to do with this community.”
It is true, what else can I say? – I have nothing to do with it. I have never performed a single marriage, I have never gone to any service for somebody who has died.
But if you drive along the street, they stand and cheer.
That is their business and their joy. Just now they were standing outside – I had not asked anybody to stand there – and they will still be standing there, just open the door and see. Nobody is telling them to. For two hours those loving people will be waiting for me.
You said once, “It is dangerous to be a part of my commune, you are taking a risk.” What kind of risk does everybody take who joins you?
The risk is of dropping all the rubbish that everybody carries and thinks is very valuable – all kinds of crap. Your religion will disappear, your nationality will disappear, your whole idea of racism will disappear. Your belief systems, your political ideologies will disappear. Here you will be just a simple, innocent human being. I believe in the individual.
Innocence also means irresponsibility.
Yes. It means both; it means irresponsibility to those who have been forcing responsibility on you. But in fact it means responsibility, because a person who is totally free is responsible for whatever he does. He cannot say, “My commander-in-chief ordered me,” or, “It was from the pope, what can I do?” “It is from Jesus, the only begotten son of God.” He has nobody to dump anything on. All responsibility is his, so whatsoever he does, he has to take the responsibility upon his own shoulders. So to him it means responsibility, but certainly to others it will look like irresponsibility.
Perhaps he can also be manipulated easier?
Everybody is being manipulated everywhere and very easily.
Osho,
Two days ago you were asked whether you were trying to spread your power or your influence over the whole of Oregon. You said you want to try to spread it over all of the United States. Was that misunderstood?
No, these are not my words. They had asked, “Are you going to take over Oregon?” The question is stupid, and a stupid question does not need…
But what would be your honest reply to that stupid question?
I told the person that I would love them to take over the whole world, Oregon is too small.
But there is a certain risk for the Oregonians, that you'd take over the whole of Oregon.
There is no risk for anybody from my people.
But they feel it's a risk.
They are just cowards.
But you brought in truckloads of displaced persons and drunkards and whatnot just to increase your voting power. Can't you understand that people are a little bit afraid of your tactics?
We did not vote at all. They were absolutely creating that whole situation.
But why did you bring in all these people?
They are still here.
But they were not sannyasins… Were they?
A few of them are still here, a few of them have become sannyasins. Those who wanted to leave have left. We brought them because we wanted to share something with them. Next year we will bring someone else. Next year… Every year after our annual celebration we have enough money to share.
It just so happens that this coincided with the election date?
It was just a coincidence, and we did not vote at all.
Osho,
So it was the same kind of coincidence when you discovered that you were adopted, when it just came in handy for the immigration authorities?
No, it is not a question of my declaring it. I myself was not aware up to that point that I was adopted in my childhood. It was a secret pact between Swarupananda and my father. They were friends, and it was just superstitious astrology. Astrologers said that if I was not given in adoption I would die, and I should be given to somebody who does not belong to my family, does not even belong to my caste, to my religion… To somebody utterly a stranger.
But somebody must have known that all the time.
Only Swarupananda and my father; those two persons knew it all the time. My father is dead, so Swarupananda was the only person who knew, and who had all the documents. So when he declared it, I came to know about it.
Well, I'm quite amazed by that high rate of coincidence.
It is not a coincidence, it happens in India every day. If people are told by astrologers that their children will die, it is good to let them be adopted – that way they think they are going to deceive the stars and death, and everything. It is foolish, but it happens every day. And they kept it a secret pact between themselves.
Until they could use it, or until somebody could use it.
There was no question. Yes, my father told Swarupananda, “If there is a need any day, you are authorized, he is your son.”
Osho,
You predicted World War Three for some undisclosed year, I think between 1984 and 1999. Have you got any more precise idea now, could you predict exactly when it will happen?
No, it is not a prediction.
Or your feeling?
It is simple reasoning.
A vision. How…?
No, it is not a vision.
But how real is the vision? Could we rely on it, or is it just an idea?
I don’t say rely on it, I am an unreliable man. What I said is a simple, logical conclusion of the world situation.
A conclusion of what? Of political events of recent years?
Yes, political events, nuclear weapons.
Have you got anything particular in mind: SDI, or AMEX, or Pershing?
No, it is just the whole mess in which humanity is. The politicians go on creating more and more weapons to kill and sooner or later they are going to explode.
But you couldn't say who is more responsible, and who is less responsible?
Everybody is responsible.
Do you have some advice for the politicians?
One piece of advice: that all nations should dissolve into one global government. The only way to avoid the Third World War is that there are no more nations, but only one world.
Osho,
In that context you have said you were going to save the elite of the world by creating underground shelters. Furthermore, that only sannyasins will survive the war, and that all the rest of mankind will perish, commit suicide or degenerate into monkeys. So, is this the prospect of what the world will look like after that war?
If the war happens, then only a few people are going to survive. Perhaps even they will not survive.
And the sannyasins will survive? Are you preparing for it? Are you constructing shelter, a nuclear-proof shelter?
The state is preventing us from making anything – from making even a house. And we are fighting the case in court.
Are you building bunkers for…?
We will make them once our case is finished.
You will start building.
We will.
Nuclear-proof bunkers?
We will. I would love my people to survive.
But are you taking practical steps?
We are fighting in the court, what more practical step do you want me to take right now?
No, practical steps against dying in a holocaust – not against surviving in Rajneeshpuram, against being expelled from Rajneeshpuram.
Are you part of the peace movement?
No, I am not interested in the peace movement. They have never succeeded, and they are utter nonsense.
Osho,
Is it true when the Osho Times writes “Everyone who dies in Rajneeshpuram or within twenty-four miles of its boundaries will be enlightened”?
That’s true.
Is it true? What exactly is meant by twenty-four miles, why not twenty-two?
At one hundred degrees, water evaporates, why not at ninety-nine? It is simply a law of existence, you cannot ask why. This is a law of existence, that if there is one man in the state of absolute enlightenment, his being there creates a certain vibe in the twenty-four-mile radius around him. In that radius…
When did that happen before, when Buddha died, or…?
Yes, Buddha also had exactly the same twenty-four-mile radius.
What about Jesus?
No.
Mohammed?
No.
Other religious leaders?
None, except Buddha.
And you.
There have been many others whose names are not known; but these people – Jesus, Moses or Mohammed – were not enlightened. But there have been many: for example, Kabir, in India; Farid, a Mohammedan in India; Bodhidharma, an Indian in China; Chuang Tzu, a Chinese; Lao Tzu, a Chinese. It has happened around many people in different countries, and I have spoken on all these people. I have spoken at least 350 books and I have talked about these people, their methods, what happened in their lives, and what happened in their death.
But these people, Mohammed, Moses, Jesus were themselves not enlightened. Jesus was a mental case; thinking that he is the only begotten son of God, thinking that he is the savior of the whole world, telling his people that he will come back to save them. And the things that he did – condemning, cursing a fig tree because he and his disciples were hungry and the fig tree was not welcoming them with fruits. It was not the season, it was not the responsibility of the fig tree, and this man cursed the fig tree. You think this man is sane?
Osho,
This is a very important question, not a very philosophical one, but a question that interests large crowds of people and readers in Europe: In Pune you favored unlimited sex as a kind of birthright and so it was exercised. Now, as I understand from what I have read, it seems to be the contrary: you say sex is only allowed with rubber gloves and even kissing is forbidden. What made you change your mind?
Because of the facts of life. In Pune I had said to my people that sex is simple, natural, a joyous game which you can enjoy. Don’t take it seriously, it is not sin, it is not a crime, but don’t impose yourself upon anybody. When two persons are willing to be together, it is their absolute right to enjoy a sexual meeting.
But you'd rather they turn it into consciousness, you said.
Yes. I would love that slowly their meditation grows so that even while making love…
Like the Christian monks in the monasteries?
Christian monks in the monasteries have been masturbating and nothing else.
They are not turning it into consciousness?
They cannot because they are repressive people. If you repress your sex, you can never become meditative. The moment you become silent, immediately sexual fantasies will come up.
Is it a matter of age or is it a matter of stage of consciousness? You say you are not opposing it directly, but you wouldn't favor it the same way as you did in Pune?
It is exactly the same as it was in Pune. There is sexual freedom but a new disease, AIDS, is spreading. Now we have to take notice of it, and to my people I have said that if you want…
How is your own sex life? Are you still active?
My sex life?
You were active before in Pune?
I have been active all my life.
Till now?
But now it is enough, I’m finished with it. I enjoyed it before my enlightenment, and I enjoyed it more after my enlightenment. And I proved one traditional idea wrong: that an enlightened man cannot enjoy sex. It is something of historical importance. But now I am completely satisfied – very!
Osho,
You're not a very healthy man these days, are you?
I am not. My body is fragile, my back is bad.
Will you have to undergo another operation?
The possibility is always there, because I have allergies to many things: dust, perfume, smoke.
Has it become worse since you came here, or has it improved?
No, it has improved. Oregon’s dry climate has been immensely helpful. I am grateful to Oregon – not to Oregonians – my asthma has almost disappeared because there is no humidity, and my back is perfectly good.
How are you medically treated?
I have my two physicians of my own.
Do they do massage, or what do they do?
No. If my back is bad – as it was in India – then they were massaging it, giving me traction, giving me medicines for it. For my asthma they were giving me medicines. So whenever it is needed, whatsoever is needed…
So you are not opposed to pharmaceutical products?
Not at all. I am absolutely in favor of all the sciences, and I am against all religions.
Osho,
May I please jump back in discussion to a point we had some time ago: we were talking about doctors and you said they should be freed from the Hippocratic Oath, in favor of science. Now, if doctors are not bound by the oath, they can do human experiments, can't they? It's perfectly all right to experiment with human beings?
It is absolutely right, in fact, it is needed. Not to experiment with human beings is dangerous.
Experiments with human beings are often brought about against their own will. So, for science one should sacrifice human beings?
It is not a question of sacrificing. People like Mother Teresa should offer themselves in the service of humanity. And there are six hundred million Catholics, they should offer.
I was not talking about India and Mother Teresa, but about human engineering.
I am also talking about human engineering. You were saying, “Should people be forced against their will?” No, but people could be invited, and there would be enough people.
Osho,
Should they be forced to be sterilized if it's necessary population-wise – as happened in India?
If the population becomes a problem for the whole country, then it is up to the country to decide. They should vote for it, for absolute birth control.
You are for it?
I am not for it. I’m saying that country should vote for it; the whole country should decide if they want to die starving. It is up to them.
Would you favor sterilization?
Not against anybody’s will.
Not against his will but, for instance: would you try to persuade somebody here in Rajneeshpuram, because the family and children do not fit into the framework of this community?
I never persuade. I simply explain the situation and my people are intelligent enough that there is no need for persuasion.
Do they exercise sterilization here?
Not a single baby has been born here in four years.
Due to sterilization of women here?
Every kind of birth control method is being used.
Is sterilization widespread here?
In India it was.
And in Rajneeshpuram?
No.
Not many women are sterilized because of the unwanted consequences?
No, they can use other birth control methods. There is no question.
Osho,
Is that the way your relation toward the community works: you explain the situation, and then somebody else makes the consequences and does the dirty work?
No, everybody has to take his responsibility. I simply…
Except for you.
…explain the situation, the consequences. And everybody has to think what he would like for himself.
And you call that not having influence on the community?
It is absolute democracy, nowhere does that exist except here.
I may be old fashioned, but my notion of democracy is two people arguing a point and reaching a conclusion.
But when you have somebody who can see the light, then of course he is not going to grope like a blind man. Your idea of democracy is the idea of people who are blind. So blind people are arguing about the shape of the elephant; they are arguing about whether light exists or not. And to what conclusion can they ever come?
If you are not responsible for what your community does, it works the other way round, too: basically your commune isn't responsible either. So nobody in this valley is responsible for anything.
Everybody is responsible for himself, nobody is responsible for anybody else. That’s why I don’t call it even a community, I call it a commune. And I make a distinction between the two words: a community is a certain kind of contract between people, a commune is open, without any contract.
Yes, it's lawlessness.
It is lawlessness, because there is no need of law.
Osho,
Tell me one more thing: how can a community survive without the family, without children?
It is surviving.
For a certain period, yes, but…
Who cares? I’m very irresponsible about the future. I don’t bother at all about tomorrow, if tomorrow the whole world simply evaporates…
You won't have finished your atomic bunker.
…I will say goodbye. Good morning, America!
Osho,
That would be a fun, very good final sentence, but finally we have to draw your attention to some material questions: It's probably a question you have been asked a hundred times, but concerning your Rolls Royces… We understand that you are preaching a non-materialist ideology, yet you are enjoying a luxury life with Rolls Royces and a diamond wristwatch.
No, your understanding is wrong.
Pardon?
Your understanding is wrong, I am utterly materialistic,
Are you materialistic?
Yes, because to me matter and spirit are not two different things. Existence is materialist-spiritualist; it is together, there is no duality.
But being materialist at the expense of others is what others have described as exploitation. Would you approve of that?
Not at all. I don’t possess a single Rolls Royce – you were talking about Rolls Royces, I don’t possess any.
Who owns them?
My people possess them.
But you use them.
They allow me for one hour. If they don’t allow, I will stop.
You go every day and say, “May I please…”?
Every day I go for a ride for one hour and my people allow me. I am not against riches, and I am not against luxury – but I am not asking anybody.
But we see others are…
You were talking about the watch.
Is it original diamonds, or is it imitation?
Are you a jeweler?
Is it imitation? I'm not an expert on jewelry, but it looks rather genuine. Is it?
It is not. To me, diamonds or stones are the same.
I see.
I enjoy it, it is beautiful; and it has been made by my people. It is not Piaget, but they have defeated Piaget. And these are all ordinary stones.
Do you know how many Osho enterprises there are in the world?
No, I don’t know and I don’t bother.
But nevertheless you enjoy a kind of luxury. Would you agree with that?
I am a perfect showman.
Even if you don't own them, if you want to hire a Rolls Royce…I wouldn't be able to afford it.
Not one, my people have managed to have ninety.
But it's very uneconomical to have ninety Rolls Royces, have them in the garage and use one a day.
We don’t bother about economics, economy, future. They are going to have 365.
But wouldn't it be better to let your people enjoy the fruits of their work a little bit more, spread it a little bit more?
That is up to them. My commune has hundreds of other cars, hundreds of buses, four planes, they have everything. It is not that only I am enjoying luxury – they have everything. It is simply that out of respect they will not use a Rolls Royce. And I am using it because I have tried all the cars and only the Rolls Royce seat suits my backbone.
And a Mercedes wouldn't be good enough?
I have tried it; it was not good enough. Not even other Rolls Royces, which are far more costly. I had a Corniche; it didn’t suit me. That was the costliest Rolls Royce. Then I had a Commarque – in cost that was the number two Rolls Royce; it didn’t suit me. Now I am on the third grade, the Silver Spur.
But you would not, in special regard to our German readers, recommend a Mercedes for wealthy people with backaches?
No, I have used it, I would not recommend it.
I doubt very much whether we will be able to print this, because they have big advertisements in Spiegel, you know.
You have to print it!
All right, we promise.
I love Germans, I have amongst my sannyasins a large number of Germans. And they are the most stable, intelligent, reliable, responsible people in the commune.
They also provide the most money into the funds.
Certainly.
And were they also the most frustrated before they came here?
I don’t know what they were.
We're trying to build a bridge toward current German civilization. Do you have the impression that frustration – that's what Andres Elten wrote – frustration with civilization drove them to you?
There may be some truth in it, because as man becomes more intelligent, more alert, he starts looking for meaning in life; and he does not find it – hence frustration. Then he starts looking for some way…
So Germany is first in intelligence but only second in making cars?
Certainly. You have not yet been able to create a Rolls Royce.
We are trying hard, you know.
You can try hard.
Osho,
Do you know who decides who comes comparatively close to you, who surrounds you in your study, in your everyday life? Obviously, not five thousand or two thousand people can be around.
No, in the morning everybody listens to me, the whole commune together. In the evening my secretary comes, if there is any problem for which she needs guidance from me. In the day Vivek takes care of my food. She comes only when I give her a call to bring my food or my tea. Otherwise, I remain completely alone.
Do you happen to know why the people sitting here have the privilege of seeing you tonight?
No, that is Isabel’s decision. People who are editing, people who are part of the publicity department, people who are concerned in some way with our magazine, with our newspaper, with our newsletter; these are the people Isabel has collected, because they need to be here.
In your Bible you told a nice, moving little story about a billionaire – an old man of sixty-four or so – who tried to join the movement or to join the commune, and then had to struggle with his family. This was in 1984, has he joined now?
I told the story you are mentioning this morning?
I can't recall his name, but it's a long episode in The Osho Bible.
What exactly was it? Tell me.
It's a story of an old man, a billionaire, who…
Yes, I remember now. I am such a materialist, the moment you said billionaire, I immediately remembered. He was here, he still comes almost every month. His family is very disturbed because he is the head of the family and head of the businesses and corporations, and they are naturally worried that if he becomes a sannyasin, he may start donating to my Rolls Royce collection. But nobody is interested in converting him to be a sannyasin. In fact, he was amazed that nobody has even asked him to be a sannyasin.
For almost a year he has been coming here. His family is worried, but nobody here is bothered. Here, nobody takes any interest in anybody’s personal life: why you are not a sannyasin, why you don’t become a sannyasin. If you have been coming for a year continuously and doing all the groups and the therapies, you must be somehow thinking of becoming a sannyasin? – even that is not asked.
Osho,
Just let me ask one last question that I asked Sheela before.
Drop Sheela completely.
No, I'm not asking her, I just want to ask you the same thing because I'm interested in what you think about it.
Just ask directly.
Yes. Why is it you have only women in your inner circle, in your inner power circle? Are you convinced that they are more intelligent, or that women are generally more intelligent than men, as Sheela put it? Or is there any other reason for it?
There are many reasons. The woman is not more intelligent than man. But because the woman has not been allowed to use her intelligence for centuries…
She kept it fresh.
…she has kept it fresh. That’s why she looks superior and more capable. Otherwise, there is no question; it is just a land which has not been used, not been cultivated, she gives better crops. Woman has always been symbolized by the earth, that’s why the husband… The word husband simply means the cultivator.
I would like to compensate because women have suffered for centuries. Man has done sheer inhumanity to women, they have been treated worse than cattle. So in my commune, I have allowed them to express and come up with their whole potential. One thing is certain, that they are more loving.
And as far as religion is concerned, a loving person has more possibility to grow than a man who is stuck in his head with logic, ideas, philosophies. The woman is free. If she falls in love, she is more courageous than any man. And to be with a master is a kind of love affair – for men, for women, it makes no difference – these people love me.
But not in the real sense of the word.
In the real sense of the word.
Not only philosophically.
Not in the unreal sense of the word to which you are accustomed.
Osho,
You said once that death would be a new door opening, with the whole of life condensed, a new dimension opening. On the other hand, you sharply attack any Christian or any other belief of life after death. What's the difference between a new dimension opening after death, and life after death?
The difference is that I am not saying that you have to believe in it, I am saying it is my experience. I am not telling you either to believe or disbelieve. I am simply telling you my experience, and side by side continuously insisting that you are not to believe in anything. I remember my past lives, so I know absolutely that life goes on and on. There is no end to life, only the body changes.
Osho,
Which past lives do you remember, and which ones do you like best?
The best is this moment.
And which ones do you remember?
I remember many: sometimes fragments, sometimes a few incidents, sometimes the whole series. But it is pointless.
Tell us some.
It would be meaningless.
But we are curious.
I am not curious.
If it's meaningless, it doesn't…the same as so many of your statements.
No, because they will be simply stories for you – what is the point?
Osho,
Well, if nothing is the point of anything – which is the whole point of your religion – you are completely unattackable.
I am.
We quite understand that.
Completely unattackable – because there is no point, no principle, no dogma. I will attack everybody and nobody can attack me. That is simply true.

[the journalist’s tape recorder clicks off]
Good! Now that was a coincidence.
This is a coincidence, right.
No more questions, thank you.
Good.
It has been a great pleasure talking to you.
I enjoyed it.
We are not yet enlightened, but we are quite satisfied with our interview.
One day you will get enlightened too.
Hopefully.

============================================================

Sally Hale
Associated Wire Services, Portland, United States
Osho,
Can the Rajneeshees and their neighbors in Oregon ever coexist peacefully?
Never.

Peter Gillins
UPI Wire Services, USA
Osho,
On ABC's morning interview program the other day, you said that you considered yourself to be the guru of the rich and you would leave it to the other religions to take care of the poor. In light of that, do you think you have an obligation to pay taxes on the money that your followers give you in the form of donations?
Nobody has given anything to me, and I don’t accept anything from anybody. Whatsoever I use is loaned to me just for the time being. I am wearing this watch only for these two hours.
Should your foundation be required to pay taxes on donations? Do the rich need charity – which is the purpose of tax-exempt status?
Those rich people are intelligent enough to pay their own taxes. I don’t have to take care of that. I myself have never paid any tax because my work is concerned with outcome, not with income.

Mark Haas
KATU TV, Channel 2, Portland, Oregon, United States
Osho,
Last year you brought the poor and homeless into your commune presumably to help them, then why do you accept the Rolls Royces that you accept, when perhaps that money could be used to help the poor and homeless that you wanted to help last year?
I have not accepted a single Rolls Royce. Those Rolls Royces are owned by the sannyasins. And remember clearly that I am not a Rajneeshee; you can see from my clothes. I am just a guest here, and if my host feels to take care of me and enjoys it, who am I to interfere with it?

Greg Hoy
7 Network Australia TV, Australia
Osho,
This morning you explained to us the difference between yourself and history's self-professed prophets and messiahs. You explained that you were not special at all and that you did not wish to place yourself on a high pedestal. Does it occur to you that there may be those that see the regal way you dress as opposed to those who follow you, see your jeweled, borrowed watches and now-famous borrowed Rolls Royces and think that you have very successfully placed yourself high on a pedestal, and it's an elevation you obviously enjoy?
I am certainly successful, I am going to be more successful, and I greatly enjoy my people, whatsoever they offer. But you must remember these are not real diamonds, and this is the cheapest, most beautiful watch in the whole world.
This is made by my own sannyasins – artists, craftsmen, jewelers. The same watch from Piaget is half a million dollars. This watch, as far as dollars are concerned, is not more than one hundred dollars. But if you want me to sell it to you, I am not going to sell it to you for ten million dollars. This is a work of love, and love cannot be purchased.

Richard Draper
KOIN TV, Channel 6, Portland, Oregon, United States
Osho,
Ten days ago you told a group here – and I quote – “We have to deprogram America from dirty politics, from fanatic religions, from all kinds of hypocrisy.” How do you propose to deprogram America?
America is too small a thing for me, we are trying to deprogram the whole world. I have my people around the world trying to deprogram every country, every religion, from all the conditionings that have been forced upon them.
And remember one thing: don’t get confused when I use the word deprogramming, because there are psychologists who are trying to deprogram people. They are not really deprogramming, they are re-programming. If a Christian moves out of the Christian fold, he is brought back forcibly to the deprogrammer, who reprograms him back into Christianity.
I am simply deprogramming and then leaving you alone to your own consciousness, your awareness, and to do whatsoever your insight allows you, your responsibility feels. It is you who have to be decisive about yourself. Neither the Bible, nor Koran, nor Gita; neither Jesus, nor Buddha, nor me – nobody is going to dominate and manipulate you like a puppet. A deprogrammed person is one who is no longer a puppet, who has declared his independence from the bogus God and his prophets, messiahs and incarnations.
We are already doing it. If you want to see how we are doing it, come to these people, be with these people, live with these people and you will understand it. There are things which can only be experienced. Don’t be afraid, because you will be deprogrammed; only through deprogramming you will know what it is and how it is done. You are welcome.

Jon Tuttle
KGW TV, Portland, Oregon, United States
Osho,
As we understand, there are just two Rajneeshee communes left in the United States. Across the country we hear reports that both membership and donations are on the decline. It appears that to date America has looked at Rajneeshism and said, “No thank you.” Did you come to the wrong country at the wrong time?
Whenever I would have come, it would have been the wrong time. I cannot come at the right time – in spite of all the watches given to me, I either come before time or come after time. But this is the fate of a person like me.
The message that I am giving will always be misfitting the existing society. But I enjoy to be a misfit, it means I am still alive. Those who fit completely, comfortably, are just small parts in a big mechanism. I have belonged to no society, to no country, to no religion. I will always be a misfit even amongst Rajneeshees, because I am not a Rajneeshee. It is just their love and their tolerance that they allow me to be here. Otherwise I don’t follow anything of Rajneeshism.
I can’t follow anything, I simply live moment to moment. It is perfectly true: I have come at the wrong time, but that is the way, the only way I can come. But we will try to change the time. I am not going to fit with your dead and rotten society; I am going to change it.
The other half of my question was whether this was the wrong country. Was it a mistake to come to the United States?
All countries are wrong, because the very idea of a country is idiotic. This whole earth, this whole world, is one.

Don Lattin
San Francisco Examiner, San Francisco, California, United States
Osho,
I would like you to elaborate on two things you said in Pune on what happens when religious movements become institutions – when Buddha becomes Buddhism or Rajneesh becomes Rajneeshism. You warned that once a religion becomes organized, violence enters into it. Organization is going to be violent; it has to fight its way. I wanted you to comment on that, in light of the weaponry we see and the security forces in Rajneeshpuram.
The other thing you said on that subject which I found very fascinating was “We have to learn one thing, not to institutionalize religion. When the master goes, let the religion go.” I wanted you to comment on that in the light of the announcement that was made here last summer that three committees were being formed to oversee Rajneeshism once you – if you – leave your body. Thank you.
Your question needs no answer, because the answer is all over the place: look at the guns around me; look at the organization of Rajneeshism – and I am still alive, I am not dead. But I am fighting with everybody, not only the people who are not Rajneeshees. I am fighting with every Rajneeshee too.
Don’t get institutionalized, don’t become an organization; remain an organism. Whatsoever I have said is absolutely true, and you can see the organization and the guns as evidence of it. And when I am going to die – who cares what happens? Please at least let me die peacefully.

Mr. Romano Giachetti
EPOCA Magazine, Italy
Osho,
I live in New York, but I am Italian.
That is great. In America everybody is a foreigner!
I have been in this city eight hours now, and I have a number of emotions, most of them strong. But I was following your lesson this morning and many things that you said that brought me back to Italy. My… This is a serious question!
Just ask it, don’t say it’s serious – you say it is serious you have already destroyed its seriousness. Just say it.
Among the many things that you said that impressed me, there were a few that brought me back to the culture that I thought I had left in Italy, namely that God doesn't exist; that any religion that is organized means exploitation of people. There was one Italian thinker, Antonio Gramsci, who has said many things that were very similar to yours, especially the one about God, the one about religion, and above all the one about the new kind of consciousness that we need if we want to change life on the planet. But he was one of the founders of the Communist Party.
Do you see any possibility for the birth of a new consciousness in the framework of communism, of all the systems that exist on the planet?
There is every possibility – not only possibility, but I would say almost certainty of its happening. Even in a communist country consciousness cannot be prevented from growing, from spreading; love cannot be prevented. In communist countries they can nationalize your house, your money, your other commodities, but they cannot nationalize your being. That is the same everywhere, it makes no difference. And to bring consciousness to its highest peak, any place is as good as any other place; the question is basically of the individual’s decision.
I have sannyasins in the Soviet Union, of course they cannot come into the open, they are underground sannyasins. They are being persecuted, but persecution somehow always helps people to spread the message and their number is growing every day. My books are prohibited in the Soviet Union, but my people are writing them by hand or making typescripts, and they are moving from hand to hand, from one person to another person. In fact in the basements where my people in Soviet Russia meet, they are more excited than anywhere else, because for the first time certainly they are doing something that gives them their dignity back.
Communism has nothing to do with God, heaven, or hell, communism is an economic theory. In fact, they should not interfere with religion, religion is not their domain. But Karl Marx is their Holy Bible, because he said there is no God, there is even no consciousness – because what consciousness we have is only a by-product. The moment we die, consciousness is finished.
They have not explored within, they have not meditated; they have simply believed in Karl Marx, in Das Kapital. So I include communism also in all the other rotten religions. It is a different kind of Christianity, a different kind of Hinduism, a different kind of Buddhism – and they all are bent upon destroying the individual. All the religions of the world, communism included, are bent upon destroying the individual, his freedom.
I am trying my best, even in communist countries, and the message is reaching. And the problem is not as big as it appears: even if there are only two hundred enlightened people in the whole world, the Third World War is not possible. So the work is not that big, we can manage it, we will manage it, and I am absolutely certain about it.

Jeff McMullen
60 Minutes, Australia
Osho,
Who is the better showman, in metaphysical terms if you like, you or President Ronald Reagan?
Nobody can beat me. I am the best showman in the whole history of man.
If that is true, what kind of show do you enjoy? Is this theater, or circus?
This is my circus, my carnival and I enjoy it immensely.

Marilyn Deutsch
Public Broadcasting System, United States
Osho,
I'd like to go back to the idea that you have said you are the rich man's guru. You know of suffering on this earth and starving people in Africa. Do you hurt with the knowledge that other people suffer so and die from starvation, or have to sleep on the streets?
I know, and I know also why they are suffering – they are suffering because of your priests and your politicians. Still all the religions are against birth control methods, they want abortion to be made illegal. Pope the Polack continuously says, “These children are sent from God, so we cannot prevent them.”
I am not responsible for the poverty that you see on the earth. If the world listens to me the poverty can disappear immediately. But they are listening to the wrong people, because they have been accustomed to listening to them for centuries. The Hindu shankaracharya, the Mohammedan caliph, the Christian pope, howsoever they may be different in small, meaningless matters, are absolutely together – that people should continue to produce more and more people. Then this world is going to die, naturally.
My few Rolls Royces – which are not mine, I just use them – I can give to Ethiopia. Do you think Ethiopia will be saved? If you are certain, then take all the Rolls Royces from here, and give them to Ethiopia. Ethiopia is created by the pope, and I have to sell my Rolls Royces? What kind of logic is this?
Why should I bother about the people who don’t listen to me, if they are starving? They are not even ready to understand me, to listen to me. I am saying this from my own experience.
India – I have been there, for thirty years continuously moving around the country, a wandering teacher. Nobody is ready to listen. They are ready to throw stones at me, they are ready to throw shoes at me, they are ready to throw knives at me, they made attempts on my life – and when these people start dying I have to sell my Rolls Royces? I am not going to do that.
Whether there is Ethiopia or not does not matter at all. What does it matter? If India disappears it will be unburdening the whole world, bringing a little more richness. In fact this world needs one fourth of its population, and the only way is for absolute birth control for twenty years. And abortion should not only be legal, it should be rewarded.
You should stop giving Nobel Prizes to criminals like Mother Teresa, who is increasing the world population by saving the orphans. You should give your Nobel Prizes to people who can bring this whole world to one fourth of its population.
Like yourself? Do you think you deserve a Nobel Prize?
I do not, because what will it do – only two more Rolls Royces!

Peter Coster
Australian Newspaper Service, Australia
Osho,
Why do you think such a disproportionate number of attractive young women are drawn to you?
I am not a homosexual; I am heterosexual. I love women and they love me. What I am saying to them is absolutely appealing, because I am speaking against all the male chauvinists of the past. I stand for absolute liberation of women from man’s hold, even to the extent that there should be no marriage, because marriage is a bondage, a life-long bondage.
People should live naturally just as all animals live – no marriage, no divorce, no quarrels, no problems. Have you seen a henpecked camel? And on the other hand, have you seen any man who is not a henpecked husband?
You have repressed the woman, you have taken away everything from her. They were not allowed to be educated, they were not allowed to be economically independent, they were not allowed even to go out of the house, they were not allowed even to show their face to other human beings. These people who have continuously killed the spirit of the woman are the worst criminals we have known, but they are worshipped. They are worshipped by men, because they have given men power over half of humanity.
Here, everybody is absolutely free. If two persons feel like making love, and they both agree, then it is nobody else’s business to prevent them. Anybody preventing them – any law, any court, any politician, any priest – is simply going beyond its limits.
My community is a community of love. And of course, as I have said, I am the greatest showman in the world. Women are bound to be attracted to me.
Osho,
You talk of physical love without ambition among sannyasins. Are you celibate?
No, why should I be? I am just natural, why should I be unnatural? If you want to meet celibates you go to a Catholic monastery, and you will meet celibates doing nothing but masturbating. I don’t see that anybody can be naturally celibate, he is bound to become a pervert in some way or other.
I am a simple, natural man, I follow my natural instincts in every way. I have loved many women – perhaps no man may have loved so many women. In the beginning I used to keep count; then I dropped it because what was the point?
Osho,
Why do you think outside people feel threatened by this community or you?
I don’t care at all; the outside does not exist, we are absolutely contented and happy herenow. They should take care of themselves. We are not hostile to them, we are simply unconcerned. They are hostile toward us.
Remember one fundamental law of life: if they are hostile, have hate toward us, sooner or later they are going to fall into my trap – because hate can turn into love very easily, just as love can become hate very easily. But my people have nothing to do with them. We are not hostile to them, we are not against them, we never think about them.
For five years I have not seen a single newspaper, I don’t read. I don’t see television. I don’t know what is being said about me; I don’t care, because I have no desire to be a respectable great master, a messiah, a prophet. I am just an ordinary man. And I am notorious enough – what is the point of reading it again and again?

Bruno Glaus
World Press Institute, Switzerland
Osho,
My question refers to the worldwide famine crisis. Don't you think your lecture this morning makes the economic system and the current governments very happy, because that's exactly what they think also? I quote: “Starvation is a way of natural balance” or, “Helping the poor is destroying their license to heaven.” That's exactly the way they see the world.
They must be quoting me.
Don't you think that by this view your community stabilizes the current political and economic system?
No, my community is so much more intelligent, that there is no need for nature to balance it. Here, in four years not a single baby has been born and four sannyasins have died – I am not going to overburden the earth. It is simply the way of nature to establish harmony.
It is in fact absolutely true, that service to the poor has been the basic cause of poverty remaining for centuries. You go on throwing a few crumbs from your table, and those poor people go on hoping for more, and your priests go on telling them, “Just wait a little. After death you are going to be in paradise. In paradise, even a camel can pass through the eye of a needle, but no rich man can enter the gates.”
They console the poor to remain poor, they make him happy because the rich man will suffer in hell. They make the rich man happy because their consolation of the poor prevents revolution. The rich man goes on contributing to make big cathedrals, churches, because he knows that if he can manage here, he will be able to manage there too – if even a camel can manage, do you think Rockefeller, Morgan or Ford will not be able to manage? They are certainly far more intelligent than a camel.
I am certainly against poverty, and I want to destroy it completely. But to destroy it completely one thing has to be understood – that all preventive measures should be taken.
People not giving birth to children should be rewarded, people giving birth to children should pay higher and higher income tax. People are doing just the opposite – if you have more children, you pay less income tax. This is strange: government policy is for family planning, and on the other hand if the family is bigger you support the bigger family and you don’t support the person who has no family.
The priests and politicians are responsible for keeping poverty somehow alive. They are still doing it: send help to Ethiopia, send help to India. It fulfills the ego of the super-rich countries, and it also keeps those poor countries in a subtle, mental slavery, always dependent on you.
If I am listened to, it is so simple a matter. We need one world government; we don’t need any countries. We need one government, one world and that government, that world, can easily see where the problem is.
Even a poor country like India, where people are starving, is exporting wheat to other countries. It seems we are living in a madhouse: Indians are dying, starving, and they are exporting wheat. But they have to export, because they want to make nuclear weapons. From where are they going to get nuclear plants? They need money for that.
Seventy-five percent of the national incomes of all countries goes to war, either fighting or preparing for fighting. If the world is one, seventy-five percent of the income of the whole world is immediately released. Poverty disappears like a dewdrop in the early morning sun.

Mary Catherine
Osho Times, Rajneeshpuram, Oregon, United States
Osho,
What do you have to say about politics?
Do I have to say? I curse it, it is the calamity that has made us live for centuries in suffering. Politics is absolutely unnecessary. But politicians will not allow it to become unnecessary because then they lose their presidencies, their White Houses, their Kremlins, their prime ministerships.
Politics is not needed, it is really out of date. It was needed because nations were continuously fighting – in three thousand years there have been five thousand wars. If we just dissolve the boundary lines – which exist only on the map not on the earth – who will bother about politics? Yes, there will be a world government, but this government will only be functional. It won’t have any prestige to it, because there will be no competition with anybody. If you are the president of the world government, so what? You are not higher than anybody else.
A functional government means like the way railways are run – who cares who is the president of the railways? The way the post office is managed and managed perfectly – who cares who is the head postmaster general?
Nations have to disappear, and with the disappearance of nations politics itself disappears, it commits suicide. What remains is a functional organization that takes care. It can be made rotary – like a Rotary Club – so sometimes a black man is the head, sometimes a woman is the head, sometimes a Chinese is the head, sometimes a Russian is the head, sometimes an American is the head – but it goes on moving like a wheel.
Perhaps no longer than six months should be given to one person, more than that is dangerous. So for six months be president and then go down the drain forever. And no person should be chosen again. It is simply poverty of intelligence that you go on choosing the same person as president again, and again and again. Don’t you see it as poverty of intelligence? You don’t have any intelligent people? You have just one dodo to go with?
In one world there is no need for political parties, either. Individuals should decide individually. There is no need for any political parties, it is very destructive of democracy. Although people say that democracy cannot exist without political parties, I say to you democracy cannot exist if political parties are there, because they have vested interests.
Each individual is free to run for any post or to vote for anybody he feels right. And whoever comes out may be far wiser than your presidents and prime ministers. Perhaps because he is going to be there for only six months he cannot waste his time: inaugurating this university, inaugurating that bridge, inaugurating this road, inaugurating all kinds of nonsense and wasting time… And parliament is simply arguing about absolutely meaningless affairs as if they have eternity in their hands, a small bill takes years to pass.
A man who has only six months cannot allow this stupidity, he will choose scientific advisers, experts in different fields. For example, in economics he will find all the best economic minds in the world to advise him. He has not much time, he cannot go on with third-rate politicians who know only the art of lying and nothing else. If he has to decide about education, he will ask the advice of the great educationists of the world. But right now strange things happen…
In India, when I was there, in Morarji Desai’s government a man became the education minister of the central government. I know the man. I have seen many idiots, and he is only number two – because Morarji Desai is number one. He is the education minister, he is going to decide the whole educational system of the country.
But he decides nothing, the bureaucracy goes on running in the same way. They go on playing the small games of back-biting, of pulling legs, of making every effort to reach to the top. Just a single formula I give to you: one world.
Osho,
Many politicians have asked if you are running this place.
No, never. Who wants to fall back in all that bullshit? – it was so difficult to get out of it. It took many lives for me to get out of it all – and you are asking me to again take a dive into the bullshit? No, absolutely no!

Enrico Franceschini
La Republica, Italy
Osho,
I am Enrico Franceschini from La Republica, an Italian newspaper.
I love Italians, except their spaghetti!
If I may first follow up on the question concerning communism that a colleague of mine asked you before. You said this morning that messiahs, prophets, incarnations of God are cheating us, keeping us repressed and preventing us from rebelling against the status quo. You said that poverty and hunger are not a blessing. But communists have said these same things for many years and have tried to do something to eliminate poverty and hunger. What do you think?
Yes, they have tried to eliminate… Not poverty, but richness. And they have eliminated it. Now the whole of communist Russia is equally poor. That gives a certain satisfaction of course, but it is not my goal. I want to destroy poverty. I am all for the rich man, I am the rich man’s guru.
Osho,
If, as you said this morning, you are just an ordinary man, why should there be a buddhafield around you that makes the grass greener, and puts more birds in this valley?
It always does around an ordinary man. To be ordinary is the most extraordinary thing in the world. You can go around the world and you will never find an ordinary man. Everybody is exceptional, everybody is special, everybody is imagining himself to be something big.
I am just an ordinary man, that’s why the buddhafield exists around me. Become an ordinary man, and see.
Osho,
Since to laugh is so important to you and to this community, is there anything in the arts, like movies, literature, that makes you laugh? Do you like Woody Allen?
I am so happy that I am continuously laughing with my sannyasins – and there is no reason. Sometimes even I am surprised they are laughing, but I join them in their laughter. To me, life is not rational, it is very irrational. I enjoy everything – except spaghetti.

Tarcisius Munaku
World Press Institute, Kenya
Osho,
One correction: I am from Zimbabwe, not Kenya.
That’s okay. Wherever you are from, I am glad to see a black man. To me black is beautiful, and I am all for the black people, although they have not started coming to me; perhaps they are so poor, so downtrodden, that they are involved in their own misery. But take my message to them – that I would like as many black people as possible here.
I was going to ask how you can explain the lack of followers with black skin in this community? Not from Africa, but from the United States.
The world has been divided into the East and the West. Now it should be divided between the North and the South. The South has been completely denied, ignored, it has not been able to grow in intelligence. It has the same potential as the white people of the North – perhaps the black man has more potential than the white man.
One thing is certain, that the intelligence of black people has not been used for centuries, perhaps never. So it is absolutely raw, unused, ready to burst forth. They are not coming to me for the simple reason…
That you don't go to them.
…that me and my teaching are difficult for them to understand. Poor people may turn Catholic, may turn communist, but they cannot become Rajneeshee, because the poor people have hopes with the Catholics – yes, after life, after death. They have hopes with the communists in this life – of course it is a big bargain, but they are certainly impressed by those things.
What I am saying goes above their heads for a simple reason: you cannot ask everybody why they do not understand Mozart’s music… But what can Mozart do about it? You have to learn classical music, its delicacies – only then you can understand Mozart. I am speaking in favor of luxury, richness in all dimensions of life. Naturally the poor, wherever they are, will not feel in tune with me. But in fact, I am the only person they should feel in tune with. I can drag them out of their poverty.
Just look at my communes around the world. We have hundreds of communes around the world, and they are all living richly, joyously. We would like the same for you and for your country and for your people. But it is a very strange phenomenon, that you tend to listen to those same people who are the cause of your poverty, your degradation, your slavery.
In India I had experienced it; I was talking to people to make them free of all mental bondage, all spiritual slavery, but they were turning against me because they think their spiritual slavery is not slavery, it is something holy, a divine heritage.
It is very difficult. I can very easily reach people who have known the taste of richness and have found frustration in it, those who are educated and have found that all this education is worthless. It does not give you wisdom to live; it gives you only knowledgeability, that can make you somehow vegetate.
The gap is big, even in India. Here you will see all white people, in India it was the same. All white people, ten thousand sannyasins from all over the world, were living with me – but the Hindus were trying to kill me. They made attempts to kill me. Before ten thousand white people a Hindu stood up and threw a knife at me. That is their response. I can understand it, because I am speaking against their tradition, and they are so burdened with tradition they cannot imagine themselves free.

[sound of doors banging]

Has some black man reached there?

Sheela, Osho’s secretary replies: Today one of the press persons is reported to have come with a gun to see if somebody else had a better show than he did, then he was going to shoot you.

That’s great. Shoot me before all these media people. I would not like to die in a dark dismal room lying on a bed. Shoot me! This is the right moment. I have done everything that I wanted to do, I have experienced everything that is possible to human consciousness. There is nothing to lose. Shoot me this moment. Gather courage, don’t be afraid. I will tell my guards not to prevent you. My guards are not to shoot the person. Assassinate me, because Jesus missed the media… At least don’t let me miss the media.
Osho,
How do you know there is hunger and starvation in Ethiopia when you don't read the newspapers, when you don't watch television? Where do you get the information?
Just from your questions – that’s enough for me. I answer your questions, that’s enough. I don’t want to go into details. I have a vision of my own, a clarity. I am just like a mirror; you come before it and the mirror will reflect you. The mirror is not a photograph – the moment you are gone, the mirror is again empty.
I am just an empty mirror: you ask the question, I will respond with my totality. But my response is pure, it is not the response of a scholar. It is not out of knowledgeability, information, it is simply the clear insight of an ordinary man.

John Ng’anga Thuruo
World Press Institute, Kenya

Great, I was thinking there is only one. Two… Two is too many!
Osho,
You described prophets, Jesus and other messiahs as liars. What makes you think that what you teach is the truth?
I am not teaching anything, so there is no question about my teachings, nobody can ask whether they are true or not. I am teaching only methods. I don’t give you any dogma, any philosophy that you can discuss and argue, and find out whether it is true or not. I give you only a method. Practice the method, and you will experience what I am saying. Your experience will prove that what I am saying is truth.
These people here are here because they have experienced something. They have left their countries, their families, they have left everything they had, just to come to me.
And look at me. This is stupid; when you are asking a question, looking here and there is simply stupid. Just look at me! And listen to what I am saying, because when you are moving this way and that, you are not listening. Perhaps you are thinking that it is nothing.
I am listening.
Then you must have understood what I said: I have no teachings, I have only methodologies. I am a scientific person; science has only experiments, I have only experiments.
Those who are courageous enough go through the experiment, and if they find something there, it becomes their truth. It is not my truth. I don’t emphasize to believe in me. Even the method has to be accepted only as hypothetical.
This is very pleasant for me because I don’t have any principles: nobody can contradict me, nobody can criticize me, nobody can say that what I am saying is not true. To say that, he will first have to go through the experiment, the meditation, the silence, the joy, the blessing, and he will know. And I have never come across a single person who has followed the path and has not reached. Existence is very compassionate.
Osho,
The followers love you so much – I have seen that – and you must be aware of a community like this that lived in Jonestown, Guyana, who committed suicide some years back. Don't you think that if you ever told them to take a potion, they would do so?
They love me, I love them; how can I help them commit suicide? Reverend Jim Jones was a Christian. And the whole responsibility of Jonestown’s suicidal act is the responsibility of Christians from Jesus to Pope the Polack. All Christians are responsible for it because they have been teaching that all that is beautiful is beyond death. Jesus was doing the same as Reverend Jim Jones, they belong to the same category. Jim Jones was only repeating Jesus. Jesus was saying “You are all going to be with me, and soon I will come back and take all of you into the glory of God.” Two thousand years have passed, the guy has not been seen again.

Nevil Aschen
National Public Radio, United States
Osho,
Is it planned that the leadership of the Osho foundations and organizations are all female? Is there a reason for that?
Yes, there is a reason. I love women, and I want to give them all that has been taken away from them through the whole history of man. This is just a little compensation. The women are running this whole circus of mine, and they are doing it beautifully. There are other reasons also: a man is more head-oriented. He thinks: for and against. It is really very difficult for a man to say a total yes or a total no. He is a split personality. Some part of him says yes, some part of him says no.
The woman functions through her heart, which knows no division. If it says yes it is total, and yes is beautiful only when it is total. If it says no it is beautiful. Anything which is total has a beauty. Anything which is half-half, fifty-fifty, is schizophrenic.
So not only are the women, who are in a biologically feminine body, running the show, but also the men who are here have become more feminine than they would ever have imagined. They have become more graceful, more loving. Their heads are no longer in the way, they have fallen deep into their hearts. In fact, all my sannyasins are women!

Howard Sattler
6PR Radio, Australia
Osho,
You have been continually telling us that you have the greatest circus in the world and as we know, great circuses travel. I wonder if you would respond to stories from the southwest of Australia that you are about to tour the circus there, and that the circus is going to set up its big top there near a little timber town called Pemberton.
Spread the rumor that I’m coming!
I wonder if you would like to tell the people there, particularly the Christian leaders who have been leading a legal and a moral battle against your people over there, what they can expect if the circus comes to town? What is your message for them?
They are going to be shocked by my message. Make it clear to them that my coming to Australia is going to create an immense turmoil in the whole continent, because I don’t believe in their morality – it is all hypocrisy. I don’t believe in their values, which are only a mask, and I’m going to hammer on that mask as hard as I can.
My whole work is to reveal your original face to you. Naturally, if you hammer on somebody’s mask he freaks out, because he has been thinking that that mask is his face. So the first response to me is always that of shock. But if he has some guts – which I think Australians have – if they have some guts, they will wait to see what is behind the mask. Let the mask slip and you will be surprised: your personality was just mumbo-jumbo. This is your individuality, your true being – and it brings freedom with it, it brings wisdom with it, it brings a new kind of morality with it.
So just tell them to get ready!
We're ready! Thank you.

Tom Senior
KPTV, Portland, Oregon, United States
Osho,
Getting back to your wristwatch for a second: as an enlightened master, why do you care what time it is?
Just for your sake: I know the heat; my people are suffering and in the heat you must be suffering. I can continue forever. I am sitting in an air-conditioned place, you are not. It is just a little bit of concern for my people and for you all, who come from all over the world. I don’t want you to be ascetics. I want you to enjoy Rajneeshpuram, not to suffer in the heat here. Otherwise there is no problem, I can stop looking at the watch. You seem to feel offended by it: if that is so then it is great, because to offend is my whole work.

Carlo Silvestro
Grazia Magazine, Italy
Osho,
What kind of love is possible between a man and a woman? Is there any possibility of a relationship between a man and a woman not entangled in the usual pattern of sadomasochism?
It is a very significant question. Ordinarily, religions have made it impossible, they have destroyed any beautiful relationship between man and woman. There was a reason to destroy it: if a man’s love life is fulfilled, you will not find so many people in churches praying. They will be making love, early morning love, on Sundays. Who bothers about the idiot who is preaching in the church?
If people’s love lives are of immense content and beauty they won’t bother about whether God exists or not, whether the philosophy preached in the Bible is true or not. They are so contented with themselves. Once in a while it happens that I pass on the road and two lovers are hugging, they don’t even look at me. I feel so happy; they must be in an immensely groovy place.
Religions have destroyed your love by creating marriage. Marriage is the end, not the beginning – love is finished. Now you are a husband, your beloved is a wife. Now you start trying to dominate each other, it is politics, no longer love. Now every small thing becomes a point to be argued.
And marriage is against human nature, so sooner or later you are going to be fed up with the woman, and the woman is going to be fed up with you. And it is natural, there is nothing wrong in it. That is why I say marriages should not be there, because marriages make the whole world immoral. A man sleeping with a woman, and they do not love each other but still are trying to make love because they are married – this is ugly, disgusting. This I call real prostitution.
When a man goes to a prostitute, it is at least straightforward. He purchases a certain commodity. He does not purchase the woman, he purchases a certain commodity. But he has purchased the whole woman in marriage – for her whole life. All husbands and all wives without exception are caged, trying to get free of it. But sometimes in countries where divorce is allowed and they manage to change the partner, within a few days they are in for a surprise. The other woman or the other man proves an exact copy of the one they have left behind.
I remember hearing about one man who married eight times – of course, it must have been in California. When he married the eighth time, after two days he recognized that he had married this woman once before. And then he started thinking, “What have I gained by changing women? It all comes back to the same rut.”
Stability in marriage is unnatural, monogamy is unnatural. Man is by nature a polygamous animal, and anybody who is intelligent will be polygamous. You can’t go on and on eating Italian food – once in a while you want to visit the Chinese restaurant!
I want people to be completely freed from marriage and marriage licenses. The only cause of their being together should be love, not law. Love should be the only law, then what you are asking about is possible. The moment love disappears, say goodbye to each other. There is nothing to fight for: love was a gift of existence, it came like the wind, it has gone like the wind.
You will be grateful to each other. You may part, but you will remember those beautiful moments you had together. You may remain friends, if not lovers. Ordinarily lovers become enemies when they part. In fact, they become enemies before they part – that’s why they part.
Ultimately, if both persons are meditators – not just lovers, but trying to transform the very energy of love into a meditative state… And that is my whole approach toward man and his relationship with woman. It is a tremendous energy, it is life. If, while making love to your woman, you can both move into a silent period, utterly quiet, no thought passing through your minds – as if time has stopped – then you will know for the first time the real taste of love. That kind of relationship can remain for the whole life, because it is no longer just biological attraction, which fades away sooner or later. Now you have a new dimension opening.
Your woman has become your temple, your man has become your temple. Your love has become your meditation, and this meditation goes on growing, and when it is growing you start becoming more and more joyful, more and more nourished, more and more strengthened. There is no relationship, there is no bondage to remain with the woman. But who can renounce joy? Who can ask for a divorce when there is so much joy? People are asking for divorce because there is no joy, just despair: a twenty-four hour nightmare.
My people here and around the world are learning that love is only the jumping board. There is much more ahead of it, which is possible only if two persons remain intimate for a longer period of time. With a new person, you begin again from scratch. And there is no need for a new person, because now it is not the biological or the physical aspect of the person, but you have come into communion spiritually.
To transform sex into spirituality is my basic approach. And if both are lovers and meditators they will not mind, once in a while, if you visit a Chinese restaurant, or she goes to visit some continental restaurant! It is not a problem. You love the woman; if she is feeling happy once in a while with somebody else, what is wrong in it? You should be happy that she is happy, you love her. Only meditators are capable of dropping jealousies.
Be a lover – that is a good beginning, but not the end. Go on trying to be more meditative. And be quick, because your love may be finished the day the honeymoon is finished. So meditation and love should go hand in hand. If we can create a world where lovers are meditators too, then there will be no problem of continuous torture, nagging, jealousies, hurting each other in every possible way.
Love without meditation is bound to turn into hatred any moment – beware – but love with meditation will become deeper and deeper, more and more intense. And perhaps two persons will feel together so attuned, a kind of at-one-ment, that they would love to be together forever.
But that is not a condition. Any day, if one partner decides, “Now I am moving from this crossroad, away from you. Thank you for all that you have done. I will remember all these beautiful moments, but I cannot continue” – that’s enough. No court is needed to decide for you that you are married, to decide for you that you are divorced. What an insane world we are living in, even our love is not free.
And when I say that love should be our freedom, they condemn me all over the world as “the free-sex guru.” Certainly I am all for freedom of love. And in a way they are right: I don’t want sex to be a commodity in the market. It has to be freely available – just two persons agreeing, that’s enough. And this agreement is only for the moment: no promises for the future, because they become chains around your neck. They will kill you. No promises for the future, just relish this moment. And if next moment you are still together, you will be able to relish it more.
So I don’t use the word relationship. I use the word relatedness. You can relate, but don’t create relationship. If your relating becomes a lifelong process, good. If it does not, that is even better. Perhaps this was not the right partner, and it is good that you separated. Find another partner, there must be someone somewhere who is waiting for you. But this society does not allow you to find out who it is who waiting for you, who is the person who will fit with you.
They will call me immoral. To me, this is morality, what they are trying to practice is immoral.
Grazie, Osho, I hope you come to Italy soon, too.

Burt Rudman
KOMO Television, Seattle, Washington, United States
Osho,
We're here to do a story on your personal secretary, and I was hoping that you might be able to describe your personal relationship with her, and perhaps why it was with Sheela that you spoke during your vow of public silence.
What does he mean?

Sheela: He wants to do a story on me, and he would like you to tell him why…

You can just see Sheela. She is so beautiful, do you think anything more is needed? I have chosen her as my secretary because she has lived with me for many years, and I have seen not only her physical beauty, but also her spiritual beauty. I have seen her intelligence, I have seen that she can manage this whole commune of crazy people.
Osho,
She was discussing with a German magazine recently the fact that the reason that most of the people in the Rajneesh Trust were women was because women are more intelligent than men. Do you share that feeling with her?
That’s true. Even if a man wants to function more intelligently, he will have to acquire some feminine qualities. As a man, he is just a barbarian.
To acquire some feminine qualities – and just see, all qualities are feminine: love, compassion, sympathy, service, sharing – all qualities are feminine. Even if a man wants to function at the highest peak of his intelligence, he will have to be guided by his heart.
And we are suffering so much because we have ignored the heart, we have completely bypassed the heart. Our whole educational program is how to bypass the heart – the feeling part, the emotions, the sentiments, the smiles, the tears – and just go directly to the head. And the head is the most insensitive place in the whole of existence.
Inside the skull there is no sensitivity at all. Even if a bullet is put inside your skull or my skull under anesthetic, and I wake up, I will not feel that there is anything inside the skull. The skull is completely insulated in a way – it is insensitive. That’s why all of science has gone on in an insensitive way and has become a curse rather than a blessing.
The heart has to be the master, and the head has to be the servant. Just because physiologically the heart is lower and the head is higher, does not mean that the head is superior. The superior part of your being is your heart. The delicate, the nice part, the most beautiful part, is your heart. So whenever anybody starts moving toward the heart, the heart guides the head. Then whatever you do, you do with sensitivity.
That’s why I said that all my sannyasins are women in essence. They have accepted the heart as the master and the head as the servant. As a servant the head is perfectly good, as a master it is absolutely wrong.

Ramateertha
Osho Times, Germany
Osho,
I was shocked hearing you support the production of test-tube babies, saying they could be geniuses, more beautiful and healthier than human beings. Surely the beauty of our inner being is all that matters? Or were you joking?
No. Very rarely I am serious, and at the time I made that statement I was very serious. I mean it – because the man that has been created by blind nature, blind biology, has not proved a real growth for humanity. You can see it.
Charles Darwin says that monkeys became man. But, since that time – that must have happened a million years ago – for these one million years man has not created something better. Monkeys were far more intelligent: at least they gave birth to humanity. Human beings seem to be absolutely impotent. They go on creating carbon copies of themselves. This has to be stopped.
I have heard: it happened in an office… The orders from above came that the office is too cluttered with old files – thirty years, fifty years old – they should be destroyed. But make sure that every file’s carbon copy is kept. But what is the point? Why destroy the originals?
Man has been meeting with women accidentally up to now. Hence, you feel shocked – anybody will feel shocked. I can understand – you think that a baby should receive the mother’s womb, the warmth of the mother, the care of the mother, the love of the mother. But, you know, there are many other things also in the mother: her nagging, her hatred, her jealousy, her stupidity. He will get all those things too.
And we can see, the specimens are available all over the world. This is what has come out of your human relationship: Adolf Hitler is born out of your human relationship, he was in a mother’s womb. Joseph Stalin is born in the same way. And all these criminals – Alexander the Great, Napoleon Bonaparte, Mussolini, Mao Tse-tung, Nadirshah, Tamerlane, Genghis Khan – history of full of these monsters. They have also come out of loving women.
I don’t trust any more in blind biology. I trust more in a conscious human being. It is better to give the birth of the child to a test tube, where we can choose the best semen, the best egg. And there is no need to be worried because they are anonymous; in fact, every hospital should have a bank. Just as they have banks for blood, they should have banks for semen and eggs; and they should look into the best semen-cell and the best egg, meeting in a very clinical way – in a test tube. They will not have the heritage of your ugly past. They will be fresh beings and we can program those eggs and the semen cells so that more health, more life, more intelligence becomes possible.
One of the great poets in India was Rabindranath Tagore. He was the thirteenth child of his father. In each love affair the man releases millions of living cells. Only one of them will become Ronald Reagan, he will reach the female egg. They all rush – it is really a great rush… Millions of living beings, although they are very small and you cannot see them with your eyes – and it is a big race, bigger than any race that happens on the earth.
Thinking of their size, the track between the semen and the woman’s egg proportionately is two miles long. If they were your size, the track would be two miles long. A two-mile track…and they are fighting hard to survive, because there is not much time. They are always close to the Third World War. They can only live two hours, not more than that. And only one cell reaches the egg and the egg closes. It rarely happens that two cells reach simultaneously – that’s why twins are born.
Rabindranath was the thirteenth child of his father. The other twelve proved just idiots, nobody even knows their names. Now, it is a long blind passage. If Rabindranath’s father had stopped after the twelfth child – which seems to be a good point to stop; one dozen is enough, more than enough – then you would have missed one of the most beautiful beings on the earth: a great poet, a great painter and a great human being – in every way beautiful.
But in a test tube it is so easy. Those twelve should have been discarded. We have chosen Rabindranath to be the first child – and who knows how much more potential would have been in him if he had also got the best female egg. Nobody knows.
We don’t know the potentiality of humanity, give it a chance. What I am saying is, give it a chance. It looks inhuman in the beginning. Everything new looks inhuman in the beginning. Did you know, when the first railway train moved from London to a nearby station – just eight miles’ journey – nobody was ready to sit in it, even for free. Lunch was served free, but nobody was ready to enter the train because the priest in the early morning said in church: “God never created a railway train; this is unnatural, this is dangerous, this is inhuman. Don’t sit in it.”
What do you think would have happened if people had stopped? There would have been no trains, no cars, no airplanes, no rockets to reach to the moon, and we have to reach to the stars. We need stronger bodies, we need more intelligent people, and we need people who are clean of all old crap. That is possible only if we make a clinical, medical arrangement for the birth of man. I am absolutely in support of it.

Bob Chase
KEX Radio, Oregon, United States
Osho,
For the last years we've been told that the reason for the vow of public silence was because you had nothing more to say, that you had said it all in your teachings and writings. Is your feeling now that there is something new to say, that the past bears repeating – or is it that you enjoy the showmanship in the setting that you have here today?
Your question implies so many things. First, my silence was not because I have said everything. My silence was because I wanted to drop those people who were hanging around my words. I wanted people who can be with me even if I am silent. I sorted out all those people without any trouble. They simply dropped out, three years was enough time. And when I saw all those people – and they were not many, but they were hanging around my words. I don’t want people to just believe in my words; I want people to live my silence. In these three years it was a great time to be silent with my people, and to see their courage and their love in remaining with a man who perhaps may never speak again.
When the work was done, when those people had left, there was no need to remain silent. I am back again, and I have much more to say – and I will always have much more to say. Even on my deathbed, or in the chair being assassinated, I would still be saying something. I will not die silently.
And I enjoy talking to my people, I enjoy their response. And, of course, I am a showman. Everybody is, they just don’t have the guts to say it.

Prem Isabel
Press Relations Bureau, Rajneeshpuram, Oregon, United States
Osho,
I'm not a journalist, but I deal with journalists all the time. I have a question that everybody asks me but nobody asked you today. And that is, during the time you didn't speak, Sheela was speaking all over the place, and many people got offended by her comments. Everybody asks, “How come Sheela is your spokesperson? How come Sheela makes those statements? She is antagonizing people.”
Would you please say something about this?
I was also very much offended by Sheela. Whenever she came back, I hit her hard, because she was not the way I would like her to be – really outrageous! She was falling below the standard. And I was continuously telling her, “Don’t be worried, we don’t have anything to lose. We have the whole world to gain and nothing to lose. Be outrageous!”
There is a saying: no news is good news. It is half – the other half I have to make: if no news is good news, then good news is no news! It has to be sensational. I have been sharpening her like a sword. “Go, and cut as many heads as you can!” I agree, I was also offended.

Kathleen Stone
KBND Radio, Bend, Oregon, United States
Osho,
You have said you have no interest in the outside, no interest in politics. Why then did you take over the town of Antelope, or your followers, your community? And why did you say you would like your followers to take over the world?
I am not a Rajneeshee, first, you have to remember.
I understand that.
And I have not taken over the dead city of Antelope.
But your followers…
They are not my followers either, they are my fellow travelers.
I have such a big caravan, if a few people decide to make a dead city alive, why should I interfere? They should try to find other dead cities around and make them alive with laughter and joy. That’s why I said – because the question was asked to me, “Are you going to take Oregon?” – I said, “No, it is too small a thing. I would like my people to take over the whole world.”
But that was simply a joke and I love jokes.

Penny Allen
Esquire Magazine, United States
Osho,
A number of your sannyasins have told me that they sense a certain ripeness in this moment. They feel that the fruit of Rajneeshism is ripe now and ready to be plucked from the tree. Do you feel this also, and is this why you have chosen this moment to address the questions of the press?
Yes, they are right, And this is the right moment to declare to the whole world that our tree has blossomed and the fruits are ripe, and to invite them to come and share with us. It is true.

============================================================

Jeff McMullen
60 Minutes, Australia
Osho,
Of the many extraordinary things that you say, the one on which I would never debate you is that you are an ordinary man. How ordinary a man are you?
Extraordinarily.
Are you the new man that you say the world needs?
Yes.
Do you put yourself on a plane with other great men: Jesus, Buddha, Krishna?
No, I am just myself and I don’t belong to any past, past prophets, messiahs. I am the beginning of a new man, absolutely discontinuous with the past. I have nothing to do with Jesus, Moses, Abraham, Krishna, Buddha. To me they are all dead and of no use for the future new man. In fact, they are the barriers for the new man to be born. I am fighting against all those fellows.
Are you a god?
No, there is no God. God is the greatest fiction created by cunning priests, and the new man is not going to have any God. The new man is enough unto himself. No God is needed. God is needed by retarded people.
Was Einstein retarded? He believed in a God.
Then I will have to explain to you that Einstein was a great physicist, he was a genius, but as far as other directions of life are concerned he was below average.
I am reminded: he was traveling in a bus. He gave money for a ticket, the conductor returned change to him. He counted it and said to the conductor, “This is not right, you are cheating.” The conductor counted it again and he said, “Mister, it seems you don’t know how to count.” And this is the greatest physicist of the world.
It is a strange phenomenon that the great scientists are very stupid as far as religion is concerned – they are absolutely ignorant about it. Even the ordinary man is more aware of religion. The expert is basically to be understood as a man who knows more and more about less and less. The ultimate expert is one who knows all about nothing. The religious man is not an expert. His situation is just the opposite: he knows less and less about more and more, and ultimately he comes to a point when he knows nothing about all. And that nothingness has been called nirvana. It is not ignorance, it is innocence.
Osho,
Let me try you on some other “not so ordinary men.” If I give you a name, perhaps you could give me one of your words of wisdom for each of these people: Mahatma Gandhi.
He was the most cunning politician the world has ever known.
Adolf Hitler.
He was the most idiotic politician the world has ever known.
Pope Paul.
He should be behind bars.
Mother Teresa.
It is time for her to jump into a lake.
Osho,
Your followers laugh and yet, with the kind of very unsettling raw statement that you make, you clearly disturb people who see that sort of statement as profane.
I love to disturb people, because only by disturbing them can I make them think. They have stopped thinking for centuries. Nobody has been there to disturb them, people have been consoling them. I am not going to console anybody, because the more you console them, the more retarded they remain. Disturb them, shock them, hit them hard, give them a challenge. That challenge will bring their capacities to the climax.
How would you feel if the Hells Angels – a motorbike gang, leather jackets, helmets, a terror gang – how would you feel if the Hells Angels rode into Rajneeshpuram and disturbed your tranquil oasis?
We will enjoy them, we will receive them as our guests. They cannot disturb us, nobody can disturb us. Even if they throw an atom bomb on Rajneeshpuram, the atom bomb will have a shock, because we will be celebrating, dancing, enjoying. Even death cannot disturb us; we will celebrate it. We celebrate it: whenever a sannyasin dies – even when my father died – we danced, we celebrated. We enjoyed a beautiful departure, a goodbye. So there is no question. Anybody can come, he will have an appropriate welcome.
Then why the armed guards and the perimeter around your existence here? Surely not anybody can come?
Those guards are the responsibility of the Rajneeshees, I am not concerned. I don’t interfere in anybody’s life, I have never interfered in any way. If somebody wants to assassinate me, I am the last person to give him any resistance. I will simply welcome him. I will say, “Glad to meet you. Shoot me and let me be free from the body and its cage.”
But if people who love me want to protect me, I am not going to interfere with their work, either. Those guards have nothing to do with me. They are managed by people who love me. Now, I am an outsider to both – the assassin and the guard. It is between them, they have to settle it. I am simply an outsider.
A technical limitation of film, we have to put a new magazine on.
Okay.
Even in the atomic age.
Okay.
Osho,
Hollywood isn't easy. You seem very fond of the Wild West here in America. Do you have an equal affection for the wild west of Western Australia? Do you have any intentions of going there and taking your followers there?
I never function through intentions, I am a man of spontaneity – so beware. Any time I can come with my whole circus. I may never come. I never decide for the next moment; one moment is enough to live at one time, and nobody can get two moments together. We always get one moment, so why bother about other things? – because while we are bothering about other moments, this moment will be gone, empty, unlived, and that is the misery of humanity. They go on thinking of tomorrow and today is disappearing. We are the people who are living in the present. So it is possible.
But not likely.
It is likely.
Not at this moment.
Not at this moment. But perhaps tomorrow morning.
Osho,
You do love this theater, you said that. You laughed yesterday… It is a circus. But in another moment will you tire of this circus, the trappings?
No, never, because it is such a beautiful circus, and continuously changing. New flowers, new seasons go on coming. I am not tired of it. And the people who make my circus are not the animals of a circus; they are the most intelligent people of this earth, the very salt of the earth. They go on creating something new every day. It is always new, and it is always new also because I never compare anything. Yesterday is gone, I don’t bring it back to compare with today. Tomorrow has not come, who cares? It is always new, fresh.
People get tired because they go on comparing. And comparison means you have lived this thing many times, you have seen this rose flower many times; so slowly, slowly you become blind to it, you start taking it for granted. I take nothing for granted and my people take nothing for granted, so every moment we are ready for any surprise.
The day I left India, I informed my people to prepare immediately, I am going to leave. It was a shock! Ten thousand sannyasins were settling there, making arrangements, purchasing houses, lands. And with twenty-four hours notice I told them to make arrangements, that I was leaving. And ordinarily I never come back to any place that I have left in my life. So I am not tired or bored, I am rejoicing in it as much as possible.
There is a slight technical problem with the film.
You seem to have very ancient equipment in Australia!
This is Hollywood. This is film as distinct from mere television, mere videotape. But the final look – you talk of beauty and goodness – well, the beauty of the film is still the excellence, I think, which is why we take a little more time. But when we get there, it is worth it.
That is good.
Osho,
You sound like you will not go back to India. Even if the moment were to change, that doesn't seem to be a place you would be drawn to again?
Nothing can be said about it. But in my whole life I have never gone back. The places I have left, I have left. So looking at my crazy behavior of the past, it is very unlikely that I will go to India. But then one never knows, I am not a reliable person.
That is your most reliable quality.
We have had a very peaceful time here for… It has only been a few days but…
Come again and again.
…given the madness that we parade around in for most of the year it's been very enjoyable. Thank you for sharing it with us.
Come whenever you feel like having a holiday.
You have so many Australians here already, what do you think of us?
I love you. I see a beautiful human being in front of me, open, available. I don’t see you as a prejudiced man. I don’t see you as unintelligent, and I see every possibility of growing more and more into higher and higher consciousness. I don’t predict ordinarily, but I see one of my potential sannyasins sitting here in front of me.
Osho,
Did you follow others, as others now follow you?
No. I have never followed anybody, and I have never allowed anybody to follow me. These are my fellow travelers. My sannyasins are not my followers, they are my friends.
Osho,
I think I am just a fellow traveler too. I am an ordinary man, I am an ordinary storyteller. When I ask about Australians and you say we are open… I think we are open. When Sheela came to Australia, she has learned your skill for how to unsettle people, she has made people burn. Is that really necessary? What do you win with that, wouldn't you have more support to show…?
We don’t need any support, I am not a politician seeking support. I want to share something, but that is possible only when you are shocked and disturbed in your sleep. I have to wake you up, and Sheela has been doing a good job of shaking people and waking people. She prepares the ground for me. When she has done enough, then perhaps I may come there to find people with whom I can relate heart to heart. And there are millions of people in the world who need just a little bit of shaking and they will be awake. Their sleep is not very deep.
You do seem to like to shake the rich most. Maybe it is the jingle of the coins from the pocket you like to shake loose.
The reason is that the poor man is fast asleep; otherwise he cannot tolerate his poverty. He needs deep sleep, he needs some opium – given by the politicians, by the priests. His sleep is not just ordinary sleep, it is narcotic. The rich man needs no consolation from anybody. The rich man is not worried about heaven and hell. He knows he can purchase everything – the priest, his God, his heaven, his hell – everything can be purchased. He is not in the same situation as the poor man, he can be easily awakened. Between the poor man and me there is a great distance.
And the black man? There are few blacks here.
A few blacks have come, because they are as beautiful people as anyone. The problem is, once a person comes here and just gives us a little chance to shake him and wake him, he is not going to leave the place. So those few black people had come just for three months to live with us – we had invited anybody to come and live with us for three months. They have remained. Many have gone, but they go on continuously writing to us that they miss it and would like to come back, because for the first time they had been treated as human beings.
For the first time a white man has hugged a black woman or a black man has hugged a white woman, made love to a white woman. For the first time he was not thought to be second rate. He was respected, just the way everybody else is respected. There was no discrimination.
The problem is, people are afraid to come, because the politicians are making them afraid. The religious leaders are making them afraid, creating all kinds of rumors, preventing them from coming here because they know perfectly well that anybody who comes here with open eyes, an alert mind, is going to fall in love with this place.
Osho,
It is very peaceful, any visitor here finds it peaceful. One of the rumors about the place is about that side of free love: if there is this much free love here, why the rubber gloves in the hotel rooms? What has changed?
It is being careful about my people. They should take every precaution that they don’t get AIDS, which is spreading fast, and there is no cure for it. Once you have AIDS, you have only two more years to live at the maximum. That is the maximum, most probably within six months you will be finished. I would not like my people to be finished that ugly way. Love is free, AIDS is not free.
Osho,
You are more certain about some of these things than scientists that I have talked to. What is it, how does an ordinary man become a guru, an Osho, with such clarity and certainty about these things?
Only an ordinary man can become so certain, so clear. The extraordinary man is so much burdened with his ego, with his knowledgeability, with his schizophrenic mind, with all kinds of arguments.
I am reminded of Immanuel Kant, one of the most important philosophers of the West. A woman fell in love with him and he said, “I will have to think about it.”
Now, you don’t think about love – either yes or no – but Immanuel Kant is a big philosopher. He thought about it for three years and he managed to find all the arguments for marriage and against marriage. The trouble was, they were equal. After three years he went to the woman’s house and knocked on the door. He had gone to say, “Forgive me, I cannot decide. The arguments are equal, fifty-fifty.” But the woman was not there…
Please finish.
Let them change [the film.]
Talking to Australians will not be like Good Morning, America. We don't plan to exhaust you. There is enough wit and wisdom and magic and theater already in what we have, to fill twice the length of our television program. But there are one or two more special questions that I would like to bring to you, if you could.
Okay.
Osho,
The dam that you have here is named after Gurdjieff – this is not the question for the camera, but I am curious about it – he was also a fellow traveler on the road. Was he to you at least, if not an inspiration, a remarkable man?
He was an immensely remarkable man, in fact nobody else has been so remarkable in this century. But he was an ordinary man. He never claimed that he was a prophet, he lived just like an ordinary man – but he was most remarkable. His insight and clarity are just inconceivable.
He moved, whereas you sit still – do you think one is superior? He seemed to be a traveler; whereas you are traveling here, but you physically rest anywhere. It seems not even very important to you, where you are in that sense. Do you think one is a superior choice to the other, or…?
No, there is no question of any superiority. It is just with whom your heart starts beating. It is just a question of liking, loving – somebody may like Mozart and somebody may not like him. Somebody may like Vincent van Gogh and somebody will think him crazy, mad.

[noises are heard, caused by problems with the video equipment]

If you are ready, I have to finish my answer.
He still has his hands in the magic bag.
So when he is ready please tell me, because I don’t forget anything.
You can talk about things that you don’t want to put on the film.
Osho,
Without giving you the wit and wisdom of yet another ordinary man, one thing might be useful – maybe more to the Rajneeshees – but I think the toy soldiers that you have here are a little silly. I know that they are doing it out of love for you, but it would seem to me out of kilter with the serenity of the place. Probably the more peaceful side of what you do here in this oasis in the desert is enough defense, without the Wild West trappings. That seems to me what governments and armies do, and I don't think that the Rajneeshees need to be the same as the rest.
You have not been here long enough, and you have not seen… I have been attacked many times.
Here though, or in India?
In India. Efforts were made to poison me, to kill me. I know those guns are silly – in an age which is nuclear, they are carrying toy guns. But what is the harm, if they enjoy and they feel that they are doing something?
It doesn't upset you?
It is perfectly okay. Let them enjoy. They are toys, but what they are doing – their love is not a toy. They cannot have nuclear weapons, otherwise they would have nuclear weapons too. Whatsoever they can…

[the film is ready]

I come back.
Would you like me to pick up on where we were talking?
Yes.
Osho,
You said that Immanuel Kant couldn't choose…
Yes, that will do.
…between one very simple matter of love. Could I interject and ask you something on that?
Just wait, let me finish because I had not finished it.
He knocked on the woman’s door. There was no woman, an old man opened the door and recognized Immanuel Kant. Kant asked about the woman, he said, “She was my daughter, but she has been married for three years and she has two children, too. She does not live in this town anymore. What business do you have with my daughter? You go and think a little more.”
Thinkers are the most clumsy people in the world, most indecisive. I am not a thinker. I simply see, and whatsoever I see I say it without bothering about the consequences. I am an absolutely open person – there is nothing private in me.
Osho,
The same question then, that Immanuel Kant had to answer: the yes or no about love. Are you in love with Sheela? Is she your…?
I am in love with so many women around the world. Sheela, of course, is one of them, but I cannot point out a single woman that I love. I love – and my love is not addressed to anybody in particular. And I have loved so many women, I don’t think anybody else could have managed it. Even Gurdjieff is far behind me in that matter. He loved many women, but not more than a dozen.
If Sheela is that special, is Sheela the power behind the throne? Is she the heir apparent to your spiritual kingdom?
No, there is no power, no kingdom. I am here, she is just a fellow traveler, as others.
It is a kingdom with more Rolls Royces than any other city in the world.
That is true. I am a man of very simple taste; I like the best of anything – this is certainly true. I would like this city to be in many ways the only city in the world which has that capacity. Certainly, we have ninety or more Rolls Royces, no city of a comparable membership can claim that. In every way: we don’t have a single beggar, we don’t have a single thief, we don’t have any crime, no murder in four years – in America, where twenty percent of the presidents are being murdered – no prostitution.
In many ways this place is unique, and we are going to make it more and more unique and beautiful. Just the stupid politicians cannot understand a simple thing: that we are not doing any harm to anybody. Don’t prevent us from doing things which are not harmful – but they go on, they are so afraid.
The governor goes on speaking against us and we have been inviting him, “First just come and visit. Be here and see the people and the place, and then if you feel to speak against us, speak against us. We have no problem with that. But at least be acquainted, at least be a gentleman.”
It doesn't feel like Jonestown to us.
It is just the opposite of Jonestown. They were death-oriented; we are life-oriented, we love to enjoy everything. They were just an unintelligent group of people – mostly black, uneducated, knowing nothing – following this man who was telling them, that if they go with him they will enter into the kingdom of God.
We are creating the kingdom of God here. In fact, we are waiting for God to knock on our doors some day and say, “Let me come in.” We are just the opposite. Reverend Jim Jones and his people are really the logical conclusion of Jesus and the Christian theology.
Not the logical conclusion of the power of one man over a group of people?
That was exactly what Jesus was doing, that is exactly what the popes have been doing – that is why I say he is the logical conclusion from Jesus through all the popes and all the Christian theologians. They have all been trying to prove the power, the glory of Jesus, his special-ness and his special connection with God… And if you follow him then you need not worry about the future, he will take care of you.
Here I teach people that nobody can take care of you. I am not your savior. I am not going to help you in any way to enter into the kingdom of God, but I can explain to you how we can live here in the kingdom of beauty, love, joy. To me God is a dead word. It is a dirty word, a four-letter word.
I think I would prefer to end our interview with the beauty of something you said earlier, rather than the ugliness of Jonestown.
I would like to talk to you a little more, if we can turn the microphones off – they need to get a few more shots of us sitting here, if we can continue talking…
Okay.
Do whatsoever you want to do.
For our purposes we are trying, in the space of the very condensed television program, to get your essence. It is trying to compress what you have been saying – for fifty-three years or fifty-three lifetimes – into a sixty-minute program, which is almost an impossible task. But we think that we have caught for the sake of our film some of the magic and the tranquility of this experience.
Good.
Osho,
I hope you don't mind my saying that I enjoyed the circus and the theater of it as much as…maybe that is close to a spiritual feeling, but to me you are truly one of the funniest people that I have ever met.
That is right.
You have a wonderful sense of humor. And where did you learn such timing?
I have never learned anything, I just go on doing naturally whatsoever I feel to do. Whatsoever I have to say, I say – because I don’t have any obligation to anybody, and I don’t have any commitment to anybody. I don’t belong to any party line. I am absolutely free to be funny, to be shocking.
I don’t even bother about contradicting myself, because to me it seems that a man who remains consistent his whole life must be an idiot. A growing person has to contradict himself many times, because who knows what tomorrow brings in? Tomorrow may cancel this day completely, and I am ready to go with life with no hesitation.
Did you love those contradictions when you were a debater many years ago?
I have always loved the contradictions, because for me contradictions have something of tremendous value. They appear contradictions to the intellect, but the deeper you go into them, you will find they are compensatory, they are not contradictions.
They somehow depend on each other: if one disappears, the other will not be there. For example, if there had been no British rule in India there would have been no Mahatma Gandhi – no possibility. If there had been no Adolf Hitler, forget all about Churchill and Roosevelt and Stalin. Life exists in such a way that it makes contradictions, complementaries. I have always loved them.
Osho,
Would you be happy then, if some of these people who now follow you wandered off to some other sphere of discovering what is, to them, themselves?
I will be happy and I will bless them to go there, because they have come here to seek some truth, some tranquility, some sanity. If they feel they can get it better somewhere else, I will be the first person to send them and help them to go. I have been doing that for years. In fact, I have had to do it in such a way that they don’t feel they are leaving me. Even against their will, I had to bless them and tell them to go.
I knew that they loved me, but now their minds were in difficulty; they wanted to go somewhere else, but their love for me had become an attachment. I had to destroy that attachment – only then could they go. And I have been destroying many attachments for their sake, because I don’t want anybody to be a slave. Out of freedom they have come to me, out of freedom they should go. And if they want to remain here, out of freedom they should remain here. This is not a concentration camp, it is a meditation camp.
Good.
This has been not so much an interview as a conversation.
No, I loved it.
I will find out later how much is on the television film, but…
Do whatsoever you feel like doing. Just remember one thing: I love you, and whenever you feel alone, sad, tired, come here. Again and again, come here.
Good.

============================================================

Sheela: I have some champagne, some cigars.

That’s good.

Sheela: What would you care for?

Good. Keep them by my side.

Sheela: The silver ones are Brazilian and the others Romeo and Juliet Havanas.

Good. Yes…

Howard Sattler
6PR Radio, Australia
Osho,
You have the champagne, I have the water. You say you're an ordinary man. Where does that place the rest of us?
You will be drinking water and I will not be touching the champagne. There is the difference.
Osho,
You and particularly your Rajneeshees have created quite an impact on Western Australia – where I come from – through a lot of things: their commercial endeavors and their efforts to start a community school in our southwest. The people of Western Australia want to know about you, about your people. Could you tell them what sort of person you are?
I don’t know at all. I just live moment to moment, so you cannot confine me into a personality You cannot define me, you cannot predict me. I don’t even know myself what I am going to do tomorrow morning. I am simply as open as existence and as indefinable as existence itself. So people have to figure out whatsoever they want – I am available. There are people who love me, there are people who would like to kill me. They have chosen different parts of me, they have focused their eyes according to their prejudices. But I am not in any way concerned about the opinion of others. I don’t have any opinion about other people, any judgment about other people.
Are you a threat to their existence and their futures? Many people have been told you are.
Perhaps. If you don’t understand what I am saying, I am certainly a threat. But if they understand what I am saying they will rejoice, there is no threat. In fact, I want to make these people contemporaries. They are not: somebody is hanging two thousand years back with Jesus Christ, somebody is hanging even farther back with Moses or Buddha. These people certainly will feel me a threat because I belong to the present.
I want them to come to the present, otherwise there is no hope for humanity. These people are simply walking corpses, burdened with the whole load of the past – ugly, superstitious. Certainly I am a threat to their superstitions, I am a threat to their rotten theologies. I am a threat to their concepts about morality, God, religion, about everything they have that is out of date. Certainly they will feel threatened because that’s how they have become identified in their own eyes, and it is always difficult to change.
Whenever a man like me is there, there are not two ways: either you have to be with me or you have to be against me.
Does that mean that they have to become Rajneeshees?
No, there is no need: they have to become contemporaries, that’s enough. Rajneeshees are not an alternative, they are simply the groundwork for the contemporary man to begin with. Once the world has understood that we have to live in the present, not in the past, Rajneeshees will simply dissolve. It is not something that I would like to remain forever and forever, it is a simple device to challenge people, to bring them to their senses. And once our work is done… They don’t need to become Rajneeshees, they need to become contemporaries, and the moment they are contemporaries, our work is done. Rajneeshees will simply melt and dissolve into the whole world.
Osho,
You certainly challenge people's traditional values, and that's one of the things I believe makes your job more difficult. Do you think that you could be a little bit more moderate and look for the end result rather than the immediate reaction?
I don’t care about the end result. My whole concern is not diplomatic, nor political. I am simply responding with my totality to anything that comes in front of me. I cannot be cunning. What you are saying to me – be a little more cunning – I cannot be.
You're not a politician, are you?
I am not a politician, that is the ugliest thing that can happen to a man. I am not diplomatic: I do not want people to be manipulated politely. I am not a hypocrite: I simply say the truth as it is. If it hurts, it is your problem. If it creates enemies I am not worried, because the enemies are on the first step to becoming my friends. They have already recognized me in their hate. They have already recognized their defeat and death, now nobody can save them. They cannot ignore me – if they can ignore me, then there is no threat for them. That’s why I have to be intense, fiery, and I have to hammer hard on each traditional value, because the only thing that I would not like is to be ignored.
You certainly won't be ignored, I can assure you of that.
Thank you for the compliment.
Osho,
You have a situation where I come from in Western Australia where your Rajneeshees have got to get approval from governments, from politicians, to go ahead with their projects. What's your advice to them if the politicians are against you?
Fight.
With guns?
No, legal methods are available. Those politicians themselves are claiming that they are democratic, use their own democracy and fight with them. They are saying that their judicial system is fair? Use it and fight them. Guns are just barbarous.
You would never use guns or condone that sort of…?
I myself will never even touch a gun. My advice to the people who belong to me is, “Be intelligent, use your intelligence.” And against those idiotic politicians it is a simple matter: we are going to use their own devices for their own destruction. We need not use any guns.
Osho,
Your personal secretary created an incredible impact in Western Australia. Certainly she was probably number one entertainment for around about a month on radio and television. But I understand that you are a little bit unhappy with the way she handled things – you thought she could have been a bit tougher.
She could have been.
I don't believe it.
And I have been very tough with her because I don’t see any limit anywhere, you can go on in any direction infinitely. Sheela is never going to satisfy me. She is doing her best, but I would like her to do a little more, more…
Well, perhaps you should come next time.
First she has to go on preparing the ground for me. One day I am going to come.
To Australia, to Western Australia?
Certainly. When Sheela comes, that means I am coming.
She's getting us ready, is she?
Yes, she is coming again. She will go again and again, and prepare the ground. She will hit people more and more, and their values more and more, so they become ready. Because when I come, then comes the final hit.
All your opponents will be almost knocked out by then.
Just tell your people, “Be ready.”
What will you do when you get there?
I cannot say that now because I don’t know myself. When I go there and I see the situation and I feel the atmosphere, then whatsoever happens in me as a response… I never prepare myself for anything. I am not an actor – no rehearsal, I simply start the drama without knowing what is going to happen. We will see it. And up to now everything has gone well.
I have been told that one of the reasons you live in Oregon is because the weather suits you, because of your medical condition.
Yes.
The weather in Western Australia is almost the same as Oregon.
That’s great! It may become my permanent residence.
That's not going to be good news for your opponents.
Certainly not, but wherever I am the situation is the same. I will find my friends, I will find my enemies. Both belong to me; in fact they are two polarities, complementaries. There is nothing wrong in it.
Osho,
You said just a little while ago that you are not an actor. But a lot of people might class you as one of the great comedians of this world.
I am.
Where does the talent come from?
Just because I don’t expect any respectability from anybody, so I can act the way I want. I can be funny without any trouble. I have nothing to lose, because in the first place, I have never expected the world to praise me and give me Nobel Prizes, and this and that. I have everything that I need – it is within me, and I am completely fulfilled. Now I can be crazy, mad, a comedian. I am absolutely free to be anything, I can afford anything, even to be a madman. But it is within my control, and I enjoy the whole show so much.
You enjoy the laughs?
Yes.
More than anything else?
Yes.
Osho,
You've suggested that perhaps you are a madman. I don't think you are a madman at all. But there are madmen around the world who are religious leaders and I'd ask you, if I could, to comment on some of them: the Ayatollah Khomeini?
I said to you that I can be a madman, and that is possible only if I am not mad. I can enjoy being mad, but I am not mad – that’s why I can enjoy it. The madman has become identified with his madness. One thing is absolutely certain about every madman: he will never accept that he is mad. The religious leaders are mostly mad people, fanatics, and just because they are mad, fanatic, they gather all kinds of idiots around them.
Whole nations sometimes, like Iran: a whole country.
Yes, because most human beings are retarded. Scientifically, the average mental age of a human being is below thirteen. Now if thirteen is your mental age, you may be seventy years old but you can be exploited, you can be conditioned for any nonsense. You can be made afraid of hell, for which no evidence exists. You can be motivated: your greed can be aroused for heaven, for which no evidence exists. You can be conditioned to pray to a God who is the greatest lie in the world.
The wonder of wonders is that even in your supreme courts – where you have your best judges, the cream – the oath has to be taken in the name of God. The oath to be truthful, in the name of the greatest lie! None of those judges have seen God, none of those judges have any idea what God is, but it is being used. Most of humanity is so mediocre that it can follow any madman. The madman just has to be a little methodological, and the religious madmen are very methodological.
There is no contradiction in being methodological. Methodology does not need intelligence. Now, what is the methodology of Jesus? – “I am the only begotten son of God.” And the mediocre people are going to believe it, because to not believe in it is to go to hell and suffer for eternity. Nobody wants to suffer for eternity – as it is, one is suffering enough already. One wants some relief. Even if the relief comes after death, one wants to live peacefully and joyously, not starving, not sick, not old, not ugly.
Naturally a simple methodology: “I am the only begotten son of God, I can save you, I have come to save the whole world, those who believe in me I will choose for paradise, and those who don’t believe in me will fall into an abysmal darkness of hell.” A very simple methodology – and the suffering, the poor, the starving, the uneducated, the downtrodden, the oppressed, exploited are ready to cling to any hope.
Why?
Because there is nothing in their life. It is so empty that if there is no hope for them, they will commit suicide. Then there is no other way – for what should they go on, continue dragging their empty lives? Just to suffer? Just to get hit, just to be crushed under the boots of people who are in power? The hope helps.
And that is the methodology of all the religions: Give people hope. But the strategy is very cunning: keep the hope beyond death – because they know perfectly well that hope in this life cannot be fulfilled, and then these same people who are their followers will kill them. So keep the hope beyond death – you can never be caught, nobody comes back from death to say that these people are lying. So they go on lying, and the more a lie is repeated, day by day, year by year, century by century, for thousands of years, it almost starts sounding as if it is true.
So the pope is a fraud?
Certainly, absolutely. All religions up to now have been a fraud; they have deceived people and because of their deception humanity has continued to suffer. Otherwise, we have enough intelligence. If we can reach to the moon, do you think we cannot manage enough food for humanity?
Osho,
Perhaps we are spending too much money reaching the moon.
That, too, is foolish: if you cannot feed people here, what are you going to do on the moon? Seventy-five percent of every nation’s income – even poor nations – is going into construction for the coming war. Everybody is getting ready.
Is it going to happen?
If all these people are getting ready and are getting excited about it, any fool can start it. My effort is that it should not happen, but the only way to prevent it is to make human beings more alert so that they cannot be exploited by priests and politicians. And that’s what I am doing. Naturally politicians are against me – all kinds of politicians. It is a miracle: the capitalist is against me, the socialist is against me, the communist is against me, the fascist is against me. It is simply a miracle.
But you're a capitalist here, running a commune.
I am not a capitalist. I use capital as a servant, it is not my political ideology. I want people to live richly in every possible way: luxury should be available to everybody. I don’t want people to become equally poor and call it communism. I want people to become equally rich, and then whatever name you want to call it, you can call it. Names don’t matter.
Is that sort of wealth available to the people of India, the sort of people that Mother Teresa tries to help?
These people like Mother Teresa, who have been helping the poor for centuries, are really the causes for poverty continuing. The poor cannot be helped the way Mother Teresa is helping. This is not help, this is politics, because all those orphans she helps are transformed, converted into Catholic Christianity.
In fact, Mother Teresa would be out of a job if there were no orphans in India. She needs more orphans. That’s why they are all against birth control methods, against abortion. Otherwise, from where are you going to get orphans? They need the poor, because without the poor whom are you going to serve? And without service you cannot reach heaven. This is a simple strategy to reach heaven.

I love one story:
It happened in China that a man fell into a well. It was the annual fair so there was so much noise that nobody took any note that he was shouting, “Save me!” A Buddhist monk passed by, he looked into the well and told the man that there was no need to cry and scream.
“Accept whatsoever is the case, be contented. In the next life you will be fulfilled a thousandfold.”
The man said, “I am not here to listen to philosophy. I am dying and you are talking philosophy. First, please help me get out.”
The Buddhist said, “It is against my religion to interfere into the actions and the consequences of somebody else. You must have committed some sin in your past life. You have fallen into the well, be happy that your sin is finished, your punishment is over. But I am not going to take you out, because tomorrow if you murder somebody then I will also be responsible for it. I am not going to be responsible for any murder.”
And he went away.
The man could not believe it, “These Buddhists talk about compassion. I am dying and he talks philosophy. I am not in a state even to understand what he is saying.”
And after him came a Confucian monk. In the old days in China the wells had no walls surrounding them, so it was very easy to fall into them in the darkness, there was no preventive measure.
The Confucian monk said, “Listen, you are the proof of what my master has said. My master has said that every well should have walls around it. Don’t be worried, I am going to create a great revolution in the whole country, so that every well is well protected.”
The man said, “But when will the revolution happen? And when will all the wells have walls? By that time I will be gone.”
The Confucian said, “You are not the question – individuals come and go. It is a question for the whole society. We cannot bother about a single individual, we think in terms of the whole civilization.”
And he went away to create a revolution.
And then came a Christian monk with a bag hanging on his shoulder. He took a rope from the bag, threw it in, took the man out. The man was immensely grateful, fell at his feet and said, “You are the only religious man. But tell me how you guessed that somebody has fallen into the well. And you came with a rope – why are you carrying a rope?”
He said, “We carry everything in this bag for emergency purposes, anywhere. Somebody will need to be served, and our lord Jesus Christ has said that those who serve will receive immense rewards in heaven.”

Now, think of a world where nobody is in need of anybody’s service: everybody is happy, healthy, comfortable, luxurious. What will happen to the great Christian servants and saints? They will simply be out of a job. They need poverty to remain, it is their very source of becoming saints, holier than thou.
I don’t say to my people, “Go and serve the poor.” Service, to me, is not a beautiful word. I say to my people, “If you have something, share it. But remember one thing: there is no reward beyond it.” Enjoy sharing – that is the reward. If you pull somebody out who is drowning in a well, that’s a great joy. What more reward do you want? You saved a life; you should be immensely happy. The reward is in the act itself and the punishment also is in the act itself. They are not extrinsic, they are intrinsic.
But all these religions have been telling people that the reward is somewhere far away – beyond death – and punishment, too. Neither can it be proved, nor can it be disproved; hence their business goes on and on, and mediocre people go on following it.
If all these religions disappear two things are possible: either the poor will die out of poverty… Ethiopia will disappear, so what? – it is better that Ethiopia disappears from the earth, rather than thousands of people dying in hunger. With hunger you don’t die in a day: a man can live hungry for three months, he will become just a skeleton – and what is the point of these three months of torture?
So, there are two alternatives if all these great servants of people don’t interfere: either countries like Ethiopia, India, other poor countries will disappear… Let them disappear, this earth cannot manage so many people.
Osho,
What would you say to the millions of Australians who have donated to buy food for Ethiopians who are dying of hunger, dying of war?
It does not help: it simply will save a few Ethiopians, who will produce more Ethiopians.
We should stop aid to Ethiopia?
You should stop completely, because the world needs only one fourth of the population that it has right now. Only then can people be peaceful, living comfortably, joyously. There is no need – what is the point? I have been in India for fifty years, and for thirty years I have been teaching people that birth control is absolutely essential, that abortion is absolutely essential. And they were throwing stones at me, knives at me, shoes at me; that was my reward.
In places like India and perhaps South America, oppressed countries, should there be a moratorium on all births for, say, twenty years?
That’s what I said, that there should be total birth control for twenty or thirty years.
That’s what I was saying, that there are two possibilities: one, the poor will disappear. Please don’t serve them, be compassionate. Your service is not compassion, your service is your greed for heaven. You are using people and their poverty for your own joys in heaven – beautiful women who are always young, who don’t even perspire and don’t need any deodorant.
In the Mohammedan heaven there are rivers of wine. You cannot get water in the Mohammedan heaven, only wine. Here it is a crime, here it is a sin and the same thing that is sin here – Mohammedans are against alcohol – by a miracle, the same wine becomes virtue, saints are enjoying it. To look at somebody else’s wife with lustful eyes is sin, and your saints, what are they doing in heaven? They are not married, there is no marriage in heaven. They are enjoying all kinds of women.
Either let the poor die – be compassionate – or if you are really compassionate, then stop this wastage of your energy and money for war effort, drop these boundaries between nations. Let there be only one government – which is enough. There is no need for America and Soviet Union and India and Ethiopia, just let there be one global government.
Who would be its president, Ronald Reagan?
Certainly not!
You?
No! Not I, because I don’t want to get into any stupid mess. Not Reagan, because if the world is one, people will find a better man, a wiser man. Because the world will be available to choose, they will not choose Reagan, with a chimpanzee as his friend. There are wiser people in the world.
The moment nations are not there, war is impossible. So seventy-five percent of the income of the whole world can change the whole scene – there will be nobody who is poor. There is no need for anybody to be poor. And if there is one world, all scientific effort will become creative. Right now it is destructive, right now it prepares only for war; but when there is no need for any war, all scientific minds will take a 180-degree turn. It will be creative; we can create so much that nobody will bother about paradise.
What's it going to take for this to happen? You're enough of a realist to know that it won't happen tomorrow.
I don’t know, I am simply saying that these are the two alternatives. Either let the poor die and don’t make a fuss about it, or, if you are really concerned, then let the nations disappear so there is no need for war. Scientific efforts will automatically go for making more comfort, more luxury, more health, longer life.
I am not concerned what happens, I am simply saying these are the only two alternatives; there is no third alternative. And I am telling my people to spread the word all over the world. We have been here four years and a not a single baby has been born – just simple intelligence is needed.
But why no babies here? People here could afford to procreate.
No, if they want to live really joyously and luxuriously, there is no need. If they want freedom and equality between man and woman, then it is better to avoid babies.
But surely the human race will die out of existence if everybody does that?
No, no, I am not saying that. My proposal is that people stop this accidental creation of babies and start looking for a more scientific way. Any man, any woman who wants a baby, should be given permission by the medical board. It does not matter if the medical board says to the husband, “You are not the right person for this woman. You will have to take some semen, either from the hospital bank or from somebody we propose, to make this woman pregnant. Then your child will be a genius.”
So you're attracted to the test-tube baby program?
I am absolutely in favor of the scientific production of children.
A master race.
Right now it is mass production – and accidental. That will not be mass production and it will not be accidental; it will be intelligent, and we will not be producing in a factory. There is no need for so many people to be produced, we need only a few people. And as science goes on serving humanity and human needs, on the other hand people will be living longer and longer, and we will need fewer and fewer new people to come. It is an absolute certainty that we have the capacity to live at least three hundred years.
There is no question of mass production. And even if you want to call this mass production, so what? If it is better than your individual, haphazard way of production, not knowing what you are doing, not knowing what is happening.
You are making love to a woman, absolutely unconscious of what is going on in the biology, of what kind of child is going to be born: blind, deaf, retarded, mad, sick from the very birth, crippled… You call it an intelligent way? The intelligent way will be that we can manage that the best human seeds meet together from the very beginning. And we can program – now it has become possible. We can program the egg and the semen cell for anything. It is a question of giving a certain program.
I am fifteen thousand miles away from home, and even now I think I can hear people screaming that you're trying to destroy their freedom of choice.
Let them scream, it will give them good exercise. I call it Dynamic Meditation. I am always for scientific, intelligent efforts because all religious and political efforts have failed. Now there is only one thing left, and that is science – let us try it once. If that too fails, it means life is impossible on this earth, perhaps it has come to its point of death.
Osho,
If your predictions are correct it will be AIDS that will reduce and contain the world's population, because you have said that it will kill two-thirds of the people. People here have gone to extreme lengths to stop it infiltrating your community: there are condoms and rubber gloves supplied to all. Medical scientists, however, are closely monitoring AIDS, and they say that only a few thousand people will be affected. How do you know it is going to kill so many people?
It is absolutely clear, simple arithmetic. It is scientifically certain now that there is no remedy for AIDS. The man who has it is going to die within two years’ time. Two years is the maximum limit – he may die within six months or two months or six weeks or today, but he cannot live more than two years. And medicine has nothing to help him – there is no way, because AIDS is not an ordinary disease. It is a very strange disease, it simply destroys your resistance against diseases. You become vulnerable to all infections, all contagions. There is nothing inside you to fight against it, it is as if the very life force has disappeared.
And the man who has AIDS can have many contacts. Before he became aware, he may have had many contacts, sexual relationships. He must have given AIDS to those people, and they will be spreading it. And now it is known that it can be given to a person even by kissing – not even sexual intercourse is needed – because saliva carries the disease. Kissing should be absolutely illegal.
What's the alternative?
Rub noses – there are tribes who don’t kiss, they just rub noses and enjoy. I don’t see that there is any problem, and noses are more hygienic. Find some other alternative. But kissing cannot be in favor of human life anymore. It can pass – they suspect – even through breathing. That’s why I say it can spread like wildfire.
I would not like my people to die from AIDS. Dying is not a problem: I am not afraid of death, but death should be a celebration, it should come out in a joyful, blissful mood. We celebrate death here, we dance, we sing. This is the final goodbye to the person whom we have loved and with whom we have known many beautiful moments. What more can we do? But dying from AIDS will not be a celebration.
What do you think of homosexuals? – because they have been blamed for spreading most of the AIDS.
They are all perverts. But the religions are responsible for homosexuality, it is a religious perversion. The first homosexuals happened in monasteries where men were not allowed to see women, in nunneries where women were not allowed to see men. There are monasteries where for one thousand years not even a six-month-old female baby has entered – it is not allowed. Sometimes I wonder! A six-month-old female baby is not allowed to go inside – are there monks living there, or monsters? But they have become monsters. They are not meditating, they are masturbating.
They tell us they're celibate.
They go on telling that to the world, but they should come to a scientific lab and prove it. How can they be celibate? Nobody can be celibate. It is just as if somebody says, “I do not urinate,” you will not believe him. He will say, “It is my religion not to urinate.” Nobody will believe him, but everybody believes in celibacy.
There is no celibacy: it has never existed, and all those who have pretended either became homosexuals or became masturbators. Or, if they were not courageous enough even to be homosexuals or to masturbate, then nature has its own way: in their sleep their semen will be released. They will be having beautiful women in their dreams. Mahatma Gandhi tried for thirty years to be celibate after he had given birth to five sons. He must have been forty at that time. Impossible! He was having wet dreams even at the age of seventy.
He might have been lucky! Not many seventy-year-olds have that sort of dreams, do they?
No, if you are repressed, only then can you have them. If you are enjoying love, you will be spent.
Have you ever been celibate?
Right now I am celibate, but if my health gets better I am not going to be celibate. I have never been celibate, I do not do anything against nature. Right now I am celibate, not because celibacy has any value, but just because I am sick. I don’t have any energy to make love to a woman and do all the gymnastics, no. I have enough energy to talk to my people, to talk to you. If I get healthy again, I promise you, I will not be celibate.
Don't promise me, promise them. All the ladies about the place tell me that you're a great lover.
I am!
How do they know that?
Many of them must have loved me, I must have loved them.
Does that mean you've had sex with them?
Certainly. How do you love if you don’t have sex with them?
How do you choose your sexual partners?
There is no question, because I don’t have any contract, any relationship, anything similar to marriage. No, just for the moment, in the moment.
Traveling in a train I meet a stranger… I don’t ask even the name of the woman, because we may never meet again. What is the point? But if she is willing… And I am really “the blessed one”: I don’t know why, but women are always willing. I have never come across a woman who was not willing. If I was not willing, that is another matter, but if I was willing, then I have never come across a woman in my life who was not willing.
And there was no question of any promise of, “I will love you forever, forever.” There is no problem – it is just a momentous, momentary affair. We share this moment, we enjoy this moment. And perhaps at the next station I will be gone, or she will be gone and we may never see each other again. I have never seen again many women with whom I had a beautiful moment of love.
But there are many women here in my commune, and that proves a very fundamental thing: that although I have loved so many women they are not jealous of each other.
Have you ever come close to getting married?
No, never. I have been against marriage from the very beginning, because it means cutting down your freedom. Getting attached legally to a woman or to a man, no. Freedom to me is the ultimate value, there is nothing higher than freedom.
It was difficult, because I was fighting from the very beginning. My parents were in difficulty, my family was in difficulty, but I told them absolutely clearly that I was not going to be married. They would have been perfectly happy if I had been going to be a celibate monk. I said, “No, I am not going to be a celibate monk either.”
That was their trouble: if I was going to be a celibate monk they would be happy. In fact, they would have felt proud that their son had become a great monk. I said, “No, both are ditches. I am going to walk just in the middle, on the razor’s edge.” And I have enjoyed the walk tremendously.
What about the pressures from the society in which you lived – not just your parents – because particularly in those days Indian society would have been very, very close and would have demanded that you did one of two things?
I am intelligent enough for that society.
So, what would you say now to all the people in the world who are married? Should they all get divorced?
Everybody should get divorced, without exception. People should meet and love each other occasionally, as opportunity comes. There should be no ugly state when a wife has to make love to a man whom she does not love anymore, but she has to fulfill her duty. The husband is fulfilling his duty: while he is making love to the woman he may be thinking of some other woman, she may be thinking of some other man. What kind of neurotic society have you created? If you don’t love each other, at least be human and say frankly that it was beautiful to be together, but now it is finished. Say goodbye.
I would like marriage to disappear completely from the world, and with marriage, divorce will disappear. With marriage, prostitution will disappear. With marriage, most of the work of the priest will disappear. With marriage, almost ninety-nine percent of the work of psychoanalysts, therapists, psychiatrists will disappear. It is marriage that is creating all kinds of psychological perversions, repressions, guilt.
It is simply human: you see a beautiful woman and you would like to have some time with her. It does not need any God’s permission – even your God committed rape with the Virgin Mary, without her consent.
Do you believe that story?
I just believe that story because it proves that your God is a rapist; otherwise, I don’t believe in the story. Jesus must be a bastard – it is certain he was not the son of Joseph, and just to cover up the whole thing, that great story has been invented.
He got God to do the job!
They say God is a trinity: God, the Holy Ghost and the Son. The Holy Ghost did it, but he is part of God. It is just like my hand is part of me and your genitals are part of you – the Holy Ghost is part of God, perhaps he is his genitals. Otherwise, how could he manage to make a virgin girl pregnant?
Osho,
What about family responsibilities, the married partners' responsibility to their children?
Children should be the responsibility of the commune, not of the family. It is the family which creates tremendous problems in the children’s minds. It gives them all their sickness, all their superstitions, all their stupid ideas, theologies, religion, political parties. It enforces on the child. The child has to be freed from the family. If you want a new man, then the family is an ugly institution, its time is over. It should be replaced by the commune, and then it is very easy – the commune takes care of all the children.
There will be the father, the mother; they can meet the child, the child can come to them. But basically it is the responsibility of the commune to take care of the children. The children will have many uncles and many aunts, and they will have more opportunity for human contact with different types of people. They will be immensely enriched.
Our children are very impoverished; they know only one man, one woman, and they know the constant quarrel between the two. The woman is nagging the husband, the husband is beating the woman. And this is what you are training them for: your boy will repeat you, he will knowingly or unknowingly be your carbon copy. Your daughter will repeat your wife, knowingly or unknowingly. That’s why no son can ever forgive his father, and no daughter can ever forgive her mother. They destroyed their lives. It is absolutely a psychologically proved phenomenon.
But if the commune takes care, then they will have experience of so many different kinds of people. It is my experience that every person is so unique that the more contacts, intimacies, love affairs you have, the richer you will be. I have not seen two women who are similar. Making love to many women, I have seen that every woman is a unique personality in herself, her way of making love is totally different. The people who have never known anyone except their wives are really poor. They don’t know how many nuances, how many fragrances, how many different ecstasies are possible through love.
The same is true about children. They should be available to the whole commune, and because the commune is responsible, you need not be afraid of what will happen to the children if you separate. You can separate, nothing will happen to the children – the children will be the same.
Osho,
How do you relate that to a Western society where most people live as an individual family in a home, not a commune? What should happen there?
It can be immediately transformed into a commune, there is no problem. Just understanding is needed: a whole big building which has ten thousand people living in it can become a commune. It is a question of understanding, there is no problem in it. There are skyscraper buildings – each building can be a commune.
And a street row of houses?
Yes, they can also become communes. We are making communes all over the world, purchasing properties, different houses, making communes. Sometimes we have difficulty getting all the houses together in one place. No difficulty then, either: we have one main house, the meeting house, and the commune people live in different places.
But they have dropped the idea of the family. It is not a question of arrangements, arrangements can be made very easily. The question is of understanding. Our mind is created by the family, so it is very difficult to think that there should be no family. But the family is the basic unit of the nation. Unless the family disappears, the nation cannot disappear. The family is the basic unit of the church, so I am cutting at the very root.
You sure are.
If the family disappears, then nations cannot exist anymore. Churches and their congregations will simply disappear from the world. We need individuals, I respect the individual the most. The individual should be able to have as many experiences about everything as he is capable of, so that all his potential becomes actual.
Right now the situation is really sad. Even our geniuses like Albert Einstein use only fifteen percent of their potential. What a poor world we are creating. If an Albert Einstein uses only fifteen percent of his potential, then what about the ordinary people? – perhaps three percent, four percent, at the most five percent… And you will call these people talented. Beyond five percent you will call them geniuses. I am not ready for this retarded world.
Osho,
You talked before about women as sexual partners and as lovers, but you see them as a lot more than that. In fact, looking around here, it would seem to me that it's the women who are running the place.
Yes, that is true.
What's wrong with the men?
Man has been running the whole of society for thousands of years, and he has proved absolutely impotent to run society in the right direction. Give a chance to the woman now.
My commune is running far better than any society which is dominated by male chauvinists. It is running perfectly beautifully, there is no problem. All my communes around the world are run by women. Man has proved his incapacity: he has tried hard enough to repress women, to keep them uneducated, to keep them economically dependent, to keep them almost like cattle, so that he can prove he is very superior. But the basic phenomenon is that man feels inferior before a woman because he cannot give birth to a child. The woman can give birth to a child; man’s function in giving birth is only that of an injection.
The woman has the capacity to give birth to children; that creates a deep sense of inferiority in man. To cover it up he started repressing woman, cutting her talents, telling her that she is not capable of anything, that she is only capable of doing the job of cooking, taking care of the children, washing the floor. She is not capable of more than that, only man is capable of all the great things.
All religions are founded by men, and all religions have condemned women. Jainism, one of the most ancient religions in India, says that from the body of a woman nobody can be liberated, nobody can become enlightened. From the female body, nobody can grow into consciousness. Strange: the same people go on teaching that body and soul are separate, and the soul is neither male nor female, and that growth happens in the soul, and that liberation is of the soul, not of the body. Then why can’t women enter into paradise?
No, they have to be put down in every possible way. First, they should practice religious disciplines so that they are born in a man’s body in their next life. All that they can do right now is to pray, to meditate, to fast – to get into a man’s body in the next life. Then there is a possibility, from the female body there is no possibility. In India they were not allowed to read religious scriptures.
Jesus had twelve apostles, twelve idiots around him, who could not do anything to save the man. They all knew that the next day he was going to be crucified, they all knew that he was going to be caught that night, and not a single one of them was courageous enough to tell Jesus that going to Jerusalem was suicidal: “There is no need. Why should we go there? It is not the right time, you will be crucified.”
Not a single woman was Jesus’ apostle, but when he was crucified all the men had escaped. Only three women were there under the cross: his mother, Mary; his lover perhaps, Mary Magdalene, who was a prostitute; and another woman called Martha. All the apostles had disappeared.
Men have been telling women that they are weak, which is medically wrong: women live longer than men, five years longer. Women suffer less from diseases than men, women go mad half as often as men, women commit suicide half as often as men. Still, the woman is weak, and she has to be kept cut at every corner so she cannot grow. And half of society consists of women. They give birth to your children.
What you are doing to the woman you are also doing to your children, because they will be taking care of the children; the children will be learning from and imitating the woman. That’s why every language is called the mother tongue. Even Germans don’t have the guts to call their language father tongue.
So when you die, will a woman become the leader of the Rajneeshees?
I don’t care, I don’t care at all. I am a man who is not concerned with past or future.
But you care for the future of Rajneeshees?
I care in this moment, it is not caring about their future. In this moment I care, what happens tomorrow I have nothing to do with. But in this moment, whatsoever response arises in me I have to share with my people.
Have you met a woman who could do the job that you're doing as well?
It is very difficult to say because unless the opportunity is given, one never knows what a woman can do, what a man can do. It is always the opportunity. While I am here it is difficult for any woman to do what I am doing. Once I am gone, perhaps a woman can do it better than a man. Perhaps she may do even better than me – after all, unfortunately I belong to the male race.
Would you have liked to have been a woman?
No, because I love women so much. I would not be able to love men, that would be the difficulty.
Osho,
What makes you so special, why are you the one who is the leader? You tell people things, and they follow what you say, but why you? Why not somebody else? Or why not nobody? Could these people not just follow your philosophies without you telling them?
Ask them, because I am not their leader. I have not told them that they are my followers. I have not asked them to come and be here with me. It is their business and their problem and their responsibility. I am a very irresponsible person. I don’t take anybody else’s responsibility, it is enough that I take my own responsibility. You will have to ask my people why.
Does it surprise you that they follow you the way they do?
It surprises me immensely, it is really a miracle. I am nobody’s leader, but there are half a million people who think they are my followers.
Do you enjoy the adoration?
No, not at all, I hate it. I enjoy friendship. Adoration is putting somebody high above you. I don’t have any ego; I am not higher than anybody else, not holier than anybody else. But it certainly surprises me. They adore – they must be crazy! Now what can I do about it? You tell me.
I'd just go along with it.
That’s okay.
Osho,
I'm not going to ask you about your Rolls Royces and I'm not going to ask you about your half-million-dollar watch, but I know that any fashion-conscious person, particularly women, who'd seen you would say, “Where does he get those magnificent clothes from?”
My women make them. They love to see me in fabulous clothes.
Are you fashion conscious?
I love everything that is beautiful. I will not say I am fashion conscious, because my robe is not a fashion.
Well I've got a feeling you might be going to start a new fashion.
That is possible. I love everything that is beautiful, but I am not fashion conscious, otherwise I would be imitating somebody else who is fashionable. My people design my clothes, they enjoy, and they know that I love only the best of everything. So they do it and try their best. And I am perfectly contented with my people – in fact, I adore them. Nobody has been so fortunate as I am.
Jesus certainly was surrounded by fools. Buddha had not the guts to allow women to enter his commune; for almost twenty years he continuously refused to initiate a woman. What was the fear? And when he was asked why, he said, “If I allow woman into the commune, then my religion will last only five hundred years. If I don’t allow women into my commune, my religion will last for five thousand years.”
But why this desire that the religion should last for five thousand years? This seems to be only greed – immense greed – to keep your firm running for five thousand years. What is the point? And why are you afraid that if you allow women entry, your religion will be gone within five hundred years? The fear is every man’s fear.
Man feels deep down that he is inferior; the woman is superior, she is beautiful. The man also tries to imitate: for what reason does he shave his mustache, his beard? Just think of a woman growing a beard and mustache – do you think she will look very beautiful?
She'd be in the circus.
Yes, and that is the situation of the men who have cut their beards and mustaches – they are in the circus.
Osho,
You've raised a lot of consciousness, I know. I can predict that already from what we've talked about here. Are you serious about it all, or is it all just one big joke?
Not serious at all. It is all a big joke. Seriousness is not my business at all. I am an absolutely non-serious person, enjoying the small things of life, unconcerned about the next moment. I have lived my whole life this way and I don’t repent, I don’t feel that I have missed anything.
Osho,
Perhaps a final message to the people in Western Australia about you, about what they're going to hear from you in the future, and perhaps what they're going to see from you?
Nothing can be said about the future, but they will see some great circus, certainly.
Soon?
Soon.
Thank you for agreeing to appear on the program.
I was glad to talk to you.
It's been a pleasure.
Come again and again whenever you can, and tell the people there that I am coming.

============================================================

Yoga Pratima
Osho Magazine, Rajneeshpuram, Oregon, United States
Osho,
On behalf of all, I want to thank you that you are showing us every dimension of your being – so casually, so matter-of-fact.
One of the first things I want to ask as a disciple and as a reporter who communicates it to fellow sannyasins, is: in what ways would you like to see us become as ordinary as you are?
One never becomes ordinary; you can become extraordinary, the very process of becoming leads you away from being ordinary. So there is no how as far as being ordinary is concerned. You are ordinary, you don’t have to become. You have to drop becoming, you have to start living. These are the two types of people in the world: those who are continuously becoming and in their very effort of becoming this and that, they are losing being what they are. They are losing time, life, energy, and their becoming is never going to end.
It is just like the horizon – there, looking so close that you can reach it – just a few more miles to go. But as you reach those few miles, you find the horizon has receded again, the distance remains always the same. The person who is caught in the net of becoming wastes his whole life, dies unfulfilled, in tremendous despair, because he can see that the whole life was there for him to live, but because of his desire to become something, someone, he sacrificed all that was freely available to him.
One does not become ordinary, you are ordinary. You are born ordinary, just like everything else in existence: animals, birds, trees. No bird needs to be ordinary, no tree asks, inquires how to be ordinary. But man asks it and this very process of becoming makes you insane.
Drop becoming anybody else. Drop the very idea that you have to be according to some discipline, some scripture, some theology. Forget completely that you have to be like Jesus or Buddha or Mahavira, and suddenly you will find that you are who you are. Live it, joyously, without any guilt. Existence wanted you to be what you are. If existence wanted another Jesus he would have created thousands of Jesuses, there is no problem. He would have made Jesuses on an assembly line. But he makes only individuals. Existence never duplicates, never makes anybody similar to somebody else.
This is the beauty and the glory of existence. This is a blessing – that nobody like you has ever existed and will ever exist again, you are simply unique. Don’t waste this uniqueness in running after some goal, some shadow.
Now, because I am telling you it is so beautiful to be ordinary, it is so joyous to be ordinary, you have made being ordinary also a goal. Your question would have been perfectly right if you had asked how to become a Jesus Christ, how to become a Buddha, how to become a great celebrity.
But the very processes of becoming and being ordinary are absolutely diametrically opposite to each other. You are where you are trying to reach, there is nowhere to go. You have not to become anybody, this very moment you are what existence wanted you to be – don’t miss it, enjoy it. All the religions have deceived humanity and created the idea of becoming in the mind of man. Once you get caught in the idea of becoming, then there is only misery, suffering, anxiety, anguish, despair, defeat, death.
That’s what has been happening to millions of people for thousands of years. Everybody was trying to become something. You cannot go against nature, you cannot in any way be anything other than what you are. The very effort of becoming something, someone, is absurd.
But how have the religions managed to make this whole earth a madhouse? They gave you goals, they gave you great ideals you have to fulfill. It is impossible – by the sheer nature of things, it is impossible. But because it is impossible, far away, it becomes a challenge to your ego. The impossible has a tremendous attraction, but you are forgetting that it is impossible. It may have tremendous attraction because it is impossible, but you are going to be a failure, finally.
There are so many people who realize that they were alive only when they die. When they were alive they were so busy with so many things, they completely forgot about life. They remember it only when they know that only a few breaths are left – the heart is sinking, only a few beats more – that is the moment the realization occurs to them, “What a fool I have been. The whole of life has simply passed by my side. I have not drunk from its wine, I have not eaten its fruits, I am not even acquainted with its fragrance. What was it? And now it is too late.”
That’s why I say only the ordinary being is capable of rejoicing, because his energy is not involved in any process of becoming. It is all available, it is overflowing. What can you do with overflowing energy? Sing, dance, rejoice.
My insistence for ordinariness has tremendous implications that you may not be aware of. By telling you to be just ordinary, I am making you free from all strategies of religions, theologies, political ideologies. I am cutting their very root, without even mentioning it. If you are ready to be ordinary, nobody can exploit you. Nobody can push you in a direction which is not for you. Nobody can create guilt in you. Nobody can say that something is wrong in you. I am making you free from all kinds of parasites.
All over the world they have been using the same methodology just to make you feel guilty. What you eat is wrong, how you live is wrong, how you sit is wrong, how you walk is wrong. They have not left anything for you to decide for yourself. Somebody else – a Manu, five thousand years ago has decided for Hindus how they should be, and for five thousand years Hindus have been imprisoned by that man Manu – and it is so stupid.
Just be what you are – no becoming, being is my message. Up to now becoming has been the message of everybody. Being is my message. Becoming has created guilt, sadness, despair, because you cannot do it. At each step you fall, and at each step you realize how poor, how inferior, how powerless you are. At each step you are forced to recognize that you are unintelligent, stupid; otherwise, why are you not succeeding?
You are not stupid, you are not unintelligent, you are not powerless. You are just trying to do something which simply cannot be done. Have you sometimes seen a dog trying to catch his tail?
A dog is sitting, is in a thinking mood, contemplating; he sees the tail, becomes curious, “What is this?” Naturally, if human beings are doing such stupid things, you cannot expect a dog not to do a stupid thing. He tries to catch hold of the tail that is lying there, but as he tries, the tail moves away. He tries harder – that is logical – he jumps with as much force as possible, but he is simply amazed that the tail also jumps in the same proportion, and the distance remains the same. But I think dogs are not so idiotic – after a few efforts he realizes that this is not possible. He drops the idea, forgets about the tail. It is his own tail, there is no problem. But man goes on and on, chasing something, a shadow.
No, don’t make ordinariness a goal somewhere away from you, so that a path is needed, and a discipline is needed; you have to follow a leader, you have to listen to a priest, you have to change your habits, you have to fit with the goal. Nobody in the whole of history has ever succeeded in becoming anybody else. And it is good that everybody has failed, because even if one man had succeeded, he would have proved all the religions right. One exception would have been enough: if one can succeed, then why not others?
History totally supports me. Without exception, everybody has failed – except those few rare people who have never tried to become anybody, who simply lived ordinarily without any plan, without any tomorrow, without any ideals, without any philosophy, who have simply lived. Living is my religion. Living herenow, and living as you are without any conditions, without any qualification, that’s my message.
Osho,
Why do Rajneeshees, when they go into the courts, already feel as if they are guilty? Why doesn't our conviction come out? Why aren't we proud of ourselves? Why do we behave like such wimps?
For the simple reason you are not yet what I am trying for you to understand. When you go out, you try to prove you are somebody special. You try to prove that you are no ordinary human beings. You are somebody chosen, you have a message, you have a special way of life. You have a certain understanding which everybody else is lacking. Naturally you will feel in difficulty, because they are in the majority and you are alone.
Here in the commune you can rejoice in being special, because everybody is rejoicing in being special, there is no problem. And nobody cares what anybody thinks, nobody is trying to impress anybody. In the commune you are simply living – there you become tense, tight, afraid of public opinion; you want to prove in the public opinion that you are a superior being to them, which you cannot prove. Nobody is superior or inferior, there is no question of comparison. And the very tension, tightness, anxiety makes you feel guilty, as if you have betrayed me, as if you have not been the way you were expected to be.
I have no expectations of you. Go to the courts, to the marketplace, anywhere, but remain ordinary, with no attitude of holier than thou. And you will be surprised, there is no tension, there is no anxiety, there is no guilt. And your intelligence will function more efficiently because you will be so relaxed.
It is a miracle to know the beauty and the power of being relaxed. Suddenly your intelligence has a sharpness that you were not aware of, your capacities come to their very peak. You function not just on the minimum survival level, but on the maximum. Your torch of life burns from both ends together.
It is a strange thing: you were trying to be special and you felt guilty; you were trying to prove yourself holier, higher, and you were feeling a failure. Now you are not trying to be higher, and you are. You are not trying to be better than anybody else, but you are, because they are not relaxed and you are relaxed. That small difference makes such a great difference that it is immeasurable.
In my whole life I have never felt guilty about anything. I don’t have any idea how you feel guilty. What kind of thing is guilt? Intellectually I understand, but existentially I have never experienced it, for the simple reason that I have never tried to be anything other than I was.

I have been in the courts and I enjoyed it. In fact, the judges became tense, the advocates became tense, my own advocate became nervous about what I was saying, what I was doing. The whole court was full of tension. I could not understand what was the matter – I should have been tense, why were they in such anxiety? The case was against me, I was ready to face it, because I didn’t see there was any crime.
There was one church which had been closed for many years, because when the British rule ended in India, all the foreigners moved out. Because that church was specially for the British people, and all the British had moved out. The archbishop of England – thousands of miles away – was the owner of that church in Jabalpur.
I had a few Christian friends. I said to them, “This beautiful church always remains closed.”
They said, “The congregation of that church is no longer here, the nearest authority is in the capital, Nagpur. The bishop of Nagpur is the nearest authority who has the keys. But the real authority is with the archbishop of England.”
I said, “You are just fools. Break the lock – it is already falling apart for ten years – clean the church. This is your church, use it.”
They became excited – the idea was good. The church was a beautiful building with a very big garden around it, but it had become a jungle, nobody was taking any care. They broke the lock. They asked me to inaugurate the opening. I said, “I am perfectly ready” and so I inaugurated their church.
It took a few days for the bishop of Nagpur to understand what was happening there. Then he inquired of the archbishop of England what to do, because, “A few Christians have broken the lock, entered the property, and are worshipping every Sunday there.”
Of course the archbishop was angry and he told him, “Take legal action against them.” Legal action was taken against them. That’s why I was also found guilty: I inaugurated it, I inspired those people to enter into the church, so I was the most responsible person.
I said to the judge, “A church, a temple, a mosque, a synagogue belongs to those who worship there, it is no ordinary property. For ten years the church has remained without a single worshipper. The archbishop of England is guilty for that, the bishop of Nagpur is guilty for that. Who are they to lock a church and prevent worshippers?
“I am not a Christian, but I can see that a beautiful place which was meant for worshipping, for prayer, is lying empty. Jesus Christ is still hanging on the cross and nobody comes. He must be getting bored.”
I said, “Yes, I inspired these people to make that church alive again. It is dying, and to make any church alive is not a crime. To keep it locked – locked against whom? In fact, churches and temples should not have doors, so that they are available twenty-four hours for anybody to meditate there. It is a place of silence.”
My advocate was getting to the point of a nervous breakdown, when I said that the archbishop of England should be given an arrest warrant – and that these people were going to continue worshipping in the church.
The judge said, “Whatever you are saying is absolutely right, but it is not legal. The church is a property owned by the Church of England. Entering into somebody else’s property, taking possession of it, using it, is trespass.”
I said, “Then I am ready to be punished, to be jailed. But remember, you are doing something absolutely wrong. You are not making any difference between a place of worship and an ordinary house. A place of worship cannot be owned by anybody, cannot be possessed by anybody. It belongs to those who are ready to worship there.
“Tell the archbishops of Nagpur and England that either they should come here and bring their congregation, so the church becomes alive, or… Why are they worried? They were happy for ten years. The church was gathering dust, it was going to become a ruin.
“And I am not a Christian at all. I have no concern with that church, just a human concern, a compassion. I knew these people, and I told them, ‘If you are ready to worship, the church is yours.’ And I take the whole responsibility on myself. These people are not in any way responsible, they simply got inspired by me.”
There was silence. The advocate sent by the bishop of Nagpur could not figure out what to say. The judge told me that it was legally wrong, but spiritually right, “I cannot give any punishment to you. But please don’t do anything like that again.”
I said, “That I cannot agree with. I will continue my whole life doing things like that, because I don’t care about man-made laws. My concern is with the existential, with the spiritual, with the real. Man-made laws go on changing.”
But those Christians who had agreed and opened the church became afraid. The bishop of Nagpur put another big lock. I lived in Jabalpur for twenty years, and by the time I left Jabalpur the church was in ruins, the roof had fallen – this is according to the law.

Why should I be afraid or guilty? And I am ready to accept any consequences of my actions. I have been moving for thirty years in the country facing hostile masses – sometimes fifty thousand people, all hostile. But I have never felt any guilt, because whatever I was doing, I was doing with my totality. And whatever I was doing, I was doing with full consciousness. Seeing me, listening to me, although they had come with aggressive prejudices, I could see slowly, slowly a calmness was descending on them. And by the end, when I left, many were in tears.

In Ahmedabad a man came just after I had finished the meeting, fell at my feet and said, “Forgive me.”
I said, “But you have not done anything to me, why should I forgive you?”
He said, “I have not done what I had come to do,” and he showed me a big knife that he was carrying. He said, “I had come to kill you because I had been told that you are against religion, and I am a great devotee of Krishna.” He was a fanatic Hindu.
I said, “Then why don’t you kill me?”
He said, “Listening to you I became aware that what you are saying is religion. You are not against religion, you are against religions. I have followed those religions up to now, but I want to change. I had come to kill you, but you have killed me!”
That man is a sannyasin since then and has been a very stable, reliable sannyasin.

Just go anywhere simply as you are and present yourself openly. We don’t have any secrets; only guilty people have secrets. Only people who are burdened with the idea of sin have secrets, we don’t have any secrets. We don’t have any theology, so nobody can contradict you.
There is a saying that man proposes and God disposes. What I am doing here is: I have disposed of God and I am asking you not to propose anything. So both parts of the proverb, “Man proposes…” Why? Why should you propose? Proposals can be contradicted, better proposals can be produced. There is no need to propose anything. Live whatsoever you feel is right – and it is your life, nobody else’s business to interfere. God I have disposed of completely – and if you don’t propose, even if God is there, how can he dispose it?
I am making a very strange and unique effort with you. Buddha was making people special, holier, higher than the layman. The layman was almost a word of condemnation. The bhikku, the sannyasin, was truly a man; the layman was not worth anything. He was creating a class, helping their egos to become stronger and stronger.
These are the methods to make your ego stronger: do things which are against nature, do things which other people find very difficult to do. Fast, and then people will respect you; they cannot fast for seven days, and you have fasted for twenty-one days. You have done something superhuman. They cannot drop even one breakfast; they cannot live without eating for just a single day.
But whatever you have done is against nature – you have tortured yourself, but it will give you a very sophisticated ego. So do things which are not natural: be celibate, which is not natural. Don’t enjoy anything, because every enjoyment is condemned.
Jainas, Buddhists, Hindus have five great principles of life which can make a man a superman. The first of those five is aswad – the word means “tastelessness” – drop all taste. They are asking of you something absolutely unnatural: don’t enjoy your food, don’t enjoy eating anything, or, before eating it, destroy its tastefulness.
The Hindu monk begs from houses and then goes to the river: mixes all kinds of food into his begging bowl, gives the begging bowl a dip in the river, so whatsoever is left unmixed, the water does it, and then eats it. Now in that begging bowl is every kind of thing – salty, with sugar, sweets. They have all lost their taste. Now it is religious, people will worship you because you have conquered taste. All that you have done is to destroy a sensitivity that is part of your individuality.
Islam is against music. Strange: don’t enjoy music. The same – one is against the tongue, another is against the ear. There are Mohammedans who have never listened to any music – then why not become deaf? Why not give your tongue plastic surgery? Remove those small buds on your tongue which taste things – which is so much easier and so scientific – rather than the whole life suffering. And because these things are unnatural, you are never absolutely successful. Hence guilt arises and hypocrisy, because you have to go on pretending that you have succeeded.

I had been very friendly with a few Jaina monks and nuns, they had become very intimate and were almost ready to drop their monkhood. Then I came to know about a few things which no Jaina knows. These monks are not supposed to enjoy taste, but I found that in the temple where they were staying, they were keeping coca-cola, fanta, hidden behind the statue of God, Mahavira. And because I was very intimate and they trusted me, they offered me their coca-cola.
And I said, “Great, but how do you manage?”
They said, “A few laymen love us so much that whatsoever we say, they manage.” They all had small transistor radios; no Jaina can suspect their monks are carrying transistor radios, listening to all kinds of film music.

Whenever you ask people to fulfill unnatural things, you are asking for them to be guilty. So on the one hand they are creating a big ego – the ego becomes bigger, becomes a mountain – and on the other hand, side by side, a deep valley of guilt. The bigger the mountain, the bigger the valley.
I want you to be just walking on the earth. There is no need to go to Everest, I don’t want you to be anybody special. Your dress is not to make you special; on the contrary, it is to remind you that you are an ordinary human being. Behave with that ordinariness and you will be surprised that you are received and welcomed. Your ordinariness will destroy the hostility in the other person. Just go into the whole world, it is ours – why should we feel anxiety and tension in any way? By making you realize your ordinariness, I am giving you the whole kingdom of God here on the earth, and only an ordinary person can enjoy the kingdom of God.
Try, and when I say try, I don’t mean to make an effort. I mean, give the way that I am saying a chance. Give it a chance and something will trigger.

I was in the university, a student of philosophy, and I was never in agreement with my professors because they were all outdated. They had studied in the universities twenty, thirty years before. In that thirty years the whole world of philosophy had changed. They had read Bradley, Bosake, Kant, Feuerbach, but they had not heard about Wittgenstein, Jean-Paul Sartre, Jaspers, Heidegger.
I was ahead of them, so there was continuous argument. And because I was ahead of them, they were always in trouble. They had never conceived that Kant can be criticized, that Bradley can be criticized. After they had left university they had never touched another book of philosophy. So it was an everyday trouble: I would not agree with their arguments, their arguments were so poor, and they were continuously in a nervous breakdown because the whole class was with me, and nobody was ready to agree with them.
One of my professors, finding it almost impossible to manage me, one day invited the vice-chancellor, the head of the department, the assistant head of the department and all the other professors of the department, almost eight persons. As I entered the class I could not believe what was the matter, because in my class there were only three students, two girls and me. What were the vice-chancellor, head of the department and other professors doing there?
And the professor said, “Now I am going to teach, and you, before all these people, bring your arguments.” He was thinking that I would become nervous. The vice-chancellor was there, the greatest authority in the university. The head of the department was there, who could make or mar my whole future. All the other professors were there. Anybody in my place would have collapsed, his mind would have gone berserk, he would not have been able to argue.
But I got so ecstatic that first I thanked the vice-chancellor, the head of the department and the other professors. I said, “I was waiting for this opportunity to show you what kind of professors you have. This man must have been dead thirty years ago. In thirty years’ time philosophy has taken such quantum leaps that he is not aware of. He does not know even the names of the latest philosophical minds, developments. I am grateful that he has gathered you; in fact I was going to invite you all one day, but I am lazy. So I waited for some day, but he has done my job. I am thankful to him also.” And I told him, “You start.”
He was teaching Gautam Buddha at that time and he said, continuing, that the country in Gautam Buddha’s time was so moral, so religious, so spiritual, that there was no crime, no theft, no murder. In fact, people never used locks on their houses. Even if they were going for months, their houses remained unlocked, because it was unheard of that anybody would steal – that’s what Buddhist scriptures say. He asked me, “Now what do you have to say?”
I said, “They had no locks on their doors for two simple reasons: for the first, there were no locks invented. You will have to give me proof that locks existed, otherwise how do you suppose poor people locked their houses? You will have to give evidence that there were locks in existence. Secondly, I say to you that the people were so poor, they had nothing in their houses. Even if locks existed, they would not have been able to purchase them. And for what? – there was nothing in the house to be stolen.”
And he turned to the vice-chancellor and said, “You see, this is how the whole year goes by. Now what am I supposed to do?”
I said, “You are not supposed to do anything, just listen to me a little more and withdraw whatever you have said. If it is true that people were rich and there was nobody who was poor, then why does Buddha continuously teach to help the poor, serve the poor? Why does he make it a great virtue? If there were no poor people, whom are you going to serve? He continuously preached for forty-two years.
“I can bring all the scriptures tomorrow,” I said, “and put them before you. Every day for forty-two years he was teaching that stealing is a great sin, never steal. If there were no thieves and everybody was a spiritual saint, who was he talking about, who was he addressing? Where could he get people he had to teach every day for forty-two years, ‘Don’t steal, don’t be violent, don’t be jealous, don’t be this, that’? It certainly proves people were stealing, people were thieves, people were lying. That’s why he goes on insisting, ‘Don’t lie, speak the truth.’ What more evidence do you want?”
The professor was absolutely dumb. The vice-chancellor stood up and said to the professor, “It will be good for you to learn from that student. And if you don’t have any argument, then accept his argument. It does not matter who is arguing, whether he is a professor or a student; the question is whose argument is closer to the truth.”
The vice-chancellor was a retired chief justice of the high court. I thanked him, I said, “I was expecting fairness and I am happy that you have not been unfair. You have not supported the wrong side just because he is a professor, you have supported a student.”

In my whole life I have never found there is any problem, any need to be nervous, to be guilty, to be tense. But people are – everybody is, not only you. Perhaps you will feel it more because you can be immediately discriminated by your dress, by your mala. You can be immediately discriminated, and you are standing against a thick wall of prejudice.
But remember: truth may be very small, but its power is almost like an atomic explosion. And howsoever big the lie may be, almost as big as God himself – God is the lie – a small truth is capable to expose the greatest lie.
I don’t say you need conviction, because that is a wrong word here. A Christian needs conviction, because he does not know. Don’t make conviction a problem at all. Just say whatsoever you know, and just be whatsoever you are. Don’t pretend to be bigger than yourself, don’t pretend to know that which you don’t know.
Always be ready to say, “I do not know this.” There is no guilt in it, because in fact nobody in the whole history of humanity has been able to say that he knows everything. There is always a point where he has to accept and say, “I do not know.” So why be afraid? We are ordinary people: if even Socrates has to say, “I do not know,” why can’t Pratima say, “I do not know”? Conviction is not needed but experience. Don’t pretend beyond your experience, and you will be always at ease and relaxed.
Can’t you see me? I never think what I am going to say to you, because one thing is certain with me: if I know, I will answer; if I don’t know, I will say I don’t know. What is wrong in not knowing? There are limitations to everything.
If I don’t have to say I don’t know, it is because of you; you cannot find the place, the point, the question, where I will have to say, “I don’t know.” It is your problem, not my problem. Seek and search and try to find something that I have to answer, “I don’t know” – and I will say it with the same strength as I say anything that I know. I will not speak out of weakness, I will not hesitate. I will not be wishy-washy, I will not try to divert the subject.
But to ask a question for which I have to say, “I don’t know,” you will have to come to the same space where I am. And in that space you cannot ask. You yourself know that in this space all questions are futile and no answer is possible.
People are afraid of me. Strange: I am not a Muhammad Ali, and I am not going to do any boxing, so why are they afraid of me? The journalists have been continuously asking me why people are afraid of me. They are afraid for the simple reason that whatsoever they know, they really don’t know. And coming in front of me, they are going to be exposed. They will be standing utterly naked, and that is the fear.
I am not afraid of anybody, what can anybody do to me? At the most somebody can assassinate me. To me it seems exciting. Death is bound to happen, and assassination is not a bad way – in fact perfectly suitable to a man like me. I will enjoy it. I will thank the man; I will not die before thanking him. And I will ask you that that man not be punished, because he has not given any pain to me, he has simply given me an opportunity to move beyond the body. So don’t drag him to the court, don’t force him to be sentenced to death. Make history out of it: be the first people in the whole of history whose master has been assassinated but you are not against the assassination, or against the assassin. There is every possibility the assassin will become a sannyasin, otherwise he will not be able to survive.
Do you know what happened to Judas? He had sold Jesus for only thirty pieces of silver. When Jesus was crucified, he also was expecting that a miracle would happen and God would save him. And meanwhile, just being a Jew, if he has earned thirty silver pieces, what is wrong in it? Jesus is not dead – on the contrary, on the cross God fulfills his promise and Jesus is recognized as the real messiah for whom the Jews have been waiting for thousands of years.
So in fact I don’t think he was betraying Jesus, he was just being an authentic Jew. It is all profit: Jesus will be recognized as the messiah, God will be known by thousands of people – an opportunity which is rare – the ultimate miracle of God descending to save Jesus will be a proof that God is, that Jesus is God’s only begotten son. There is no problem in it. Judas believed it; and if he can make some money by the way, it is simply Jewish and human.
But the miracle did not happen, nothing descended from the sky. Judas was hiding in the hills waiting for the miracle. When the miracle did not happen, Judas committed suicide within twenty-four hours. He felt that he had done wrong, just for thirty pieces of silver. If he had really betrayed Jesus, there was no point in his committing suicide. He felt so full of guilt that he had to punish himself, with the same punishment that poor Jesus got because of him: he hanged himself from a tree.
Christians never talk about Judas. He is a man of a certain character; I don’t see anything in him that has to be condemned. He believed in Jesus, that’s why he sold him. His trust was so much that he thought there was nothing wrong in getting thirty pieces of silver. Jesus was going to be saved by God. But Jesus was not saved. He must have thrown those thirty pieces of silver in the mountains, and hanged himself out of sheer guilt for what has he done. As far as I can see, his crucifixion by his own hand is far more significant than Jesus’ crucifixion by others. Judas should be counted among the great names of world history, he is as valuable as Jesus.
But why did the guilt come in? It came because he was convinced; it was not his experience that Jesus was something divine. He had heard Jesus say that he was God’s son, but it was not his experience. These were words repeated so often that he started believing in them. The conviction of Judas was greater than the conviction of the other apostles. But conviction is superficial. It is not that you don’t have conviction, so you feel afraid – no, it is because you have a certain conviction that you feel afraid.
Do you see my point? I am emphasizing continuously: don’t believe in anybody, particularly in me. Between Jesus and you is a great distance, Moses even greater – these people are just names to you. But I am not just a name, I am flesh and bones, and as real as you are. It is possible that you can start believing in me; then that belief will create fear. Facing the hostility of others, your suspicions which you have repressed by the belief may start asserting. Perhaps, if so many people – and the world is large – are against Osho, then who knows whether he is right or not? That hesitation will create fear in you, nervousness in you.
I have been surprised giving interviews to the journalists, seeing that they are so nervous. And this must have been their experience also… Because whomsoever they go to interview is usually nervous about what they are going to ask. They may ask questions which may create trouble, they may ask questions that if he answers them, he will be exposed; if he does not answer them, then a great suspicion will arise. People are very much afraid of journalists, very nervous. With me the experience has been totally different. I have told Isabel, “Now find all the journalists from all over the world, and bring each guy and I am going to give him a good heart attack. This will be his real experience of journalism.”
If I am open, you cannot expose me. If I am utterly available, if I put all my cards before you on the table, what can you do? In fact, they become nervous because they start feeling the truthfulness of what I am saying. They forget that they are here only as journalists. Their human being is also there in the same search as everybody else, in search of silence, serenity.
One journalist was here… His people wanted only a thirty-minute interview and it went on for two hours. His director was getting very disturbed, but the man forgot completely that he was only a journalist and he was to ask only questions in which the ordinary public and the audience would be interested. He became so personally involved, he started asking questions which were relevant to his growth. Of course the director was puzzled about what he was doing: they had prepared all the questions, he was given the list again and again – and he would keep the list, and carry on with me.
You need not be nervous, afraid. And remember: it is not lack of confidence, it is your belief, conviction, your confidence that you feel here in the commune, where everybody is supportive of you, nobody is hostile to you. Outside, you are there alone with hostile people. But enjoy it, my whole life I have enjoyed facing the hostile public. It is such a beautiful challenge, and if you have something to say, they are going to hear it. They will have to hear it. If you have something authentic, existential, experiential, their lies will start dropping from their heads. If you are open to them, soon you will find they start becoming open to you, it is infectious.
Osho,
Why are we afraid of – and sometimes even resent – taking responsibility for ourselves, expecting either you or the commune to take the responsibility?
It is because from your very childhood you have been taught not to be responsible, you have been taught to depend. You have been taught to be responsible to your father, to your mother, to your family, to your motherland, to all kinds of nonsense. But you have not been told that you have to be responsible for yourself, that there is nobody who is going to take your responsibility.
No, on the contrary, your parents were taking your responsibility; your family was taking your responsibility; the priest was taking your responsibility for your spiritual growth. You were just to follow all these people and do whatsoever they said. When you are grown up and you are no more a child, a great fear arises because you have to take responsibility and you have not been trained to take responsibility for yourself.
You go to confess your sin to the priest… What kind of stupidity are you doing? First, to think that you have committed sin; second, feeling guilty that you committed it; third, now you have to go to the priest to confess it, so that he can pray to God to forgive you. A simple thing has become so complex, so unnecessarily long and circuitous.
Whatever you have done, you wanted to do – that’s why you have done it. And who is there to decide what is sin and what is not sin? There is no criterion anywhere, no weighing scale where you can go and weigh how much sin you have committed – one kilo, two kilos, three kilos. How long a sin have you committed? One yard, two yards, three yards? And what was the sin, and who is this priest you are going to confess to?
And it is his strategy, because if you go on confessing to the priest, you are certainly afraid of him, because he knows all the ins and outs about you. The priest knows every gossip going on in the town; he knows how many husbands are flirting with other people’s wives, he knows who is doing what: they themselves go on confessing it. This is the priest’s strategy to keep control of his congregation – you cannot leave the congregation because the priest can expose you. Also you are afraid that if you leave the congregation the priest may not ask God for you to be forgiven, and you have committed so many sins… Now it is too late, you have to remain in the same herd, in the same crowd, for your whole life.
I teach you not to be responsible to anybody; the father, the mother, the country, the religion, the party line – don’t be responsible to anybody, you are not. Just be responsible to yourself, do whatsoever you feel like doing. If it is wrong, the punishment will follow immediately. If it is right, the reward will follow immediately, instantly – there is no other way.
This way you will start finding what is wrong, what is right, on your own. You will grow a new sensitivity – Indians call it the third eye. You will start seeing with a new vision, a new eye. Instantly you will know what is wrong, because in the past so many times you have done it and always suffered in consequence. You will know what is right, because whenever you did it, existence showered great blessings on you. Cause and effect are together, they are not separated by years and lives.
You are responsible then. If you want and enjoy a certain act, although it brings suffering, then to do it is good, because you enjoy it. The suffering is not big enough to deter you from the enjoyment that your act brings. But it is up to you – wholly and solely up to you to decide. If the suffering is too much and the act brings nothing, no joy, and necessarily a long anguish follows it, then it is up to you: if you are an absolute idiot, and what can anybody do about it?
This is what I mean by being responsible to yourself. There is no God on whom you can dump your responsibility. But you are always searching to dump on somebody, even on a poor man like me, who is continuously telling you that I am not responsible for anything, for anybody. Still, somehow, deep down you go on carrying the illusion that I must be joking.
I am not joking. “He is our master,” you must be thinking, “how can he say that he is not responsible?” But you don’t understand. Dumping your responsibility on me, you will remain retarded, childish, you will never grow. The only way to grow is to accept that all good, bad, the joyful, the sorrowful, everything that happens to you, you are responsible for. That gives you great freedom.
If I am responsible for something, then the key to your actions is in my hands. Then you are a slave to me, then you are a puppet and the strings are in my hand. I say dance, you dance; I say stop, you stop. Of course, the puppet cannot be responsible for anything; the puppeteer, who is behind the screen, is always responsible.
God is the great puppeteer and all these popes and saints and mahatmas are great puppets, just mediators between the big puppeteer and you. They are also puppets, but they are great puppets because they follow every single instruction from on high, absolutely. You are a smaller puppet; once in a while you dance on your own, too. Once in a while the puppeteer goes on pulling your strings and you don’t dance.
The moment I say there is no puppeteer, no God, no saint, it is all rubbish, I am trying to give you total freedom. I am making you absolutely responsible for everything that happens to you or does not happen. Rejoice in this freedom. Rejoice in this great understanding that you are responsible for everything in your life. This will make you what I call the individual. And to become the individual is to know all that is worth knowing, is to experience all that is worth experiencing. To be an individual is to be liberated, is to be enlightened.

============================================================

Anand Maitreya
Osho Magazine, India
Osho,
We have chosen to become disciples, to participate in your vision in this new phenomenon, yet we are afraid to take the responsibility and defend this vision. The few people who do take this responsibility are often criticized by sannyasins for that. Why this criticism?
My vision is so new, so revolutionary, that if you are all massacred for it, it will not be a surprise to me. I am fighting against the whole past of humanity. Nobody has ever done that: Christians were fighting with the Jews, Mohammedans were fighting with the Hindus, Jainas were fighting with the Buddhists; but this is happening for the first time – one single man standing against the whole history of man. And you are choosing to be with such a man. You are participating, your devotion, your love, are toward a very dangerous man. But I don’t see that the whole past – it is vast and big – can destroy what I am saying.
The past is not in my favor; I don’t want it to be in my favor, I want to destroy it from the very roots. But the future is mine and the future is yours and the future is far greater than the whole past. The forces of the future are far bigger than all the forces of the past, because the past is dead. Life knows no past – it is in the present, and always moving into the future.
People will be against you, people will condemn you, particularly those who are trying to materialize my vision. Don’t care a bit about their criticism and their condemnation, they are just on the verge of their graves. They have failed – they have been promising man for thousands of years and all their promises have proved false. Man has remained poor, sick, starving, a slave to so many things, imprisoned, chained. They have driven man almost to madness, they have completely failed.
Naturally, they will be offended by your small successes; they have not even been able to achieve small victories. Just your very presence is offensive to them for the simple reason that you are rejoicing, enjoying, loving. They have never loved, they have never enjoyed. They have always been guilty, feeling the burden of so many sins. How can they dance? When you see their situation, you will be able to forgive them for all their condemnation. They have missed their lives, and you are not missing a single moment.
They are jealous of you, their condemnation and criticism arise out of their jealousy. When everybody is depressed, you are dancing. You are taking a risk: those depressed people will not allow you to dance, they will try to prevent you, they will start telling others that you are mad.

I have heard a story about a faraway mountain land where a community of blind people lived. Nobody was born blind, but there was a certain fly whose bite made the person immediately blind. Every child was born with eyes, but those flies were all around, it was impossible to escape from those flies. All the older people, the adults, the mothers and fathers, could not do anything – they were all blind, the whole community was blind.
The fly was affective only to a certain age-group, below five years of age. Five years is a long time for a child, and the fly was all around. Within those five years…any moment. In fact, within six months every child was blind; those flies were not waiting for five years.
For the first time, a stranger came into the community from faraway lands, he was an adventurer. Seeing thousands of blind people from the hilltop, he could not believe his own eyes. He felt immensely sorry for them, he forgot about his further exploration in the mountains and he remained with those people. He wanted to help them somehow, he wanted to find what had happened. It is acceptable that in thousands of people there may be one man blind – that he knew – but in thousands of people not a single man with eyes? It was a great challenge for him; he wanted to find out what was the matter, what had happened.
Soon he was able to find out that every child was born with eyes, and every child became blind within six months. He discovered the fly, too, which was a common fly. But while he was doing this research into why these poor people had all gone blind, he fell in love with a blind girl. She was immensely beautiful – he had seen beauty before, but this girl’s beauty was a category in itself, incomparable. Although she was blind, she looked like a marble statue made, not by any amateur, but by some Leonardo da Vinci.
The girl was still unmarried. A great problem arose in the community, because never before had it happened that anybody from their community had married somebody…particularly a stranger – and more emphatically, a man who is mad because he thinks he has eyes. But they were simple mountain people, they did not want to make these two young people miserable.
The community agreed that the man could marry the girl, but first he had to become blind. Then he would be one of them, no more a stranger. First he had to drop that madness that he had eyes – who had ever heard about eyes? If he was not willing to drop that insane idea, then the marriage was not possible, he was not only a stranger, he was insane too. The man so loved the girl that he destroyed his eyes. In his life, for the first time love became blind. For love, he became blind.
Why could those people not accept that he had eyes? It was against the egos of the whole community, they were blind and he had eyes. He was somebody special, so either he was mad – imagining, hallucinating about eyes – or perhaps he had eyes. But then he could not be tolerated, allowed to continue to have eyes, because he would remain a stranger, an outsider, and the very idea that he had eyes made everyone feel inferior. The day he destroyed his eyes and said, “I have dropped that idea of being a man with eyes,” there was great rejoicing, dancing, singing.

This is the situation: this is my situation, this is your situation. On your own accord you have become part of my caravan. I had started alone; then people went on coming, and the caravan went on becoming bigger, and bigger, and bigger. Now we are a reality the world cannot tolerate. They will condemn you, they will curse you, they will criticize you – but they cannot destroy you for the simple reason that they are mere ghosts of the past.
They are not living people: they can make much noise, you just have to remember that they are dead and that the future does not belong to them. They can look backwards into the past: they can sing songs of glory about Jesus, Moses, Mohammed, Mahavira, but they don’t have any eyes for the future. They don’t even have eyes for the present. And to have eyes for the past is absolutely meaningless, because the past is no more – it is dead, it is a long, long graveyard.
And suddenly you come and start dancing and singing and celebrating. It hurts their egos. It makes them feel inferior. When they have missed joy, how dare you dance and sing? And for what? They know only one thing, that you can be happy, but for happiness you need a certain cause… And I am teaching you that happiness is your nature, you don’t need any cause.
It is not that when you win a lottery of one million dollars you give a big party, wine and women and dance – that would be understood. But I am saying you need not win any lottery, you need no cause to be blissful. Blissfulness is your very nature; sadness needs a certain cause, bliss is free of all causality. Once you have understood it, you become a participant in a new way of life, a way so new that it is discontinuous with the past.
But you have to understand that all those poor people who have missed are going to be angry with you. In their criticism, in their condemnation, there is nothing but jealousy, anger. They cannot believe that you can be right, because for millions of years they have lived the life of sadness and sorrow – and suddenly a few strangers arrive on the earth as if from another planet, and start doing things which have never been done. They would like to destroy you so they feel comfortable; they would like that you are not. They will feel a certain satisfaction that whatever they are is the only reality, that there is no other reality.
But they cannot destroy you for the simple reason that you are living: you are vital energy and they are spent cartridges. They can shoot you with their guns, but their guns are full of spent cartridges. They cannot destroy you; life is so strong and death is so weak, joy is so strong and sadness is just a shadow – you are undefeatable.
When they condemn you, enjoy that, too. When they criticize you, sing a song as a response to their criticism, and don’t pay much attention to them. Ignore them, they are anyway going down, drowning. Don’t waste your time arguing with drowning people; you continue your dance, and you go on spreading your dance. Religion, in the authentic, true sense, is here.
You may not be aware that you are participating in something which is so important that nothing like it has ever happened before. And because you are capable, intelligent, you can forgive them. Not to let them feel inferior: you can forgive them, knowing that they are on their deathbed and you are just starting to grow and live and flower. There is no comparison.
One journalist asked, “Can’t the commune live in coexistence with the neighbors?” In the first place, there are no neighbors, we are alone on the earth. Ghosts are not neighbors, graveyards are not neighborhoods. Those dead people – although they are still breathing – are not alive. Just to breathe is not enough to claim life, much more is needed.
Just to breathe is to vegetate – even trees are breathing. Being able to walk is not much – animals are doing it, and even a few trees walk. In Africa, trees walk miles from their place of origin to find new sources of water. Of course it is a very slow journey, but they go on spreading their roots, and slowly go on moving miles to where they can find water, miles to where they can find open sky, the sun.
Yes, these people we are surrounded with are breathing, walking, eating, doing all kinds of things – which any robot is capable of doing. Any mechanical device will be able to do all that these people are doing, but no robot can feel joy without any cause. No robot can be meditative and experience silence, ecstasy, blissfulness.
What coexistence can there be between living, overflowing people and the dead? – or the nearly dead, which is even worse. If you are dead, at least misery is finished, a long tragedy has come to an end; but nearly dead, almost dead, life is not there but the tragedy continues. They have enough energy for misery; misery does not need much energy, you cannot say that you are so weak you cannot be miserable. Can you say that? – “I am feeling so weak today that I cannot feel miserable.”
Misery needs no energy; it is easy, cheap, costs nothing. But to be blissful, to be dancing and singing, to be a joy to yourself and others, certainly you need energy, more energy than is needed only for survival. If a tree gets enough energy just to survive, it will not flower. No fruits will come to it for the simple reason that flowering is an overflowing of energy. The tree has so many colors within it, so much fragrance that it cannot contain it anymore. It has to be shared with existence, with the sun, with the moon, with the wind, with the birds. That’s how flowers come and open up, that’s how it gives you fruits – it has so much life energy that it can give.
These people who condemn you because you have become a participant with a man who is against the whole past of man, just forgive them. They do not know that they are being foolish. Rather than wasting their energy in condemnation and criticism, they should come closer to you, know you better, feel you deeper; because if this ecstasy is possible to you, it is possible to them also. Howsoever late, it is still possible.
There is a proverb in India: if you get lost in the morning but somehow manage to come back home by the evening, you are not lost. These people you are surrounded by are coming closer and closer to evening, but they are still far away from home. And if they could not find home in the sunlight, it cannot be conceived that they can find home when the sun has set and the darkness of night covers the earth.
That darkness is not far away, its name is the Third World War. Every moment we are coming closer to it. That is going to be the night, unending, perhaps forever and forever. It is going to destroy all that is living and all possibility for life to exist on this planet. It has happened on other planets: it is now a recognized scientific fact that there are planets which give indications that some day life had existed there. How it disappeared nobody knows, but soon we will know how it disappears.
But there is still time– even if the sun is setting, there is still time. Those people – if they are intelligent – will come and try to mix with you, so that they can understand where they got lost, where they missed the right path.
So remember, those who are intelligent are going to become participants in this caravan. Those who are retarded will criticize you, condemn you. Ignore them, they are already stepping into their graves, soon they will disappear. They don’t have any vision for the future, they don’t have any solution for the problems that the past has created.
Every day more and more problems are being created by their past, and not a single solution. We don’t have any problems from the past, any hang-ups, and we can see clearly that all their problems can be solved. But they are blind and deaf; they cannot listen, they cannot see. Perhaps they don’t want to see, they don’t want to listen because that will make them feel more inferior. They want to continue to feel that they are superior beings, that the problems are bad, the problems are insoluble, but they are doing their best. If the problems still remain, what can they do?
I want to say to you that those problems are their creations. With one hand they go on creating the problem, with the other they go on trying to solve it. Their right hand knows not what their left hand is doing. I have not come across a single problem which cannot be solved right now. But they have their vested interests – and if the problem is solved, then what will happen to their vested interests?
So they go on talking about solving the problem – poverty, war, disease, death – but just talking, and they have been talking for thousands of years. Their philosophers have been thinking, creating great treatises, but what is the outcome? What is the outcome of that whole genius of the past? How have Kant, Hegel, Feuerbach, Bradley, Bosake helped to solve any human problems? Has Mohammed, or Jesus, or Buddha, or Mahavira been able to give any solution so that man can live at peace?
No, on the contrary they all created more problems, they added more problems. The older ones were there and they created new ones with their so-called solutions. It is really very surprising and amazing to see into the past and the people who have been adored in the past, respected like gods. And what is their contribution? Nobody asks.
What has Krishna given to the world? Nothing at all. Yes, a few problems, certainly: he has given the idea to the Hindus that they are the right people, that everybody else is wrong in the world. Hindus think they are the purest race, everybody else is impure. Hindus go on saying that it is a great blessing, and they are fortunate to be born as Hindus – to be born as Christians or Mohammedans would have been a condemnation from the very beginning. Unless you have committed great sins in the past, how can you become a born Mohammedan, a born Christian? All the virtuous people are born brahmins, Hindus.
But the same kind of idea is given by these so-called geniuses to everybody. Jesus says to Christians the same stupid thing: you are the very promise, all God’s hopes are with you. Everybody has gone wrong, now only you can help people to come to the right path. Moses says to the Jews: you are the chosen people of God, you are born to rule over the world.
Now, what is the difference between Moses and Adolf Hitler? From where did he get this idea that German Nordics are the purest Aryan race in the world and they have, by their very birth, the right to rule over the world? Adolf Hitler must have got it from Moses. Perhaps that’s why he killed one million Jews.
You will be wondering what is the relation between them. It is very simple: what Hitler is claiming is also being claimed by Moses. Those claims are going to clash against each other – either the Jews are to rule the world, or the German Nordics are going to rule the world. Both cannot rule the world, both cannot be the purest and the highest race. Something had to be decided – and he decided: by killing one million Jews he made it clear to the Jews who is higher, more powerful, stronger.
Religious leaders, political leaders, they are all sailing in the same boat. I see man’s whole past as utterly impotent. It has not contributed more beauty to the world, more joy to beings, more health, more happiness. It has not been creative, it has been simply destructive. I am totally against it.
It has been asked by very scholarly professors, “You are a rational person, how can you say that everything in the past is wrong? Something must be right, too. There must be something that is good in Buddha’s approach, something good in Jesus’ approach. You may not agree with their total message, but to deny the total message – not of one person, not of one country, not of one culture, not of one civilization, but of all the civilizations, all the cultures, all the prophets, all the messiahs, all the religions!”
This professor was the Professor of Buddhism in Benares University, his name was Bhikshu Jagdish Kashyap. He said, “You are a rational man. I cannot see how you can say this.” I said to him that just because I am a rational man I can say it, and also I can prove it.
Yes, there are things in Buddha which look beautiful, there are words of Jesus which look beautiful. But remember one thing: Jesus is one organic whole, his good words cannot be separated from his bad deeds. Buddha has to be taken as a whole, because whatsoever he says and does is interconnected.
You cannot just cut pieces from different people – the good ones, the nice ones – and make a living culture out of it, that is impossible. In the first place, the moment you take a small piece from Mohammed, it is already dead. It was alive in the Mohammedan context, once it loses that context it has no meaning at all.
For example, Jesus says: Blessed are those who are the last in this world, because they will be the first in my kingdom of God. A beautiful sentence: to find something wrong with such a beautiful sentence is difficult, even enemies of Jesus cannot do that. But I am not an enemy, neither am I a friend. I am simply looking with open eyes, with no emotional antagonism, favoritism. He says: Blessed are those who are the last. But how many people can be the last? If the whole humanity is standing in a queue, one man will be the last; and if humanity is standing in a circle, then it will be impossible to find who is the last.
How do you determine what is the criterion to decide who is the last? – the beggar? Buddha was a beggar – do you have the guts to say that he is the last? He had nothing but his begging bowl, that was his only possession, but you cannot say he is the last. He was so magnificent a person that you can only put him as the first – this world or that does not matter. And Jesus is saying this without considering how long humanity has existed. How many people would have been the last in each generation, and why were they last in the first place? They had no intelligence, they had no strength, they had no guts to move. These will be the first in the kingdom of God?
Then in the kingdom of God only idiots will be found, and those who are intelligent, geniuses, they will be thrown into hell because they were never the last. A beautiful sentence, but if you start thinking and dissecting it, you find that you will have to accept Jesus’ whole theology. Only in that context can that sentence have any meaning.
Buddha says beautiful things but also says stupid things; now I cannot conceive of a man doing both things together. On the one hand he says that men and women are equal; on the other hand he is not willing to initiate women into sannyas. Now what to make of it? If they are equal, then why are you preventing equal people equal opportunity?
Certainly they are not equal, your action proves they are not equal. You initiate the most idiotic man and you are not willing to initiate the most intelligent woman. Then, when you say men and women are equal, it seems to be just a political, diplomatic statement; it has no value, you yourself have canceled it completely.
I have looked into the past, I have tried my best to find something. But it is always connected with something which is ugly. Now the Hindu god Rama is a beautiful person, if you are not very alert. If you are very alert, you will find that this man is an enemy of humanity. His wife was stolen by another king. Three years he had to fight to get the wife back. Poets praise him, Hindu saints praise him because he respected womanhood so much that he fought for three years. Otherwise, in those days, who bothered? Every king had many wives, who cares if one is lost? It looks right, the man must be very respectful toward women.
But the same man when he is victorious, when he takes out his wife Sita from the imprisonment of the enemy king, the first words that he says destroy him completely. He says, “Listen, woman,” – he is not even saying, my dear, my darling. Three years of separation, and the word he uses is derogatory – “Listen, woman, I have not fought this war for you. I have fought this war for my own prestige, for my kingdom’s prestige, for my forefathers’ prestige. It is not a question of you, so don’t get a big head because Rama fought for you for three years.”
These are ugly words. And then he is known to have forced the woman to pass through fire to prove that she is pure, that she had not made love to the enemy king. In the first place, it is such a stupid idea that the fire will judge whether the woman is pure or not.
You can try it – do a small experiment: say something absolutely truthfully, say something which cannot be untrue in any way. Say the time in your clock at this moment, and put your hand just on a candle flame to see whether you are true or not. And you will know that the candle flame does not bother whether your clock is there or not, whether you are saying the truth or untruth. It is going to burn you. Then try a lie, anything that cannot be true in any possible way, that two and two make five, and put your hand on the flame. See whether it burns you more, less, or the same: fire has its own laws.

============================================================

Denise Kovacevic
KATU TV, Channel 2, Portland, Oregon, United States
Osho,
We appreciate your taking the time out to speak with us this afternoon.
Thank you.
What is it about you, what is it about your religion, that people find so appealing? We see people here that we think are like ourselves, and see what they have here, and we ask ourselves, what is it about you and this place that is so attractive to people?
It is very simple, I am so ordinary a man that nobody can feel any inferiority with me. All the so-called religious leaders of the world were nothing but egoists, making everybody feel inferior, guilty, sinners. I don’t make anybody feel guilty; if he feels guilty already, just coming to me his guilt disappears. I transform sinners into saints instantly, and that’s what appeals to them – that I am one of them, and they’re my fellow travelers, not my followers.
I am nobody’s leader; they are not sheep and I am not their shepherd, I am just a human being, as they are. And my emphasis is that every human being has the birthright to become enlightened, this is nothing special.
Osho,
When we see the people who are part of the commune and who subscribe to your way of life, they seem to worship you, and they treat you with reverence, they treat you with respect that, perhaps, they would not treat other people. So do you really consider yourself an ordinary man? You call yourself the enlightened one.
I am: I don’t consider, I don’t think, I am just an ordinary man – and that’s why they adore me. They have adored for centuries people who are just egoists, people who have been deceiving them, calling themselves prophets, messiahs, only begotten son of God, and all kinds of nonsense. They are intelligent enough to see that I am not putting any burden on them, I am trying to remove all burden. I am continuously saying to them there is no need to worship me, because I am just amongst you. There is no need for adoration.
But they do give it, and they do not treat you as an equal.
That is the problem. The more I say that I am nobody, the more they love me. Now what do you suppose I should do?
I hope you're not waiting for an answer, I really don't know. I'm supposed to ask the questions! If you say that you are not their leader, what do you do for them? Do you just set an example? What do you offer them?
I don’t offer them anything except myself, I am available to them. I have no secrets, I am completely open. All the prophets and the messiahs had secrets, esoteric philosophies, I have none.
But I say to them that being nothing, nobody, brings you all the blessings of the world. And just being close to me, slowly they start feeling also that they are nobodies, nobody is special. And the moment one feels he is nobody, the whole existence starts pouring immense blissfulness, it showers on him like flowers.
Once you have known the secret, how you can commune with existence… With your ego you cannot commune with existence; you are separating yourself. With no ego there is communion, and that communion is enlightenment, that is real godliness. I don’t have any God to offer them, but certainly I can show them the way to godliness. And remember, godliness is nothing special; it is our birthright, we just have to claim it.
It has been said for centuries, again and again, that you have to earn virtue. It will take many times, many lives for you to reach the kingdom of God. They have made it very far away, it is always beyond death. I say to my people that this is sheer stupidity. They were exploiting people’s gullibility, they were exploiting people’s hope.
I am saying to them that there is nothing beyond this moment – don’t wait for any Godot. Live this moment in its totality and squeeze the whole juice out of it, and if the next moment comes, do the same to it. Go on squeezing each moment and you will be surprised that unawares you have entered into paradise. In this very life, here and now, existence knows only one tense: the present. It knows no past, it knows no future.
So I simply help them to be here and now, getting more rooted in the present, and then everything becomes possible. And it is not a question of deserving God: we are part of existence already, it is not a question of earning. No virtue is needed, because it is not a bargain, not a business. We have just to be a little quiet, silent, so we can hear the still small voice within. We can also hear the silent music that surrounds the whole existence – and that I call godliness. There is no God, but there is certainly a quality of tremendous beauty, grace, love.
Osho,
Is there a way that you can help the public understand what it is to be a sannyasin? Most people are familiar with Christianity and Christians; they believe that Christ is the savior, the messiah. Christians try to live their lives according to a certain set of standards. Can you give me something brief like that for how sannyasins live?
I don’t have anything like that because I don’t have any catechism, any dogma. I don’t offer any principles, any philosophy, any theology. My sannyasins live individual lives in freedom.
So there is no such thing as a bad sannyasin, like there is a bad Christian, or…?
No, no, there is no good sannyasin, there is no bad sannyasin; there are only sannyasins. Good and bad are ugly words and I have dissolved them completely. Here is no judgment; everybody has to be responsible for himself, his freedom and whatsoever he wants to do with his life. So it is difficult for me – impossible – to explain to the outside people how a sannyasin is. The only way is to invite him to be here, live with the sannyasins, experience what they are going through. Taste it and their fragrance will be my explanation, the taste of being with the sannyasins is my theology. Those people will have to come to the well, the well does not go to the thirsty.
Osho,
If there is no good and bad and no judging, how does one know if he is improving? Or is there even a need to improve? Or is that up to the individual – am I happy with what I am doing now, am I happy with the level I am at now?
I do not teach that you have to become somebody other than what you are. No improvement is needed, there is no goal to be achieved. Whatever you need is already provided by existence each moment; it is up to you how to use it, or not to use it.
I'm not very familiar with the Bible, but what you just said is almost something that I think is in the Bible: that answers are there, you just have to open your eyes and see them. Everything that you need is here right now, you just have to open yourself up to it, the answers are all there.
No, it is not in the Bible, you don’t know anything about the Bible. In the Bible it is said: seek and ye shall find, ask and you will receive the answer, knock and the door shall be opened. This is totally against what I am saying. I am saying: seek and you will miss, do not seek because it is here right now – in seeking you will forget the moment which is slipping by. Do not ask because you are the answer. Why become a question? It is simply stupid to become a question when you can become the answer.
Osho,
What do you think of those of us who do not subscribe to your way of life?
I don’t care, I simply allow them their freedom – nor do I subscribe to their philosophy, their religion. It is perfectly right they don’t subscribe. But we are not at all worried about them, they are worried about us. That makes the difference; somehow they are troubled by us, we are not troubled.
Does that amuse you?
Yes, it amuses me immensely, it is our whole entertainment. Their worry, their concern, their continuous curiosity makes it clear that whatever philosophy, theology, religion they belong to, is not giving them what they want. It is not making them joyful, it is not making them sing, dance, it is not giving them anything substantial, any nourishment. That is the reason they go on looking, perhaps somewhere else…
They are curious but also afraid, because they have been conditioned, they have lived according to a certain dogma. A man who has lived for seventy years according to a certain dogma is in a really big mess if he comes across sannyasins. He can see there are people who are happy, dancing, singing for no reason at all. To dance is enough, a reason unto itself. To sing is enough, you need not be rewarded for it in heaven – in the very singing of it you are rewarded.
They can see these people are happy, that makes them curious. But they are afraid to come too close, because of their seventy years’ devotion to Christ, to the Bible. They don’t want to recognize the fact that for seventy years they have been idiotic, not Christian. They have been calling their stupidity, Christianity. It needs guts to come close to my sannyasins. Those who have guts, they are coming, from all over the world. Those who have no guts, let them go to hell. It is none of our business to interfere in their journey, in their pilgrimage to hell, let them go.
Osho,
How many sannyasins are there now throughout the world? We had heard that perhaps your numbers were shrinking.
Never shrinking, we are always expanding. But we don’t bother about numbers, we don’t even have an exact account of how many people are there. But they are growing every day; around the world in every center people are taking sannyas, joining communes – there are almost eight hundred thousand sannyasins.
And a few have left; they can be counted very easily on ten fingers – a dozen or two dozen people. Even though they have left, they are in tremendous trouble, because once a sannyasin, you cannot again become part of the old world. Now they are in a limbo: they cannot mix with the old world, I have already deprogrammed them. They cannot go to the church and listen to the sermon without thinking, “This is idiotic.” They cannot come back because of their egos, “We left, how should we approach Osho again?” I would like them to know that the doors are open. Nobody is going to ask you why you left, we never ask anybody why you have come.
Osho,
It appears that most of the people in the top, in the commune and within the organization and the religion are women. Why? How did that come to be?
Certainly, because I am a man.
And women are important to you?
Certainly, I love them – I love you.
And we have only met. Do you think that – this is getting interesting! – do you think that women are necessarily better than or more important than, or perhaps smarter than men?
They are lovelier, delicious, tasteful. And they have been repressed for centuries, that’s why they appear not to be so intelligent as men. Otherwise, they are exactly equally as intelligent as men, and more earthly than men. Man is always a moon gazer: the woman doesn’t care about the moon, she cares about the earth, her concern is very practical.
I am creating a certain way of life which is not schizophrenic, which does not divide materialism from spiritualism, a life in which materialism and spiritualism are together – not as enemies, not as contradictories, but as complementaries. And one has to begin from the earth – even if you have to go to the moon, you have to begin from the earth. The woman is very earthly; I don’t need moon gazers, I need very earthly people. The woman gives roots to you; a man without a woman is without roots.
Osho,
Is there a special woman in your life, or do you have many?
I have so many that it is very difficult to say who is special. In this moment, you are. It is moment to moment.
Well, okay, other than this moment, is there a companion that you share your life with?
No, I don’t make any contracts, particularly about love, because love is a very delicate phenomenon, it is just like the wind. A cool breeze comes in and passes through the other door; you cannot catch hold of it, you can enjoy it. And if you try to catch hold of it you miss the moment of enjoyment. In a closed fist there is no wind, if you want to enjoy, keep the fist open.
I have no contract with anybody. I never promise anything, because I don’t know if tomorrow I will be there or not. And who knows, the next moment somebody else enters into my life, and I am enchanted. I never make any promise.
How can something so fleeting give a man roots then?
It gives you roots. It does not matter that you love one woman, then you will get roots… What gives you roots is that you love. Lovers can change but your love remains, and that gives you roots. That is permanent, that is not a fleeting thing. I have always loved – addresses have changed, but I have been writing love letters my whole life. That gives roots, and that gives you a very beautiful centering and a feeling of earthliness. From there you have to start to grow, just like a tree. The phenomenon of the tree is exactly similar to what I call my religion.
[Osho speaks to the video crew] Change it. There, you see? No contract even with the film: in the middle of a sentence the film changes, what to do?
A tree is exactly symbolic of what my religion is: the tree grows roots deep under the earth, the deeper the roots go, the higher the tree stands. It is equal, proportionate; if the tree wants to reach to the stars then the roots will have to reach to the very hell.
My commune is a very balanced phenomenon. There are more women than men, for the simple reason that I am preparing the earth. Men are coming, soon you will see equal numbers. But they can come only – the trees can grow upward only – when the ground is ready. The woman is of tremendous importance.
Osho,
What will the children play?
The children are the commune’s, they are not yours or mine. In the first place, my approach is that the world is already overpopulated, so don’t burden it anymore. Science has given you the greatest revolution in human history, the pill, which makes you absolutely capable of making love just a play, a fun, a game. There is no need to be serious about it anymore. In the past, of course, people were serious, because children will come, then who is going to take care of the children?
So first my emphasis is, remember: the earth is already too burdened and we have to unburden the earth. So in four years’ time, in my commune not a single child has been born. Although four sannyasins have died, we have not even replaced the four sannyasins with four children.
Secondly, there are children, because when sannyasins came, a few sannyasins came with children. When they became sannyasins they were already mothers and fathers. Those children are here, but the commune is responsible. We remove the responsibility from the father and mother, we make them free, unburdened. Their children are there, they can love them, they can live with them, they can go to them, they can call them, but they belong to the commune. If they don’t care about their children, the children are not going to suffer in any way. The children have the whole commune of uncles, aunts, and they go on making friends with different kinds of people.
This is a tremendous education and a great preparation for a life, a rich life. It is an established fact that the boy loves his mother and the girl loves her father. But this kind of love remains only in the mind: the boy cannot make love to the mother, that is unimaginable. The boy fantasizes but goes on repressing it, feels guilty. The girl feels guilty: you can see small girls flirting with their fathers – it is natural, he is the only man she knows from the very beginning.
This is a very significant thing, because the girl becomes impressed with the idea of men according to the image she carries of her father. And the same with the boy – his whole life he will remain frustrated, he will not find the right woman for the simple reason that it is always his mother that he is looking for, unknowingly, unconsciously.
When he falls in love, he cannot say why he has fallen in love with this particular woman, but psychologists know perfectly well. Something in this woman resembles his mother – perhaps the color of the hair, the style of her dress, the way she walks, the sound of her voice, her eyes, her face, her color – anything. But something resembles the mother so much that the boy has fallen in love. But the woman soon will not be able to fulfill all the demands that the boy is going to make, that he was making on the mother. Soon he is going to discover that she only walks like his mother, but she is not the woman he was seeking, searching.
In the commune we destroy this neurosis completely, because the child goes on moving with many aunts, many uncles. And remember: father and mother are later additions to language. Uncle and aunt are far more ancient; because there was a time when there was no family, so everybody of the age of the father was an uncle, nobody knew exactly who was the father.
I would like my commune’s children not to be focused on one figure, but to have a rich experience of many women, many men, so they have only a general, vague feeling which can fit with any woman, any man.
Osho,
How were you raised? Were you raised in that way?
No, how could I be raised in the same way? I had to fight for it, I had to struggle for it. I was raised in a family, but the family never thought that I belonged to them, because I never listened to them.
In fact I had made it clear that if they want me to do something they should keep quiet, if they say they want me to do it, then I’m not going to do it. Then I will do just the opposite, because I don’t want to be ordered in my life, and I don’t receive anybody’s commandments. I told them, “If you want to throw me out of the house you can, this is your house. Remember, I am born through you, but I have my own individuality and I have to discover it on my own. Your orders will not help me.”
Soon they became understanding, because how long could they fight? And slowly they started understanding what I was saying. Now, my mother is a sannyasin. My father, who died a few years ago, died a sannyasin, and before his death he told me, “We were trying to mold you, we were trying to make you. Forgive us, if we had succeeded, we would have destroyed something beautiful.”
How old were you when they finally understood?
When I came back from the university, then they had to understand, because their first thing was to get me married – just the general idea around the world, that if a person is married then his wings are cut, he is chained. Then he forgets all about revolutionary ideas, rebellion, those youthful dreams of a better world, better humanity. Just chain him to responsibility: he has a wife who nags him, he has children who are not allowing him to sleep in the night, and he has a job he never reaches in time because of those children and the wife. He forgets all about revolution, a new man.
So that was their way. They thought that the first thing after I came back from the university was to force me to get married.
Osho,
How old were you when you started rebelling?
I must have been four years old when I started rebelling.
Four?
Four.
That's young.
It is, yes, certainly young, but I was strong enough. I was even ready to go and beg on the street, but not to be commanded, and not to be forced to do anything.
At four?
Four.
Osho,
Was there anyone that you admired when you were growing up?
Yes, a few people I admired, but very few people. I admired one of my professors, for the simple reason that he had as much respect toward me as I had for him. When I used to enter his room, he would stand up to receive me. I would say, “This is not right, this is not done.” He said, “I don’t do it for anybody, but somehow, the moment I see you I cannot remain sitting. It feels embarrassing.”
I loved the man; he was a gambler, a drunkard, but a very prominent philosopher. Most of his years he was teaching in America, only in his old age had he come back home, and that was the time I entered the university. He had just come back from Havana. We fell in love with each other for the simple reason that he had been in rebellion his whole life. His wife, his sons, his daughters were all in New Delhi – he never lived with those people, only on holidays. He made it clear to them, “Too much time with you drives me insane, so I will be coming only on holidays.”
When he found my ideas, because I was continuously arguing in the class, I was not just a silent listener getting ready for the examination… The examination never meant anything to me, learning was my purpose. I said to him that the examination does not matter, what matters is learning, so I have to argue if I see that something is wrong, that something you are saying is illogical. And on so many points he found himself wrong, but he was a man of tremendous courage, he accepted that he was wrong and I was right.
Slowly, slowly we became more and more close and intimate, so intimate that one day he took all my luggage from the students’ hostel to his own house. He said, “You don’t live outside, you live with me.”
I said, “It will be a little difficult for you. For me it is just beautiful – so silent a place, and a beautiful bungalow with a beautiful garden – but for you it is going to be difficult.” And within three days he understood what I meant.
After three days he said, “You were right, because I want to drink, but I cannot drink before you, I feel bad. I want to smoke, but I cannot smoke before you, so in my old age I am hiding in the bathroom and smoking. You have brought my childhood back. When you go to sleep, then I drink – I have to keep my bottles hidden.”
I said, “I know everything, because when I see cigarettes in the bathroom, and only we two persons are here, it is a simple deduction who is smoking. I am certainly not smoking. And I know that you are drunk; in the morning I see your hangover. I know where you are hiding your bottles, I have figured it out, because you go to the university every day.”
He was the head of the department of philosophy, and I was a rare visitor. I was a student, but I visited the university very rarely, only to some professors whom I liked. If their period was happening I would go, otherwise I would remain in the house. So I explored the whole house and I found out where he had been hiding the bottles.
I said, “Don’t do this, now it is becoming embarrassing to me – that just for me you have to smoke hiding, you have to drink like a thief. If you cannot smoke before me, and cannot drink before me, I am leaving.”
You will be surprised: he said, “No, you don’t leave. I will stop smoking, I will stop drinking.” He threw away all the cigarettes, the best that he had carried from Havana. He poured all the wine that he had brought from outside into the gutter, and he said, “Nobody has been able to convince me. My doctors were against my smoking because my heart is weak, my lungs are weak. My doctors were against drinking because I have diabetes. But I never cared, I told those people, ‘I may live two years less, that does not matter, but I will live in freedom.’ You never asked me not to smoke. On the contrary, you told me, ‘Smoke in front of me. If you feel too embarrassed, I will start smoking with you. If you feel too guilty drinking, I will share.’”
I loved that man. Only a very few people I have found, but I was never impressed by anybody, I have never followed anybody. I have met remarkable men, but the more remarkable a man was, the more alert I was not to be influenced, because I want to remain myself – good, bad, famous, notorious, but I want to be just myself. And I have retained my individuality, not even a dent on it – I don’t like even a dent on my car.
I was born just as everybody is born in families, but with a rebellious mind. And as far back as I remember – that is four years old – I started asserting myself, slowly, and then it became absolute assertion when they asked me to get married. I asked my father, “Are you satisfied with your marriage? I have seen you being nagged by my mother every day. You cannot even eat your meals peacefully. I have seen you eating your meals, your eyes down, and my mother continuously hammering you, because that is the only time she gets when you are at home, otherwise you are in the shop. Do you want me also to be harassed by another woman? You think it over.”
I asked my mother, “Are you happy that you got married? Are you happy that you have eleven children? Your whole life is wasted – what have you got out of it? – not even a single moment of peace. So please, before asking me to marry, think for fifteen days, and then – if you both say – I will get married. But remember, I am giving you a great responsibility, of my whole life.” And that was really a great challenge for them.
My father broke down within three days. He said, “I take my words back. I will never again ask you to marry. I have suffered much, and I know everybody is suffering.” My mother took fifteen days – naturally, women are stronger, can resist anything longer than men – but after fifteen days she told me, “Forget about marriage. Our life is enough proof, and we don’t want you to get into the same trap. You be yourself.”
Osho,
Well we know you're not married; we know you get to eat your meals in peace. How do you spend the rest of your day? Do you meditate a lot? Do you get involved in any kind of physical activity? What do you do in a typical day?
I do many things. One, I have always loved my bathroom, the bathtub, the shower. So one and a half hours in the morning, one and a half hours in the evening – three hours every day – I devote to my bathroom, that is my temple.
What exactly do you do in the bathroom for three hours a day? Or should we not discuss that on videotape?
I just enjoy sitting under the shower, lying down in my tub. I change from hot, extreme hot, to extreme cold, freezing water. That is immensely healthful to the body. One and a half hours is not long. It goes so fast because I enjoy it so much. So three hours go into the bathroom.
For two hours, or two and a half hours in the morning, I talk to my disciples. Then in the night, for two hours; just the way I am talking to you, I talk to some journalist, some author. So for four or five hours I am talking.
Then, I enjoy my food, twice. I don’t even like to talk, because whatever I am doing, I want to do it totally. When I am eating, then I just want to eat and relish every bite to the fullest. So one hour or one and a half hours, because I take two meals, lunch and supper… And then before I go to sleep in the night I take – my whole life I have taken – some special sweets which are made only in Bengal, India. So in all, one and a half hours goes to my food.
For two hours in the day I sleep. I have napped as long as I can remember, and I love to sleep because to me sleep is just meditation, as pure and as simple and as relaxing. And whatever time remains in the night, I go to bed at about ten or eleven, it depends on the interview. I wake up at six in the morning. I love sleeping on a king size bed – I love big things!
Osho,
What do you do for fun? What do you do for recreation?
I go for a one-hour drive in one of the ninety Rolls Royces. So, for one hour after my sleep in the afternoon – I wake up at two – I go for a drive. My people have made a special road for me. Perhaps I am the only man in the whole world who has a special road without any traffic, it is used only for one hour in twenty-four hours. I love driving, I have always loved it.
Then for whatsoever time is left, I sit in my chair. I use only one type of chair – this is the type – I have so many chairs of the same type, so wherever I am, I am in the same type of chair. I have designed it myself, and I have not found any other chair more comfortable than this.
Then I simply relax with closed eyes. You can call it meditation, I cannot call it meditation because to me meditation is now my very nature. Not that I am doing anything, I am just sitting with closed eyes, no ideas floating in my mind. Just utter silence.
My life is simple in a way, no complexity; in a way a very strict routine, too. Every day at the same time in the morning I wake up, every day at the same time in the morning I talk to my people – and that’s how I go around the clock.
Do you ever get bored or tired of routine?
Never, for thirty-two years I have not experienced boredom. And I don’t see any hope that in the future I will have to experience boredom, because I am never comparing. The same bath, the same bubbles, the same pine fragrance… But it is the same only if you compare with your yesterdays. I never compare anything with my yesterdays.
I can eat the same food for years. The sannyasins who cook my food get bored cooking the same thing, they want to change. But if I like something, I simply like it, and I like it every day. The same thing for years creates no boredom in me because there is no comparison. It is always fresh, and I am always excited.
You can ask Vivek, she is here. She brings my food, she takes care of my clothes, my bed, my whole routine, that it goes exactly right. She asks again and again, “We can change to some other sweet.” I say, “Wait, if I feel bored sometime, I will tell you.” But I never feel bored. If sometimes I change anything in my food, it is for her sake, because she is getting so bored. And I am eating – she is simply bringing the plate. She is getting bored carrying the plate, so it is human: change it.
Osho,
How is your health? You seem to be looking very well.
My health is very good and getting better. Oregon, its dry climate, its hostile people, have all been tremendously helpful. I am feeling very good.
Osho,
Well, that's all the questions I have – unless there is anything else that you would like to add. Is there anything that you would like to say?
I would like to say that Oregon is so beautiful, that the people who live in Oregon should not behave in ugly ways – it is an insult to this beautiful land. If you have such a beautiful land, it needs and deserves beautiful people, too. So tell the people that I would like them all to come and visit this place, and see that there is a different way of living, too – without hostility, without antagonism, without hatred, without crime. In four years’ time, no crime has happened in this commune, no woman has been raped, nobody has been murdered, nobody has committed suicide.
People are so happy and relaxed and rejoicing, who wants to die? And who wants to waste time quarreling, fighting, killing? Who wants to steal? Their very blissfulness prevents them from everything the world is full of.
My people work hard, but they call it worship. It is worship; working on the farm, digging the earth – if you are sensitive enough you will feel it as worship. And if you feel it as worship you will not get tired. They work ten hours, twelve hours, whatever is the need – it is their responsibility – and still nobody is complaining, nobody is saying that this is too much.
These are not average, common people; there are Ph.D.s, D.Litt.s, almost everybody is highly educated. Doctors are there, professors are there, engineers are there, architects are there, legal experts are there. Perhaps we have the biggest legal firm in the world – four hundred sannyasins are legal experts. Everybody is doing, but nobody is being coerced to do anything.
So tell the Oregonians, I love this land and I am not going to leave this place.
Knowing what you know about human nature, can't you understand how some Oregonians might feel threatened by your presence here?
They are all, not some – almost all are threatened.
If the tables were turned, would you perhaps not feel threatened – if Oregon were yours and a small unknown group came, would you not maybe feel threatened?
No, we don’t feel threatened even when we are a small group. So it is unimaginable that we own the whole Oregon and a small group is there, and we will feel threatened. We will enjoy that group, we will absorb that group. We will not leave it alone, we will not be hostile to it, they will be our guests.
And it is beautiful to have different kinds of people, strangers – it gives richness. It is simply ugly the same type of people, the same churches, the same Bible… It makes life dull.
I would like any small group, there is no question of being threatened. One feels threatened because one feels one is not happy where he is, what he is, and these people are happy; their dance is threatening. Otherwise, such a small commune, what is the fear?
But just a few days ago, a secret document has been discovered and it has been on television. The governor and all the big officials, the secretary of state, the attorney general, the head of the police and all the government agencies had a secret meeting. And the governor lied, because they did not allow any journalists in.
This is ugly: in a democracy why should they try to hide things from people? They did not allow any journalists, and the governor said, “I will have a press conference after the meeting” – and he lied in the meeting. Everything he said was a lie.
Now that secret document has been found. He had the idea that it had been destroyed – perhaps he had ordered it to be burned, but somehow it was not burned and somebody discovered it. The document says that in that secret meeting they decided that the army should be put on alert, against us; that the military should be ready. On any notice, within three hours they have to reach Rajneeshpuram.
So it is not a few Oregonians who are threatened. I am simply amused at the foolishness of this man, Governor Atiyeh. We are not a nation, we don’t have an army. You can simply throw a few bombs on the commune and finish it. Just one airplane bringing half a dozen bombs – small, old fashioned bombs – and that will do. You don’t need an atom bomb. It is not Hiroshima – Hiroshima was big – it is not Nagasaki. There is no need to waste so much money, you can bring just any old-fashioned, out-of-date bombs and just finish us.
But remember, while your bombs will be falling on us, we will be dancing and singing. We will celebrate it, we celebrate everything – we are celebrants.
Okay?
Osho,
How old are you?
I am ancient.
Could you be a bit more specific?
Very ancient. You can look at me, in my eyes you will see the whole past of humanity. I am as old as existence itself – because I have always been here. I am part, just as you are part, of this existence. And I have been in so many bodies that now I cannot get identified with any body. When you have to change so many trains, you are bound to feel that no train is yours; at the coming junction again you have to change the train.
In this body, I have been fifty-four years. But in fifty-four years I have lived a life which is not possible to live even in two hundred years. I have lived intensely, totally. Whatever I have been doing at whatever time, I was doing it with my whole heart, as if the next moment is death.
Osho,
What happens after death? You will come back in another body?
No, no more, this time is the last time. I have been coming into bodies again and again, but this time it is the last time. After enlightenment, you cannot come back to the body, that is the only disadvantage.
Osho,
When did you become enlightened? How old were you, was it this life for you?
Yes, when I was twenty-one years old.
What about others? What about the sannyasins: when they die, when they leave this life, will they come back as humans?
A few will not come, a few are bound to come – it all depends on them. If they die unenlightened, they will have to come back. This is an existential condition, that existence sends you back again and again and again unless you have passed the examination. Enlightenment is the examination, then there is no question of coming back to the university – you have learned everything, experienced everything. Your being dissolves into the whole, becomes one with it; it is tremendous freedom. Being caged in a body is really carrying your jail around you wherever you go. But as far as I am concerned, this is the last time, so I am trying to make the most of it.
So is the ultimate experience to become enlightened, so that when you do leave this life you no longer have to carry around the prison of your body?
Right.
Thank you for your time, it's been a pleasure.
Good, come back again.

============================================================

Shanti Prabhu
Osho Times, Rajneeshpuram, Oregon, United States
Osho,
It has been said that violence is as American as apple pie. Why is the United States – a country that prides itself as a land of freedom – such a violent place? Is there a relation between violence in America and its so-called freedom?
Violence in America has deep roots: it is the only continent in the world which is being ruled by foreigners. The native Red Indians, to whom this continent belongs, are almost finished; and the people who think they are Americans, none of them are American. They have all come from other countries, invaded the poor country, invaded the poor innocent natives. The roots of violence are there.
The people who had come into power over this continent through violence have remained in power through violence. Unless the continent is given back to its people, this violence is going to remain.
It is a strange phenomenon that the foreigners who are ruling the country are trying to prevent us from living here. We are not trying to rule the country, we are not invaders. They are trying to call us foreigners just because they came here three or four generations ago. Time makes no difference, they are all foreigners.
We are not rulers; we have not invaded the country, we have not killed its people, we have not destroyed its people’s integrity and spirit. We have purchased the land and we have purchased it for the right price. Do you know how much the invaders paid the Red Indians for the whole of New York City? Thirty dollars – the whole of New York was purchased for thirty dollars. This is not purchasing, this is cheating innocent people.
The people who came in the early days of America were really criminals: they were thrown out of their countries, expelled. Those criminals became presidents, those criminals became chief justices of the Supreme Court. They were expelled from their own countries for crimes which were so big that the countries could not tolerate them – either kill them or throw them out.
Then people from Africa were forced, bribed – persuaded and given great promises and hope that they were going to a rich world where they would receive all the facilities. What they found here was that they were sold in the marketplace just like cattle. Slavery had disappeared from the whole world, and it appeared just three centuries ago in America. And the slaves – although no longer called slaves – are still not first-class citizens.
This continent is based on violence. It has repressed the Red Indians in such ugly ways… It is difficult to imagine what man can do to man. Red Indians are living almost in concentration camps; of course, they are not called concentration camps, they are called reservations – especially reserved for Red Indians.
Why should Red Indians not be allowed to mix in society? It is their land, they have lived here for thousands of years. Now they are confined to forests and mountains, on reservations, and they are being given pensions. On the surface it looks humanitarian, that if we are ruling over their continent we are paying them, for generations we have been paying them. But to pay them salaries for no work is not humanitarian.
What will they do with that money? They will get drunk, they will take drugs, they will gamble, they will fight, kill each other. What else do they have to do? Money comes without any effort. They will go on creating more and more children because with each child comes more money. To give people money without work is to reduce them into drunkards, gamblers, murderers: you have taken their dignity.
On the surface everything looks so whitewashed, clean; it can be claimed that you are giving them money because you are using their land. But the real purpose is to keep them drunk, fighting, gambling, rowdy, and to keep them in such a state that they never again think of being free, that they never think of getting rid of all the invaders of this continent.
The whole society is interwoven with violence: the black people are downtrodden, there are thousands of people on the streets with no home – what do you expect them to do? They will do every kind of crime, they have nothing to lose. And America goes on pretending to the whole world that wherever there is any trouble, they are going to help. You can’t help your own people; twenty-five percent of Americans who are able to work are unemployed, and America goes to help Ethiopia!
In America, Ethiopia is spread everywhere – just thinly, but it is there – and violence will come out. These people who have lost everything, respect, humanity, integrity, they have been treated like animals – you cannot expect that the country can live without violence.
Basically, America is one of the most destructive powers in the world. The whole government is working with only one object: to win the Third World War. But they are simply fools, because nobody can win the Third World War, neither the Soviet Union nor America. The difference may be at the most ten minutes: whoever attacks first, it will take only ten minutes for the other party to attack back. Nuclear weapons are ready on both sides, so it is not a question of somebody getting defeated and somebody else becoming victorious. It is simply suicidal – both will be destroyed, and with them all life on earth will be destroyed.
If your great leaders, political, religious and others, are bent upon having a Third World War, if all your scientific and military efforts are aimed at just one point – how to destroy the Soviet Union and how to destroy communism in the world – who are you to take responsibility for the whole world? Who are you to decide that the Soviet Union should not be communist? It is none of your business.
Your government is utterly violent. The whole structure of society is violent; there are the super-rich and there are the super-poor in this country, the distance between the rich and the poor is too big. Naturally, the poor man becomes violent – he is angry. Your priests and bishops go on teaching the poor to be contented, but how long do you think you can keep poor people contented?
Now old strategies won’t work. You have used this strategy for thousands of years in the whole world, but it is not going to work in America: it is a new country, it has only three hundred years’ civilization, which is nothing compared to countries like China or India with histories of thousands of years.
This country is new and the poor have seen clearly that they have been exploited. In India they have never seen it clearly – they have been exploited for thousands of years. They don’t remember any time when there was not poverty, they have accepted poverty as a law of nature, the will of God.
But you cannot deceive the American poor. He has seen with his own eyes that those who were cunning and clever, have exploited and become rich. He has seen people who were criminals becoming rich; and he has seen simple, innocent people who were not criminals becoming poor. You cannot deceive the American poor, you cannot tell him that he is suffering from his past lives’ actions. He knows perfectly well that he is suffering from other Americans and their actions.
In such a small period of history – three hundred years – things are very crystal clear. They had all come to America, they were all equal: nobody was rich, nobody was poor. Then, suddenly, a few people started becoming richer and richer and richer, became the richest in the world, and a few people started falling down. They have seen with their own eyes how one becomes rich. It is not by right means; it is by exploiting, it is by cunning, by every kind of means – good or bad does not matter.
The American poor have a very different attitude from the poor in any other country, because all those countries are very ancient. They don’t remember their beginnings; they don’t know what happened in the beginning – that a few people became poor and a few people became rich. They think it has always been so. But the American poor have a unique situation, they know what has happened – they cannot forgive it, they cannot forget it. That brings violence.
Violence is the religion of America, and America is despised and condemned all over the world – even those countries where American help reaches are not sympathetic toward America. I know it: in India you will not find a single person who is sympathetic toward America. And America has been helping: whenever there is a famine or floods or no rain for years, and people are dying, America is always ready to help. But American help does not create sympathy for America. On the contrary, it offends, because they know what you are doing to your own poor.
Why are you helping others when you yourself are not doing anything for your own downtrodden? It is not compassion that you go on helping Ethiopia, India, wherever there is poverty and sickness; it is an effort to make ground for your armies, for your nuclear weapons. All those countries understand perfectly that this is simply business, not help.
America is the most condemned country in the whole world: America has no friends anywhere, for the simple reason that it is the most destructive power today. When your whole government and the energy of the people and the intelligence of your scientists are moving in only one direction – destruction – how can you avoid violence?
There is only one way, which is really difficult: give the country back to its native people. If they want you to remain here, you can remain here, but you will have to remain on reservations. If you don’t want to live here, that is far better – just go back to your own countries.
Somebody is from England, somebody is from Spain, somebody is from Portugal, somebody is from France, somebody is from Italy, somebody is from Greece: the whole of Europe has to take the responsibility to take these people back. Give the country to its own people. If they allow you to live here, you live, but you live under their rule, and violence will disappear. I don’t think Red Indians can even imagine about nuclear war.
When you are in power, and you are the greatest power in the world, you are not going to be human, to be considerate. So it is not a simple phenomenon; it is very complicated, and the violence has many aspects. In America, more rapes happen than anywhere else. Strange – in a country which is educated, rich, why should there be so many rapes? It is because your priests go on talking stupidities to the people. They go on talking about monogamy, they go on saying that if you are not married then any sexual relationship is sin.
I wonder how a marriage license transforms a sin into a virtue? Just a license, a paper, signed by a judge who may be committing adultery himself. In fact, sometimes I wonder from where this word adultery comes? It looks so simple – any adult is capable of it; the moment you are capable of adultery you are an adult. What other meaning can it have? From where can it come?
The women still are not free; protests go on happening in the name of liberation but the woman is not free, not equal. The woman is angry, and her anger is turning into a perversion. The American woman is educated enough, you cannot keep her repressed. She is not like the women of the East, of Arabia – uneducated, not knowing anything about the world.
The American woman is educated. If you want her to be a dependent partner in a marriage, she would rather move into lesbianism than become a slave of man. In America there are more lesbians than in any other country, and naturally, when women become lesbians, men start becoming homosexuals.
These are all different shapes of violence; your priests are responsible, your politicians are responsible. Do you know what happened in Vietnam? You forced your young people without understanding the fact that these young people are not soldiers as they exist in other countries. They were educated, highly qualified, and you forced them to kill innocent, poor Vietnamese for no reason.
Who are you to interfere in the whole world? You want to put your nose in everywhere? It is Vietnam’s decision whether it wants to be communist or not. And what happened there? Thirty percent of the American soldiers did not kill anybody. They could see that this American violence was absolutely ugly, uncalled for. They could see that the poor Vietnamese have difficulty to arrange even two meals every day and you are bombing them, destroying their houses, burning their houses.
You are burning, destroying, bombing… Many American soldiers went insane for the simple reason that they could not believe that this was what their country stands for. Many of the American soldiers had to be treated psychologically when they came back home; they were so much disturbed they had to be rehabilitated psychologically. They were not like other countries’ soldiers – uneducated, unaware of what is going on – who when they come home, come with great pride. The American soldiers came back home with guilt and, you may know or may not know, many of the soldiers who were in Vietnam have never moved back into American society. They are hiding in jungles and mountains, in Alaska, living a very primitive life.
Many of them have been approached by their families and friends to come back home. They said, “We are finished with home, country, nation, flag, American Constitution, democracy – all nonsense. Just leave us alone. We would like to live here in complete isolation: at least we will not feel guilty. We will not be forced to do something violent, unnecessarily. Back home, they’re going to put us back into the army, prepare us again for the Third World War. We are not going.”
There are hundreds of young American men who were professors, doctors, engineers, living in the forest like primitive people, in caves. They don’t want to come back to America for the simple reason that this whole society is basically wrong. It is based in violence. Twenty percent of American presidents have been murdered – this is a record, in no other country has this happened. Once in a while a person may be murdered, but not twenty percent of the presidents. And if the president is so much unprotected – remember, the American president is the most protected man in the world – if the most protected man in the world can be killed by his own people, who else can be at ease? Even the president is not at ease: every moment, violence.
This is not something superficial. If we want to change the violent structure of America, there are three things to be done. One, the country should be ruled by its native people, it belongs to them. Anybody who wants to remain here should remain here, but he cannot remain here as a ruler. Secondly, America should stop bothering about other countries’ poor people: it should help its own poor people. Thirdly, it should stop piling up nuclear weapons. They are pointless, and so costly, and now so meaningless, because you already have enough to destroy the whole world, what more do you want?
America should declare, “We drop the whole idea of war, we destroy all our nuclear weapons. We drown all those weapons in the Pacific, in the Atlantic, we’re finished with it.” America should declare, “We will not have any defense department any more – it is just pointless.”
If America can do that, its people can be immensely rich, happy, and people who are happy do not do violence. It is out of misery, suffering, anger, that violence comes. When you are comfortable, happy, at home, and all that you need is available to you, you don’t want to be violent – because your being violent will destroy your cozy home, your beautiful surroundings, your love life. Your children, your wife, your parents will be lost. It is the people who have nothing to lose who become violent – and one cannot say to them, “Don’t be violent.”
I, personally, cannot say to them, “Don’t be violent.” On what grounds can I say it? They have been cheated of all that a man needs, and if they are revengeful, it seems logical. America should take care of itself, then unemployment is impossible, everybody can be comfortably rich. You just have to stop piling up nuclear weapons, and you can make this country actually, literally, a new world – by declaring that you are not going to defend.
Defense is meaningless. Even with all your nuclear weapons you can be destroyed, so what is the point of having all those nuclear weapons? It is a very strange fact that in the past weapons were significant; now they are no longer, but idiotic politicians go on following policies of the politics of the past. They don’t understand that the whole thing has changed.
Only a nation which is not burdened by the past can become the first nation in the world to declare, “We are no longer a separate entity, we are open and available to the whole world. We declare that we are not enemies to anybody. We declare friendship to be our basic policy, and we are ready to lose everything but we are not going to be violent.”
If these three things can be done, it wouldn’t harm America in any way. It would give America prestige, pride. America would gain sympathy from all over the world. America would become the beginning of the New World. Other nations would follow – they are following America now, they are starting to make nuclear plants, atomic plants; if America stops it, they will stop it too.
The whole world now has become free: the British Empire has disappeared. Only America has not been capable of freeing the people who are the real owners of this country. Give it back to them. You have reduced them to such a situation that they cannot even struggle for freedom: they are doped, drugged, they are almost asleep. They cannot fight for freedom, they don’t know what freedom is. And they don’t want it either, because this is going so well: no work, and money is available; no work, and alcohol is available; no work, and all drugs are available. Even those drugs which are prohibited to other people are available to the Red Indians, to destroy them, to destroy their spirit.
I say these three things: the land has to go back to the real owners – those who are capable of living here under the Red Indians as rulers can remain, otherwise they should go back to their own country. America has to stop all interference with other countries and put its whole energy into changing the conditions of the poor, of the blacks, of women. And third, it has to drop the very idea of war, to become the first country in the history of the world to drop war, defense departments, armies, to become a precedent for others to follow.
I am perfectly convinced that if America can do that, soon other countries would have to follow, would certainly follow, because they are also suffering. Under the pressure of war effort, their whole economies are going down and down. But out of fear they cannot stop creating more weapons. These simple things just need a little understanding, and America can open a new dimension for the whole of humanity.
Osho,
You have said there is no God, only godliness; and there is no religion, only religiousness. Is there such a thing as a master, or is it masterliness?
There is no such thing as a master, but there is certainly something you can call masterliness. Not everybody can manage – even all the people who have become enlightened have not been masters.
To be a master, different qualities are needed than just enlightenment. You can become enlightened and nobody will ever know about it. To give the message – what you have got you have got – you need to be articulate, immensely articulate, because you are going to do something which is almost impossible: you are going to transform the experience of silence, wordlessness, into words.
You have to be a charismatic personality, so that people are automatically attracted toward you. No need for advertisement: mouth to mouth, people start hearing about you, that something immense has happened to a man… Not only that, the man is capable in some strange way to relate it to you. Through words, through silence, just by his presence, just by looking into your eyes, just holding your hand, something transpires. Something starts happening to you which you have never thought about, never dreamed about.
Yes, there is a certain quality which makes a man a master. But I say that there is no need of a master because people in their ignorance, in their unconscious state, start becoming dependent on the master. He becomes a father figure, and that is where everything goes wrong: he himself unknowingly destroys what he is doing.
I am here with you, and I say that I am not your master and you are not my follower – and you know perfectly well, I know perfectly well, that I am your master and you are my follower. But I go on insisting that you are not my follower and I am not your master – you are my fellow travelers – just so that you don’t become dependent on me, just so that you don’t start thinking it is my responsibility; you need not be worried: the master is there, he will take care, he is the savior. He will save you, you need not do anything.
No, I want you to be responsible. I want you to take all your responsibility on yourself. I can impart whatsoever has happened to me, and it is no obligation to you. I am not obliging you; I am simply enjoying sharing.
To have enlightenment is tremendous bliss, but it is nothing compared to when one starts sharing it, when one starts seeing the same flame in thousands of eyes, the same luster and glory around thousands of faces. No enlightenment can be compared to it. It transcends all bliss that you have known in enlightenment. That was an individual affair, small; a window had opened and you had looked through the window. The sky, the stars… But the frame of the window was there, your experience was framed. You have never been out of the house, naturally you will deduce that this is the sky – the frame of your window.
Yes, you are seeing real stars and the real sky, but you are confined, limited – your window is giving a frame to your experience. If you want to share with others, you will have to come out, you will have to seek people with whom you can share. You will have to go and knock on many doors to find people who are almost ready to receive it. And when you go out of the house searching for seekers and disciples, then you know the whole sky, the infinity of it, the unlimited number of stars. Now you know that sky you had seen was framed.
There is no frame, there is no boundary to existence. Sharing your enlightenment, you come to know there is no boundary to enlightenment either; it is not yours or mine, it is existential. This I call transcendence of enlightenment. This is the moment when the enlightened person becomes ordinary: he has transcended even that special-ness of becoming, of being enlightened. Now he is at ease with himself and his ordinariness.
But this ordinariness has an immense impact of its own, it has the charisma I am talking about; it makes the man a magnetic force. He becomes the very center of the whole existence, and all those who are in search – even groping in darkness – start moving toward him. But don’t give it a frame. When you call it a master, you have given it a frame. Let it remain a quality – masterliness.
There is no God, there is godliness. There is no religion, there is religiousness. There is no master, there is only mastery, masterliness. And as the master becomes a quality, immediately the disciple becomes a quality. Then there is no disciple, only discipleship.
Discipleship is a totally different thing: disciplehood, or to come to the exact right word, discipline. The word discipline means learning, the process of learning. There is no disciple, no learner, but there is a process of learning. There is no master who teaches you, but there is a master-being who shares that which he has found, and his treasure is infinite, inexhaustible.
Osho,
In the past, monarchs, statesmen and politicians always looked toward the wise enlightened men for their advice in affairs of state. Would it be a boon to mankind if Ronald Reagan sought your advice? What would you say to him?
In the first place, the politicians of today are not so wise as some emperors in the past have been. The emperor was born an emperor, so sometimes there were idiots who became emperors, mad, crazy people who became emperors. Once in a while, there was a person who was wise enough and yet became an emperor. Augustus in Rome and Ashoka in India were such emperors. They went to seek advice. They knew there are people who knew much more; they knew there are people whose word is truth.
But today’s presidents and prime ministers are going to be just third-rate cunning politicians. It is impossible for a wise man to become the president of a country, for the simple reason that he is wise. He cannot lie, he cannot give you promises which he knows can never be fulfilled.
He will tell you things which will hurt you. Just think of me: in the first place I cannot run for the presidency of a country, because I don’t like running. I can drive in my Rolls Royce, so my campaign for the presidency will not be running for president, but driving for president.
My whole life I have been practicing a certain art: how to influence people and create enemies. This is not a way to become a president or a prime minister. No wise man can even think of it, because he cannot fulfill the basic conditions of a politician.
And you are asking me if a president – for example, Ronald Reagan – came for my advice, would I give it to him? Of course: if I can give advice to you all, why can’t I give advice to Ronald Reagan? But he will have to come not as a president but as a disciple, because unless you come to learn I cannot teach you.
If he comes as a president, he cannot get an appointment from Sheela; but if he comes just as a human being he is welcome. Any politician from any country is welcome, but he should come just as a human being; otherwise it is useless, wasting my time and wasting his time.
So from my side, I am clear. But your question is only “if” – you should not forget, no president is going to come, no president has the guts to come. I am not just saying something without any support from my experience: it is my whole life’s experience.
I knew Jawaharlal personally: he was a man of great aesthetic, poetic qualities – the first prime minister of India – but still he had not the guts to accept my advice. He said, “You are right, but you don’t know this dirty politics. If I start doing things the way you are suggesting, I will simply lose my premiership. I will not be able to do what you are saying – I will just lose my power, my prestige. I will look crazy. And I say to you that what you are saying is right.”
His successor, Lalbahadur Shastri, was immensely interested in me. He died with one of my books on his chest: he was reading it and must have fallen asleep, had a heart attack and died. He was in Tashkent, Russia, for a summit meeting – the Russian president, Pakistan’s president, and himself. These three were there to settle matters about Kashmir, because a part of Kashmir was occupied by Pakistan.
Pakistan’s army had been standing ready for almost forty years, the Indian army was ready, confronting Pakistan’s army for forty years – and the U.N.’s army was just standing in between at the cease-fire line. Now, how long is it going to be there, this cease-fire line? Forty years is too long a time. They had gone to settle it, but Shastri died.
He lived to be the prime minister for just one year. He was very simple in a way, and it was by chance that he was chosen prime minister. No one could have thought that he could win the race, but in the political game it sometimes happens. He was the most unexpected candidate.
The commanding, ruling party of the country was very much afraid of Morarji Desai, because he was the most stubborn type of person. Once he became the prime minister, he would not care a bit about the committee who had chosen him. The committee was afraid to choose him, for the simple reason that they knew that man. Once he had power in his hands, he wouldn’t care even about those who had given him power.
So on the one side was Morarji Desai, on the other side was Indira Gandhi. They were afraid to choose Indira Gandhi because in the whole political atmosphere there was the idea that it seems India is not a democracy but a monarchy. Jawaharlal was the first prime minister; now his daughter will be the second prime minister. They wanted to avoid Indira, because turning it into a family affair would bring condemnation to all of them and would make the opposite parties more powerful.
Certainly it has turned into a family affair. After Indira, her son has become the prime minister. For forty years one family has been ruling, except for that one year when Lalbahadur was chosen. He was chosen because he was a very simple and weak person. The committee knew perfectly well that even if he were the prime minister, they would remain the masters, the kingmakers. He would be only a puppet. Whatever they wanted, he would do.
Morarji Desai could not be chosen. He wanted to be chosen; he was forcing the committee, “I am the most experienced, the most senior person, why are you not choosing me?” Against him was standing Indira Gandhi. She had her reasons: she had lived with her father, she had seen the whole freedom struggle, its problems. She had seen the beginnings of the independence of India, its complexities, its problems. She knew every in and out of all the politicians of the country. Nobody else had such knowledge.
“Morarji Desai might be senior, but that he knows nothing about all the chief ministers of the states, all the governors, he knows nothing. I have all the files of my father and his whole experience, and I was living with him. I knew everybody – who is dependable, who is not; who is reliable, who is not; who is certain to betray the country.”
Both had their claims, but the committee persuaded Lalbahadur, who was a very small-sized man, and was very afraid: “Forgive me, I cannot manage, I am a simple man.” He had never been in the public eye, he was not a national figure. Just because Jawaharlal loved him for his sincerity, truthfulness, reliability, he was in the supreme commanding committee of the ruling party – Jawaharlal had put him there.
The committee – the whole committee unanimously – chose Lalbahadur. It sometimes happens… He was very available to me, but even he was not courageous enough to come to see me. He managed a lunch, in a political way, in the home of one of his cabinet ministers. This man, Karan Singh, was interested in me: he was the king of Kashmir, and because Kashmir became dissolved into India, he was immediately taken into the cabinet. Naturally he had to be given something; he was the first to join India and give his whole country to the union.
He was very much interested in me, so Lalbahadur said, “This would be good. You call him and me for lunch, so we meet just casually and discuss. My going to him will be dangerous to my career.” And he confessed it to me that this is how diplomacy works. Nobody knows – just a casual, accidental meeting. And before lunch, after lunch, for almost three hours he was listening to me about every problem that he was facing.
But I told him it would be good if he came to my place and lived a few days with me; everything could be cleared. He said, “That is impossible. If people come to know that I have gone to you for advice, I am finished. You have so many enemies in the country, in my party, in my cabinet, that I cannot take that risk. And I am simply a weak man – I have been chosen for my weakness.” But he was sincere.
Indira, the third prime minister of India, was very much interested in me, but not courageous enough to come to Pune. She was continuously telling Laxmi, “I want to see Osho, I want to come. And next time when I come to Mumbai or anywhere nearby, I am going to come to the ashram.” And she came twice to Pune itself, but she could never gather courage to come to the ashram.
Political fear… Just to be associated with a man like me needs courage, because all those who are my enemies will become your enemies. And all those who are your friends may stop being your friends just because you are associated with me. The last time she came to Pune, she told Laxmi, “This time, whatsoever happens I am going to manage to come.” But when Laxmi went to see her, she said, “There are so many engagements, I cannot find time.”
And this was a lie, because she went to Kohlapur – four hours drive – to meet the shankaracharya, the head of the Hindus like the pope is the head of the Catholics. She found time to go to the shankaracharya – four hours going, four hours coming, and just two minutes to touch the feet of the shankaracharya. But that was politically helpful.
Thousands of Hindus had gathered for the shankaracharya. He was an old man from the south, very much respected by the Hindus because he was absolutely fulfilling all their demands of how a religious person should be. He was an ascetic, a masochist – those were the qualities that Hindus were asking for: intelligence has never been asked. Scholarship, yes: he could recite Hindu scriptures without reading, he knew them by rote. He was very much respected and he was very old, eighty or eighty-five.
Now, Indira lied that she had no time but the reality is that she had no courage – even to meet the person who was the only one who supported her when she was defeated and lost her premiership. The whole country was against her, it was a tremendous defeat, and when she stood in a by-election, I was the only man to bless her. No shankaracharya blessed her, not even Vinoba Bhave, who was her political guru, blessed her. Now they were afraid: to bless her means to lose many friends.
She went to the shankaracharya again to get his blessings; he did not speak a word, she was told that he had taken silence for the day. This was simple diplomacy: if he has taken silence, good, when she touches his feet he can bless her with the hand – that is not breaking your silence. But no, he remained sitting just like a statue – because it was a problem for him too. If he blessed Indira, then all the Hindus who were against Indira would be against him. It is a simple rule: the enemy of your enemy is your friend.
So I would like to say to you that your question is only “if” – Ronald Reagan cannot come, cannot have the courage. But from my side I have no ifs, no buts. If he wants to come, he is welcome; but he has to remember that here he is not the president. He has come here to seek advice, to learn something. He has to be here like a disciple. If that much humbleness is there, then certainly my advice can reach to his heart, otherwise, it is meaningless.

============================================================

Anand Rose
Osho Times, Cologne, Germany
Osho,
No country, not even America, is as upset as the Germans at your presence in the world today, and at your influence on intelligent and creative people. They are trying hard to see you as another Hitler. What does that tell about the German mind, forty years after Hitler's death?
The ghost of Adolf Hitler, his long shadow, is still present. And Adolf Hitler is not something that you can confine to one person, it is something deep down in the German mind itself. Adolf Hitler would not have existed if the German mind had not been supportive of him. And not only ordinary people who can be easily influenced, impressed, but exceptional people: geniuses like Heidegger, who is certainly the most important philosopher of the twentieth century – he was a follower of Adolf Hitler.
What these people were seeing in Adolf Hitler was something that was in themselves, in Adolf Hitler it was magnified. In themselves they could not see it, but Adolf Hitler became the mirror, they could see it. And he became the representative of the collective unconscious mind of Germany; hence the influence that he had.
Although forty years have passed, the German mind is still the same. And when they see my influence on people they become afraid, for the simple reason that if I can influence so many young intelligent German people, I can paint the whole of Germany red. And Germany has suffered through Adolf Hitler’s influence so much, the wound is still there and it hurts.
They don’t know much about me, all they know is that thousands of young Germans are ready to die for me. To their knowledge, this phenomenon had happened only with Adolf Hitler. In the same way, thousands and thousands of people were ready to die for him, to do anything for him, so they see a certain similarity. But there is no similarity at all: I teach people to live for me, not to die for me. I teach people to dance for me, not to die for me.
All your so-called great leaders of the world have told their people that they should be ready to die for them, it was thought to be something of great pride. And certainly millions have died for idiots – they died, they killed; all kinds of neurosis was released by these so-called leaders. I am not a leader, I am not a politician; I insist to my people to live long, to live happily, to rejoice. Even if I die, celebrate it; nobody has ever said to his people, “When I die you rejoice and celebrate, sing and dance.”
In thousands of years not a single man has been there to say this. They were just saying, “Be ready. If you love me, be ready to die for me, because we are going to conquer lands, conquer the whole world. If you are not ready to die for me, you are a coward, and then how are you going to conquer the world?” I have a different way of conquering the world. I don’t need nuclear weapons, atom bombs, I have a different approach totally. And they have all failed.
None of them could conquer the whole world, neither Alexander the Great, nor Napoleon Bonaparte, Ivan the Terrible, Adolf Hitler, Joseph Stalin, Mussolini, nor Mao Tse-tung. They have all – without exception – failed, because this is not the way to conquer. Hate is not the way to conquer; it will destroy the other, and in consequence it will destroy you too. Your victory is going to be just a very passing phase. I say to my people, yes we are going to take over the world; by our rejoicing, by our love, by our peace, serenity, by our meditation.
We are not politicians, we are not going to rule them. In fact, we are going to teach everybody not to be ruled by anyone and not to rule anyone. Only then are you really an authentic human being. My influence on German people is exactly the opposite of Adolf Hitler’s. But influence is there, those who don’t know me can find a certain similarity. Those who know will find that the influence is there, in fact it is far greater than Adolf Hitler’s. And it is not me who is saying it. One of the most important Western journalists, the author of many significant books, Aubrey Mennen, wrote a book almost ten years ago about the new mystics. He put my picture on the cover.
The book was published by Thames and Hudson in London. Inside, what he said even I could not believe. He says, “I have seen Adolf Hitler, interviewed Adolf Hitler, I have listened to Adolf Hitler in a meeting sitting in the front row, and I have seen his tremendous influence on people, but it is nothing compared to Osho.” His influence, he says, was only that of oratory, there was no substance in it. Those people were enchanted because their egos were fulfilled.
He was saying to those people that you are the highest race amongst human beings: you are the purest Nordic Aryans, it is your birthright to rule all over the world. Naturally, all those who had ambitions, ego trips, were influenced. Here is a man who can manage to fulfill their hidden desire. They themselves, of course, cannot manage, it is too big. Aubrey Mennen says that people were influenced, but that influence was something sick, it was fulfilling their egos. The people who are influenced by me are totally different.
I am making every effort to destroy your ego, and to destroy the German ego is the hardest thing! In fact, the young, intelligent, German generation is influenced by me against Adolf Hitler and against any possibility of Adolf Hitler ever happening again in Germany. I am the greatest enemy of Adolf Hitler anywhere. Any country which is influenced by me, particularly the young generation – I don’t care about the graveyards, I only trust the young blood, fresh blood – if they are in love with me, that means Adolf Hitler is impossible, destruction is impossible.
And it is true about other countries too. If all over the world the intelligent young people become attuned with me, fall in love with me, not only Adolf Hitler but even the Third World War is impossible. To create a Third World War you will need all kinds of geniuses, talented people, young. And if they have in some way fallen in love with me, they are not going to serve any destructive cause at any price; they are going to simply refuse. My influence is diametrically opposite to Adolf Hitler.
The older generation may be afraid; they have seen Adolf Hitler, they have seen his great influence, they have seen people becoming almost mad after him. And he himself was a retarded mind: he himself was not intelligent at all, just a third-rate person. He was refused admission to schools, colleges, he was refused admission to the university where he wanted to learn architecture. Then, seeing rejection everywhere – nobody could think him capable of anything great – he joined the army. That was the last resort of all the idiots, of all the fools, of all the stupid minds. The army is the last resort: you don’t need intelligence, in fact, intelligence is a barrier in becoming a good soldier. Just as a retarded person cannot become a sannyasin, an intelligent person cannot become a soldier.
What does it mean to become a soldier? It means you have accepted death as your profession. You don’t have any sensitivity for what you are doing: for a little salary and employment you have accepted to murder innocent people, children, women, old people who have done no harm to you, to whom you are not even introduced. This needs something of a very low kind of person, almost the animal. Physically he looks like a human being, mentally he is not.
And these people have fought all the wars. Of course, when you want to kill people you have to be ready to be killed any moment. They have not only sold their intelligence and their freedom into the hands of some dictator, for just a little employment they have become murderers. And simultaneously they have accepted for that little salary to be suicidal also, because in war it is not necessarily that you will only kill and you will not be killed.
So those leaders were emphasizing, “Be ready to kill or be killed. The stake is great: the nation’s pride, the race and its ego, the religion and its messiah.” All these people have been teaching you just death, either somebody else’s or your own.
I am simply amazed when people start comparing me with people who are absolutely opposite to me. In anything, my influence is to live more, to allow others to live more, to love more, to allow others to love more. Let this whole earth become a celebrating planet. There is no reason to kill and be killed – and just for some fool like Adolf Hitler, Mussolini, Joseph Stalin. If they want, they can commit suicide, they can hang themselves from any tree, but why spread this poison? They spread this poison because it fulfills their ego. The name of the nation, race, religion is just a facade, just a curtain, a mask. Behind it is some monster who looks like a human being.
My message is for love, life, laughter. But not only in Germany, everywhere there is fear, because it has always happened that whenever there was a man of charismatic influence who can attract people so much that they become identified with him, there has always been difficulty. That’s why, because of their past experience, they are afraid. All over the world there is great fear. And the strange thing is, their fear is absolutely baseless.
I am a totally new kind of man, the beginning of a new humanity. But I can understand them. They have only their past, and their past is long, and their experience is wrong. And whenever there has been a man of influence, he has created trouble. Adolf Hitler created the Second World War. Now they are afraid: if their younger generation is being influenced by me and is ready to do anything that I say, naturally fear arises. Again the same situation may happen.
But just tell them, with me it cannot happen, without me it can happen. They are so afraid in Germany that perhaps sometime I may be coming to visit my communes, they have already put a bogus law case against me. Just in case I want to enter the country I can be immediately arrested. I have never been in Germany and I have never done anything in Germany, but they can file a case against me.
That case will help them in many ways: first, they can refuse my entry. Secondly, they can allow me to enter but refuse to let me out of the country. Thirdly, as long as the case is not finished, they can force me to remain there. And they can put other cases. If I win one case, they can put another: there is no problem in it. Somebody simply goes to the court and says, “What Osho has said hurts my religious feeling” – that is enough.
It is a very strange world in which we are living. If your religious feeling is hurt, then it is your problem: get treated, or drop that religion which cannot help you to be strong enough not to be hurt by a small criticism from anybody. And if your heart, your religious feelings, are disturbed, that simply shows they are superficial. You need a new religion which goes deep to your roots and nobody can hurt you.
Can any of my people be hurt? None of my people have gone to the courts, filing cases that their religious feelings are hurt. I have been condemned all over the world, in all the newspapers, in all the media, they have called me all kinds of names. You could have easily gone to court, in every country you could have fought that your religious feeling is hurt. But, none of my people has even thought about it: they simply laughed and ignored it. Filing a lawsuit means giving attention to idiots. And whatsoever they are saying, they are saying without any argument, they have no argument.

In India once there was a case against me of a similar type, that I had hurt the religious feelings of Hindus. That is enough in any country, it is very strange. And why was the case accepted by the court? It went for almost one year and I had to come back to Ahmedabad again and again for that case. They were simply wasting my time, and the case was utterly stupid.
Speaking in Ahmedabad amongst fifty thousand people, I had said that Mahatma Gandhi used to listen to the story of Rama every day. Vinoba Bhave, one of his disciples, but a very scholarly person, used to read the Ramayana, the story of Rama. It is read in every house in India, the drama of Rama is played in every town, city, village, every year. Rama is in every Hindu’s heart center.
I said in the meeting that Vinoba was reading the story of Rama and there comes a passage where Rama’s wife, Sita, is stolen. Just to leave some clues as to what direction she has been taken, she went on throwing her ornaments along the way. Indian women have many ornaments, and she was a queen so she had enough ornaments. And it was bound, she felt – it was certainly logical – that Rama would find these ornaments and they would give him a clue to the direction. And if he found more, that made it more certain: if he found more he could reach to where she was being taken.
He found precious diamonds, emeralds, rubies and he asked his brother Laxmana, “Do you recognize, are these ornaments my wife’s? I cannot recognize them myself because whenever I am with Sita, she is so beautiful that I get lost into her. I don’t pay attention to her ornaments, so I cannot be certain that this ornament belongs to her. But in this thick forest, who is going to throw rubies and diamonds and ornaments made of all kinds of precious stones? Laxmana, perhaps you can find.”
Laxmana said, “Please forgive me, because I have never seen Sita, except her feet, because I used to touch her feet every morning.” Your elder brother’s wife in India is thought to be equal to your mother. “And I have never seen her face, I have never seen above her feet. Yes, if we come across the ornaments she used on her feet, I will recognize them immediately.”
Gandhi was a little puzzled. He said to Vinoba, “I don’t understand. First, I cannot understand Rama, that he lived for so many years and he could not recognize the ornaments of his own wife. But perhaps he was still in his honeymoon, Sita may have been very enchanting. But why Laxmana never saw Sita?”
Vinoba produced an argument which is not in the story, the argument is Vinoba’s: he produced an argument that Laxmana never saw Sita’s face because he wanted to remain celibate. He wanted to remain unimpressed by Sita’s beauty because he was under a strict discipline. And Gandhi accepted the idea that it was because of a strict discipline; that Sita is so beautiful, perhaps looking at her he may get interested passionately in her. Gandhi accepted the idea. Not only that, it was because of this argument he gave Vinoba the title of acharya. Acharya means “the master mind.” He said, “The explanation that you have given makes you a master. I could not have conceived that this would be the explanation.”
I told this whole thing to the people, fifty thousand people, and they were all Hindus, followers of Rama, followers of Gandhi, followers of Vinoba and I told them that his explanation is ugly. It simply shows that he was afraid to see the face. This fear is already part of desire and passion: he is perfectly aware that if he sees her, he would like to have her. All this must have been going on in his mind. He must be dreaming of Sita, because it is not that he had never seen her – before the marriage, Laxmana and Rama had both gone to see her.
In those days in India, the king’s daughters used to have a certain ceremony; it was called swayamvara. The princess chooses her husband by a certain device. Sita was the daughter of a very big emperor, hundreds of kings had come to marry her. The device was that Sita’s father had one very long bow – which was known as “Shiva’s bow” – and the condition was that anybody who can, just by hand break the bow into pieces, would be the person to marry Sita. The bow was so heavy that many kings tried to take it up from the platform but they themselves fell, they could not move the bow. There was no question of breaking it just by hand. Sita was sitting there ready with the garland; whoever breaks the bow…
Laxmana was getting too eager. They had gone with their teacher, Vashishtha. The father of Rama had sent Vashishtha to take care of the boys and see that they were not defeated, that no cunningness was being used. Laxmana was getting so excited that he was asking again and again, “Vashishtha, just give me permission and I will break it.”
Vashishtha said, “You just keep quiet. Rama has the first right, he is your elder brother. If he fails, then you have a chance.” Of course Rama broke the bow. Laxmana had seen Sita, seen the beauty of the woman. She must have been a rare woman: now he had to treat her as if she were his mother – you can think of his mind.
I explained to those people that Vinoba’s explanation simply shows Vinoba’s mind, it has nothing to do with Laxmana. Vinoba was a celibate, and he knew perfectly what celibacy means: your dreams are full of girls, your whole day is continuously a fantasy of sexuality. The repressed sex tries in every possible way to break your unnatural idea of celibacy.
Vinoba was afraid of meeting women, seeing women. He used to live isolated; he never lived in Gandhi’s ashram itself, because there were women there. He lived a few miles away: he used to come every day at the prayer time, reading the story of Rama or some other scripture, and would go back. But he lived in isolation: Gandhi’s ashram was dangerous, there were women – beautiful women – and he was a celibate monk.
The explanation that he gave was his own mind, and the explanation is a condemnation of Laxmana, it makes him a repressed sexual person. It is a condemnation, it is not appreciation. Neither Vinoba understands the psychology, nor Gandhi understands the psychology, because he confers the degree of acharya for this stupid explanation.
A case was filed against me, that somebody’s religious feelings were hurt. I said to the court, “This is strange. I have not said a single word against Laxmana. I was criticizing Vinoba’s explanation.” Vinoba was alive then, I told the court, “Call Vinoba, and I am ready to argue with him that his explanation is wrong – not only wrong, but condemnatory. And from where does this man get the idea that his Hindu feelings are hurt? Vinoba is not yet a Hindu incarnation of God, and I am trying to save Laxmana, that this is not the right way. In any Sigmund Freud’s hands this explanation will mean Laxmana is sexually so repressed, so much afraid of his own repression that he cannot look at the face of the woman.”
The court finally agreed with me. But the court was also Hindu, so they were not daring enough to also call Vinoba into the court. I said, “This is unfair. I criticized him, this man says I have hurt his feelings. Now the court gives the judgment that I am not speaking against Hinduism: I have spoken against the explanation. Now it is the duty of the court to call Vinoba. Vinoba has hurt the Hindu mind and the Hindu mind’s religious feeling.” But Vinoba was a great Hindu leader, so naturally he was never called. The case was really against him, not against me.
But a strange thing happened. Whenever the case was in the court, thousands of people would be there, inside the court, outside on the verandas, on the lawn, thousands of people – at least ten thousand people would come to listen to what I was saying, and they were all Hindus. And when I won the case, the man who had filed the case against me told the magistrate that he needs police protection.
I said, “For what? I need police protection because I have hurt the feelings of the Hindu religion, religious people, and these ten thousand people are Hindus. And I have to go out of this room. These ten thousand people can kill me. And this fellow is asking police support and police protection, for what? Are these Hindus against him?”
They were: they could see the point clearly, they could see that this man is simply a Hindu chauvinist. They could see that I had been unnecessarily harassed for the whole year. And they were really angry, they were shouting and screaming and asking that the man should be delivered to them, so they could teach him what it means to be religiously hurt!
The magistrate himself was afraid that the situation was dangerous. He told the man to go inside, behind, which was the magistrate’s private room. “Just remain there until everybody is gone. No police protection will help, because these ten thousand people… From where can I bring the whole army to prevent these ten thousand people? The court has a few policemen, but they are not enough to protect you: just sit.”
And he went inside the room and waited. I left, so naturally other people left, by and by. Perhaps he must have left just when the court was being closed, or he must have left with the magistrate in his own car.

Exactly that type of case they have put in Germany and soon they will be putting it in every country. I told the Australian media, “Get ready, I am coming” – now the whole of Australia is agog, afraid. Newspapers have started coming, saying that people are very much disturbed, afraid that I may remain there, may not leave Australia.
But the man himself who was here was an intelligent man; I really loved the man, he was not just a journalist. He is answering the phone calls continuously coming to his studio. He informed us, “I have never answered myself, my secretary answers: but this time I am answering myself because I can say to them that I have been there, I have seen the man, I have seen the commune that is there, and they are beautiful people. You need not be afraid, and don’t get unnecessarily excited by rumors, there is no danger.”
But it is now all over Australia, a great wave of fear. I have not gone there and there is not much possibility. But my people are there, and my people are growing in every country. And in every country my people will have to face the same problems. They cannot believe, the politicians and others, that I am not going to use my influence politically. It is something inconceivable to those retarded people, that there can be a man who has great influence and is not going to use it in any way.
My influence is that of love. I love my people, and I would not like to put my people in any kind of destructive situation. But what can you do with people who are so afraid that they cannot even come to visit the commune to see, and experience themselves, that there is nothing to fear? My people are peaceful and wherever they will go they will bring the peace, the silence, the rejoicing. They will bring songs to every country and ecstasy to every land. They don’t understand our war is totally different – we are spreading a certain kind of atmosphere around the world which can prevent wars, which can prevent Adolf Hitlers, which can prevent nuclear weapons being used.
Osho,
In your vision of the world being one commune, is it still so that the Italians should be the cooks, the French the lovers and the Germans the organizers?
Most probably, because who can cook better than the Italians? And in my commune everybody is to do the best he can. Yes, the Germans will be the organizers; they have proved, and I have a greater number of Germans than any other country. They are the best organizers, the most reliable people; you can trust them, they can never betray. They certainly have a very strong spirit.
But nobody is going to force them; if they want to change places they can change, and that is how it is happening in my communes all over the world. People don’t remain stuck to one job, they want to learn many more things. The doctor wants to learn plumbing, the plumber wants to be a mechanic, the mechanic wants to be a cook. The commune is also a university. It is so many things together: it is a religion, it is a university, it is the birth place for the new man.
So my feeling is that Italians will try to learn how to organize, although in the beginning their organization will be greasy, lousy, spaghetti all over. Nobody is going to condemn them, that’s natural. The Germans cooking – you can understand, Koran Grove will be full. If we can survive German cooking, that means a miracle has happened. But we will try, we are open to all possibilities. And it is already happening that way – in fact the moment you enter a commune nobody recognizes you as Italian, as German, as Indian, as American. All those things simply disappear: you are just my people, the red people. A new identity comes up and throws out all old identifications.
I don’t know who is a German, who is an Italian, who is Greek, who is Spanish. I don’t know myself, except for a few people who had come to me in the very beginning, so I know them more personally. That’s why when I want to say something about Germans I will use Haridas, because except Haridas I don’t know any German. If I have to talk about the English, I have to talk about Teertha because I don’t know anybody else. If I have to talk about Italians, then Asheesh is the only Italian. But there are many and now there is no possibility for me to be acquainted the way I am with Teertha or Haridas or Asheesh: that way is not possible any more.
I will love you but I will not know your name. I will do everything for you but I will not know your name, your race, your country. And the thing has become so enormous and big, and it is expanding with such speed, you cannot expect me to. In the beginning, when there were only a few people who could be counted on the fingers, naturally I knew their name, their country, their background and they had the chance of being more intimate. In the beginning it was possible. But don’t feel that those who have come late are deprived of anything, because my work has really begun now.
After I started speaking again, those three years that I remained silent were just to give a gap. All that I had done before that was only a preparation. Then a three-year gap for all those who want to escape, can escape before my real work starts. So those who have come just now, they should not feel deprived, my work has begun just now. Now I am talking directly to you: there is no Krishna between me and you and no Jesus between me and you. I am cutting their heads right and left and creating a direct passage.
I am not allowing even people whom I love – Bodhidharma, Chuang Tzu – I am not going to let anyone stand between me and you, I am going to chop their heads. Of course, lovingly. I can ask them, “Forgive me, but I have to chop your head because now nobody stands between me and my people.” However beautiful is Heraclitus, and however much I have loved Pythagoras and Zarathustra, does not matter, that is my personal affair. As far as you are concerned, I am not going to let anybody else stand between me and you.
So nobody needs to feel that he has missed something – no! My work has begun just now and you have all come in the right moment. Those who have remained in the preparatory period, in the silent period, of course are more fortunate. But, if you have courage enough you can take a long jump and be in the front line with the old sannyasins. It only needs courage: they had enough time to go slowly, step by step, the new sannyasins will have to jump four steps at a time. Soon you will be all in the same line.
And that’s my effort, that’s why I am giving you so many shocks. Shocks are particularly good to keep people jumping. I don’t let them stand in one place; another electric shock and they jump four, five steps immediately. A day or two I may let them rest there, but not more than that.
Osho,
Why is the media so nervous around you?
Because they have never come across a man like I am. The media knows politicians, popes, other kinds of leaders; they are all afraid of the media and nervous. The politician is nervous: he has reasons to be nervous. And the journalist is assertive and aggressive, and the politician is simply dodging and trying to save his skull.
A few days ago I saw an interview with Rajiv Gandhi, who has now become the prime minister of India – he was here in America. The interviewer goes on continuously hammering and Rajiv Gandhi looks almost frozen, as if any moment his breathing is going to stop. And I can see the reason, because the interviewer tried in different ways to get Rajiv Gandhi to say something against Russia. That Rajiv Gandhi cannot do. Before coming to America, first he had gone to Russia. In fact, he must have been prepared there in Russia, what to say and what not to say, because India is almost in the hands of Russia. It is not a communist country but on the very verge, any day it is going to become a communist country.
The interviewer was also trying to force Rajiv to say something against America. That he cannot do. He has come to America to create more friendship, he has come to get more uranium for nuclear weapons in India: he cannot say anything against America. He cannot praise America either, because Russia will get upset; he cannot praise Russia because America will get upset.
So naturally, the politician is nervous before the media. I have no problem; I can say exactly what I want to say. All the media becomes nervous because they know they will not even be able to report the things I say, because if they take all these things to the editor, they may perhaps be thrown out of the job.
They are nervous because what I am saying is also hurting their prejudices. They are human beings: first they are human beings, then they may be journalists. First Christians, then they may be journalists: and when I am hitting on Jesus they want to scream but they cannot do that. Naturally, it becomes a nervous feeling, they forget to ask what they wanted to ask. They have never met a man like me who has nothing to lose, so can say anything, who does not belong to your society, who does not care about respectability.
Now, the pope is continuously concerned that his respectability as the greatest religious leader in the world should not be affected by any statement. All his statements are prepared by other bishops, looked at by a committee, everything is edited. He is simply a spokesman, he is not speaking himself. The whole church, the Catholic hierarchy, is decisive. He has just to speak what they teach him, what they tell him to say.
Another fundamental reason they get nervous is that I am an absolutely free man. I don’t care about contradicting myself, so they cannot put me into a corner by saying, “You said this fifteen years ago, now you are saying that.” They cannot put me into any corner. I say forget it, to hell with those fifteen years. Whatever I am saying now is true now: tomorrow I do not promise I will say the same thing, because I don’t bother about consistency, about respectability, about what people will think.
I have no reason to be nervous, I simply enjoy their nervousness. It is strange, something new. The table with the water is placed by the side of the person who is being interviewed. Because when he feels nervous he can start drinking just to do something: get busy, forget nervousness, and meanwhile he also has time to think what to say next. Here, it is just the opposite: the water and everything is placed by the side of the media. And I see them plucking grapes, taking water, tossing and turning in their chair, sometimes looking at the photographer, sometimes at the director.
They will never forget the interview, because that kind of interview is never going to happen to them unless they come here again, to have another nervous breakdown. But my work is first to give you a nervous breakdown, because only from there is there a possibility of a spiritual breakthrough. Breakdown to breakthrough, that’s the whole story.