---
title: The Great Zen Master Ta Hui 01
series: The Great Zen Master Ta Hui 01-38
talk_number: 1
url: https://oshoworld.com/the-great-zen-master-ta-hui-01
language: English
duration: 01:46:42
author: ZEN AND ZEN MASTERS
scraped_at: 2026-01-03T09:28:14.519328+00:00
---
Clear the Mind (to Li Hsien-Ch’en)

Buddha said, If you want to know the realm of buddhahood, you must make your mind as clear as empty space, and leave false thinking and all grasping far behind, causing your mind to be unobstructed wherever it may turn. The realm of buddhahood is not some external world, where there is a formal “Buddha”: it’s the realm of the wisdom of a self-awakened sage.
Once you are determined that you want to know this realm, you do not need adornment, cultivation, or realization to attain it. You must clear away the stains of afflictions from alien sensations that have been on your mind since beginningless time, so that your mind is as broad and open as empty space, detached from all the clinging of the discriminating intellect, and your false, unreal, vain thoughts too are like empty space. Then this wondrous, effortless mind will be unimpeded wherever it goes.

Mindlessness (to Hung Po-Ch’ong)

An ancient worthy had a saying: “To look for the ox, one must seek out its tracks. To study the path, seek out mindlessness. Where the tracks are, so must the ox be.” The path of mindlessness is easy to seek out. So-called mindlessness is not being inert and unknowing like earth, wood, tile, or stone; it means that the mind is settled and imperturbable when in contact with situations and meeting circumstances; that it does not cling to anything, but is clear in all places, without hindrance or obstruction; without being stained, yet without dwelling in the stainlessness; viewing body and mind like dreams or illusions, yet without remaining in the perspective of dreams’ and illusions’ empty nothingness.
Only when one arrives at a realm like this, can it be called true mindlessness. No, it’s not lip-service mindlessness: if you haven’t attained true mindlessness and just go by the verbal kind, how is this different from the perverted Ch’an of “silent illumination”?
“Just get to the root, don’t worry about the branches.”
Emptying this mind is the root. Once you get the root, the fundamental, then all kinds of language and knowledge and all your daily activities as you respond to people and adapt to circumstances, through so many upsets and downfalls, whether joyous or angry, good or bad, favorable or adverse – these are all trivial matters, the branches. If you can be spontaneously aware and knowing as you are going along with circumstances, then there is neither lack nor excess.
The great Zen teacher Ta Hui comes from the same lineage as Bodhidharma. He was born four hundred years after Bodhidharma had left for the Himalayas, to disappear into the eternal ice, the eternal silence there.
I have called Ta Hui the great Zen teacher – not a master…it has to be explained to you clearly. The master is one who is enlightened. but sometimes it happens that the master may be enlightened, but is not articulate enough to give expression to what he has known. That is a totally different art.
The teacher is not enlightened, but he is very articulate. He can say things which the master, although he knows, cannot bring to words. The teacher can say them, although he does not know.
The teacher he has heard…he has lived with enlightened people, he has imbibed their energy, he has been showered by their flowers. He has tasted something transpiring from the enlightened ones, so he has a certainty that something like enlightenment happens, but he has no authority of his own; his authority is borrowed. And if the teacher is a genius, he can almost manage to express things over which masters have faltered, or they have remained silent.
The teacher has his own utility. He is more available to the people – he belongs to the people. The master is on a high sunlit peak. Even if he shouts from there, only echoes reach to the people’s ears. But the teacher lives among the people, knows their life, knows their language, knows how things should be expressed so they can understand. The master remains committed to his experience, while the teacher is more committed to the people, to spread the message.
Once in a while it happens that the master cannot express at all. For example, Ramakrishna was an enlightened man, but utterly uneducated, uncultured, knowing nothing of great literature, knowing nothing of what other enlightened people have said. He experienced the beauty of his inner being, but he was absolutely handicapped as far as conveying it to others. He had to take the support of a man, Vivekananda, who was not enlightened but was a great genius – very intelligent, rational, logical, intellectual, well-versed, well-educated. He became the mouthpiece of Ramakrishna. He went around the world spreading his message.
Whatever exists today as Ramakrishna Mission, is completely the work of Vivekananda, but he himself died in utter agony. The agony was more intense because he had been spreading the good news of ecstasy, but inside he was empty. His whole message was only verbal, but he managed it so cleverly that many started thinking of him as enlightened.
The same thing happened with Ta Hui. When he was just sixteen years old he was so intelligent…he left the world, and after one year of preparation he was initiated as a monk, when he was just seventeen. Then he went from master to master, seeking the right enlightened man who could show him the way.
He found his master in Yuan Wu. It seems almost the same situation: Yuan Wu knows, but cannot say it. Ta Hui does not know, but can say it. Just living with the master, imbibing his energy, watching his grace – the way he walks, the way he sits, the way he remains silent…
Rarely, once in a while, Yuan Wu speaks a word or sentence. His statements are collected in a small book, Blue Cliff Record, but they are almost impossible to understand. They don’t seem to be related to each other, relevant to each other; they look fragmentary. They don’t create a system.
Even though his words were recorded in Blue Cliff Record, Yuan Wu never addressed the people. On the contrary, he simply asked Ta Hui just to look into the Blue Cliff Record and express his opinion, say what he thinks of them. He was not certain that he had been able to say what he wanted to say, and whether what he had said conveyed anything or was just a futile exercise. In every case Ta Hui completely comprehended the subtle meaning.
The older master exclaimed, “You must be someone who has come again!”
By saying this he is saying, “You must have been born almost enlightened, just a little bit is missing; perhaps you may be able to manage it in this life. But you have understood my expressions perfectly well.” This was his seal, when he said “You must be someone who has come again!” – you cannot be new. You have been on the path for a long, long time; although you have not achieved the ultimate end, you are very close.
But the master could not be deceived just by Ta Hui’s understanding of the words, which any intelligent man of great talent like Ta Hui could have done. Yuan Wu again said to Ta Hui:
“It was not easy for you to get to this stage…”
you have struggled hard
“…too bad that having died, you are unable to come back to life.”
This will be clear to you if I refer to Jesus who says, “Unless you are born again, you will not understand the truth.”
There are two parts of the path. The first part is to let your ego die. It is strenuous, arduous, difficult, because you know only your ego, you don’t know your authentic self. You are jumping into an abyss, not knowing whether you will survive or not; that Ta Hui has done. But the second part – of resurrection, of giving birth to your new individuality, or your authentic being – has not happened.
“It was not easy for you to get to this stage – too bad that having died…”
died as an ego
“…you are unable to come back to life. Without a doubt, words and phrases are a great disease, but haven’t you seen the saying:”
and it is a beautiful statement from the master:
“Hanging from a cliff,
let go – and agree
to accept the experience.”
That is the most important part in it:
“Hanging from a cliff,
let go…”
That is accepting death of the ego. But don’t do it with effort, with tension. Don’t do it to achieve anything based on greed or ambition; just do it simply to discover your real self. The right way of doing is:
“…agree to accept the experience.”
Yuan Wu tells Ta Hui: You have not agreed to accept the experience, so only the first half is complete. The ego has died and has left you in a limbo, because you have not been absolutely total in your let-go. Let-go you managed – but it was a managed let-go, it was not a spontaneous acceptance. You have not enjoyed the let-go. If you had enjoyed, then:
“After annihilation,
come back to life –
I could not deceive you.”
He was a man of few words. It is unfortunate…very rarely a few people become enlightened, but out of those few the major part never say anything. The few who say anything say only fragments, and in a language…unless you are enlightened it will not be possible to comprehend their meaning. And a few never say a single word. They don’t leave any trace on the sands of this bank, of this shore; they simply disappear into the other shore.
Ta Hui, hearing this saying from the master Yuan Wu:
“Hanging from a cliff,
let-go – and agree
to accept the experience.”
If you can manage this falling into the abyss as a celebration, with a joyful heart, then:
“After annihilation, come back to life…”
…then there is no problem: you will come back to life. In fact, what you used to think of as life was not life; now you will come to the eternal life. But the bridge between the two is total acceptance.
Yuan Wu must have seen in the eyes of Ta Hui some doubt, some question mark. That’s why he adds:
“I could not deceive you.”
Ta Hui remained with Master Yuan Wu; he fell in love with the master. When the master could even see in his mind just a little doubt, and had to say:
“I could not deceive you,”
it was clear that he had come to the right man, who could look into his very being and could say in exact words what had happened to him. Half of his journey was over, but because he had not been in a total accepting mood, the half had been incomplete… “Now accept totally, and resurrection will happen on its own.”
Naturally Ta Hui would have doubted; that is the nature of intellect, to doubt, and he was a very intelligent man, young, fresh, and belonging to the genius category. He must have realized that the master had even seen the unexpressed doubt in his mind, and that is why he is saying:
“I could not deceive you.”
He remained with the master. Listening to the master, imbibing his spirit, his presence, slowly, slowly he became very articulate, although enlightenment perhaps was still far away… And it became even farther away, because he started receiving honors from the people – even from the emperor, from the government – as a realized man. These are very dangerous things. When you are not realized and the government recognizes you, and great honors are conferred on you, you can get into a deluded state about yourself. You can start thinking, “Perhaps I am enlightened.”
Two things can do this. One: he has learned in moving from master to master everything that Zen teaching is. So if you listen only to his words, it is very difficult for you to find that he is not enlightened. Unless you are enlightened, you will not be able to see the flaws, the small gaps, which are bound to be there because it is not his own experience; it is simply clippings from other masters that he has collected – collected with tremendous intelligence. He almost deceived the Imperial Power. They honored him as the “Buddha Sun,” as the “Sun of Enlightenment.”
Emperor Hsiao Tsung bestowed the title “Ch’an Master of Great Wisdom” from which the name Ta Hui comes.
Ta Hui means the “Great Master of Wisdom.”
Only at the last moment it seems he attained enlightenment, just before he died, but then he did not say anything except a small verse. So I have called him “The Great Teacher” – and he was certainly a great teacher. He influenced millions of people; he was a great leader in the sense that anybody who came in contact with him was immediately intellectually convinced. But he had no presence, and he had no inner silence. It seems that only at the last moment he attained the goal, he completed the journey.
It was 1163, on the 9th day of the 8th month, after showing signs of illness, when Ta Hui told the congregation of monks, nuns, and lay people, “Tomorrow I am going.”
That is the first indication that he knows when he is going to die. The second:
Toward the pre-dawn hours, his attendant asked Ta Hui for a verse.
That is an old tradition in China: when a great master dies, as his last statement, his last gift to the world, people ask him to write a verse.
In a serious voice Ta Hui said, “Without a verse, I could not die.” He took up the brush, and wrote:

Birth is thus
Death is thus
Verse or no verse
What’s the fuss?
This is the whole idea of Gautam Buddha’s philosophy of suchness condensed. Birth is thus… thusness or suchness mean exactly the same. There is no reason to think why it is: it is there.
Birth is thus
Death is thus….
There is no reason why you are dying. A tremendous acceptability is part of the philosophy of thusness, or suchness. Everything that happens, the man of understanding simply accepts it – this is how things are, this is how nature functions. There is no complaint, there is no grudge.
Birth is thus
Death is thus
Verse or no verse
What’s the fuss?

Then he let go of the writing brush and passed on.
Perhaps in this moment, when he was writing this verse, he completed his journey.
The discourses that are going to follow were given when he was not enlightened, but he was very clear in explaining everything to the ordinary people. He moved among laymen, he talked to the ordinary people, and he talked in a way that they could understand. His whole approach was that the great masters are not available to the people; they are available only to very intimate disciples, or perhaps only to the devotees – who will take care of the millions? So he started moving among the people, and the people were rejoicing; that’s why the emperor honored him as a great master, as a sun of awareness.
Masters don’t move, they don’t go to the people; they know the gap between them and the ordinary people is too big, almost unbridgeable. Unless somebody comes close to the master on his own accord, there is no way for the master to penetrate his being.
But Ta Hui was not a master, he was a very articulate teacher. He was not talking Zen; he was talking about Zen. All that he had gathered…and he had gathered really very consistently, very logically. Only once in a while will I tell you that he has committed a mistake – which is natural, because he has nothing inside himself to compare it with. He has no criterion except his intelligence, his logic, his reason. But enlightenment is beyond your mind, beyond your rationality, beyond your intellect. That ultimate criterion is not within him. But he is certainly of immense cleverness, although blind; he has not seen the light. He describes the light as if he is a man who has eyes. He has only heard people who have eyes. But he has collected every piece of information in a very systematic way. So remember this: he is a teacher, not a master. And I make an absolute distinction.
A teacher is one who transfers knowledge which he has collected, borrowed from others. He can be very articulate. If you face a master and a teacher perhaps you may choose the teacher, because he will be more appealing to your intellect and mind.
The master will look a little crazy. He will be jumping from one point to another point without creating a systematic philosophy. But the master has the real treasure, the teacher has only heard about it. The teacher is poor, howsoever clever.

The sutras:
Buddha said, If you want to know the realm of buddhahood,
– the world of ultimate awareness –
you must make your mind as clear as empty space.
It is another way of saying that you should move beyond mind into a state of no-mind, because there is no such thing as empty mind. That’s why I say such flaws will be there. Empty mind? Empty space? A man of enlightenment would have simply said, “You should move beyond mind to no-mind.”
There is a very famous book by a rabbi, Joshua Liebman. It has sold millions of copies in many languages. It is a beautiful piece of work; the name of the book is Peace Of Mind. Naturally, everybody wants peace of mind.
I wrote a letter to him, saying “Your very title shows that you don’t know anything about meditation. Peace of mind is a contradiction in terms: when mind is there, peace cannot be; and if peace is there, then mind cannot be. They cannot both be there together.” In fact, mind is your anxiety, your anguish, your tensions, your thoughts, your emotions, sentiments, moods, ups and downs – everything is mind. Peace is possible only if you go beyond mind.
So I told him, “If you are really sincere, in the next edition you should change the title. Peace is equal to no-mind.” I had made it so clear in many ways to him. But this is the situation of our intellectuals – he never replied, because there was nothing to reply. He must have seen that what I am saying is a fact.
But I can forgive Joshua Liebman because he knows nothing of Eastern meditation. He is an American Jew, and meditation is simply a strange phenomenon to them. Peace of mind…? Perhaps my letter was the only one that had objected to the title. I said, “When the title is wrong I cannot read the book, because I know perfectly well that when a man writes a book and even the title is wrong, his book is worthless. If you ever change the title…but just the change of title won’t do – you will have to change the whole book according to the title.”
And leave false thinking and all grasping far behind…
Now he is saying exactly what I mean by no-mind, but no-mind would not have been conceivable for him. He is a mind, and everything that he has understood is through mind. And the people who are listening to him are able to make a bridge between his understanding and their understanding because all are minds. A mind can talk to another mind very easily.
So he has collected these words, empty space, and leave false thinking and all grasping far behind. But I would like to make you aware how even the most intelligent people can fall into traps. He is saying, leave false thinking – what about right thinking? A man of enlightenment will simply say, “leave all thinking.” Thinking as such is a problem – either false or not. Mind can conceive that that which is wrong can be left, and that which is good can be kept. But you cannot divide the wrong from the right. They are two sides of the same coin, and you cannot have a coin with only one side; the other side will be there.
If you protect right thinking – whatever you think is right – underneath will remain wrong thinking. If you try “love”…of course love is not wrong thinking; it is one of the most beautiful emotions, and the thought of love is one of the great thoughts. But just behind love there will be hate hiding, and love can change into hate anytime. Right thinking can become wrong thinking anytime.
If it had been his own experience, he would not have said, leave false thinking and all grasping far behind; he would have said, leave all thinking and all grasping far behind, causing your mind to be unobstructed wherever it may turn.
But these are the qualities of no-mind.
The realm of buddhahood is not some external world where there is a formal “Buddha”: it is the realm of the wisdom of a self-awakened sage.
He has collected the right words.

Once you are determined…. In Sanskrit and in Hindustani, the word which has been translated as determined is far deeper and more significant. The word is nishchaya. Determined has a quality of stubbornness, adamantness. It has a quality of something that belongs to the ego, such as, “I am determined to do it.” The word nishchaya does not have all these connotations.
Nishchaya is a very beautiful word. It means when you come to the master, just his presence, his fragrance, his eyes, his gestures, his words, his silence give you a tremendous trust within. It is not your determination; it is the deep impact of the enlightened man in your heart.
Instead of saying determined, I would like to say that once you are in trust, in nishchaya, no doubt arises. All doubts have disappeared; you feel completely at ease.
This nishchaya – that you want to know this realm – is bound to create in you a longing, not a desire. These words may mean the same in the dictionaries, but in actual existence they are so far apart. When you have attained to nishchaya – “This is the man to whom I belong, this is the man whom I have been searching for lives. These are the eyes I have seen in the silences of my heart, this is the face I have been looking for in so many, many ways in so many lives” …suddenly a nishchaya, a trust which knows no doubt. It is not a belief; belief is always about doctrines. Trust is always about persons.
It is not what the master is saying that you believe; it is what the master is that creates a nishchaya, a trust in you. And that trust will start growing into a deep longing – you would also like to enter into the same world of awareness, into the same world of blissfulness, into the same paradise where your master is.
You do not need adornment, cultivation, or realization to attain it.
…your longing will just go on becoming deeper and deeper and deeper. You will be waiting with tremendous love. You will not demand of existence, “Give me this state,” because any demand on existence is ugly. You will simply wait; you will not even pray. You will simply feel thirsty, and existence is compassionate enough. You cannot dominate it, but if you are simply thirsty, you will find existence fulfills your longing.
He has at least heard well!
You do not need adornment, cultivation, or realization to attain it. You must clear away the stains of afflictions from alien sensations that have been on your mind since beginningless time, so that your mind is as broad and open as empty space…
You can see the discrepancy! If you say that your mind is as open as empty space, it is no longer mind. It is as if you are saying, “When your fire is as cold as ice” – then why call it fire? Just calling it ice will be the right thing! But for an intellectual it is difficult; he is simply collecting opinions. And nobody is going to raise a question, because they don’t know that he is committing a mistake either.

…so that your mind is as broad and open as empty space… How much space is there? Do you know? The whole universe is empty space. The mind does not have the capacity to be so broad.
…detached from all the clinging of the discriminating intellect, and your false, unreal, vain thoughts too are like empty space.
But he goes on making the distinction that you should keep your good thoughts.
In a state of absolute silence and peace there are no good thoughts, no bad thoughts. Thoughts as such are a disturbance, whether they are good or bad. The sinner may be having bad thoughts in his mind, and the saint may be having good thoughts in his mind, but both are in the mind. There is no qualitative difference between them.
The true sage, the buddha, has no mind at all.
He lives without mind, he acts without mind.
It comes from his very innermost being; hence, it has a quality, a freshness, a great splendor. Thoughts are always dusty and old. The sage always acts afresh, not out of any old thoughts; he responds to the situation moment to moment. There is no need for him to think. It is almost like a blind man: if he wants to go out of this auditorium, he will have to ask, “Where is the way?” And then, with his walking stick, he will find the way and go out. But you never even think about it when you want to go out; you simply see the way out and you go. There is no thinking involved in it, and certainly no walking stick.
I have heard about a blind man whose eyes were operated upon. He had come with his walking stick, and after a few days the doctor opened the bandage on his eyes and told him, “Now, slowly, slowly open your eyes. Your eyes are perfectly good; now you can see.”
He was amazed at what he had been missing, all the colors, the sun, the moon, the stars, people’s faces – everything he had been missing. He thanked the doctor, but out of old habit he took his walking stick. The doctor said, “What are you taking that walking stick for? Leave it.”
But he said, “Without it how am I going to find my way?”
The doctor said, “You are an idiot. Now you have eyes, there is no need to find the way; the way will be clear to you. Just put that walking stick on that pile.”
There were many walking sticks. All the people he had cured had come with their walking sticks, and he had been collecting them as souvenirs, showing how many people he had cured. And he said, “It is not only you! Every blind man, when I cure his eyes, immediately picks up his walking stick to start going out.”
Unconscious habit…too long he has had the walking stick; he cannot believe that life is possible without it.
The same is the situation of all who have lived with the mind for millions of lives. That has been their guide, whatever they wanted to do. It is inconceivable for the mind that you can live even for a single moment without it. But it is just a walking stick for a blind man.
There is far more consciousness beyond the mind – so broad, so spacious, so silent that you need not think. It simply goes on responding. In the mind you have to think what to do and what not to do. It is always a question of either/or.
The moment you are beyond mind there is no question of either/or. You simply know what has to be done and you do it, and there is no repentance, ever. You never look back, you never feel that you have done something wrong – you cannot do wrong.
These are the reasons why I have not called Ta Hui the great master. I am simply calling him a great teacher; perhaps at the last moment he became enlightened – but at the last moment. These teachings were given before it.
Then this wondrous effortless mind will be unimpeded wherever it goes.
He goes on using the word mind for no-mind. Because he has been collecting, and he has no inner criterion, you will come across many contradictions. In the second sutra, which is called mindlessness…now what has happened to the mind that he was talking about in the first sutra?
An ancient worthy had a saying: “To look for the ox, one must seek out its tracks. To study the path, seek out mindlessness. Where the tracks are, so must the ox be.”
The ox is an old symbol in Zen tradition for the lost soul, the lost self that you have forgotten all about. Mindlessness will show you the path, will indicate to you the soul; it will become an arrow, and you have simply to follow without any tension, without any effort.
The path of mindlessness is easy to seek out. So-called mindlessness is not being inert and unknowing like earth, wood, tile, or stone; it means that the mind is settled…
Again he starts using the word mind. This is the trouble with a teacher.
It means that the mind is settled and imperturbable when in contact with situations and meeting circumstances; that it does not cling to anything, but is clear in all places, without hindrance or obstruction; without being stained
But it is still there. Then why did he start calling the sutra Mindlessness? The mind again comes in. It is settled, but that which is settled can be unsettled any moment. It is imperturbable, but that which is imperturbable can be perturbed.
…that it does not cling to anything…but it is there. And clinging is an old habit; it can start clinging tomorrow, if not today. It can fall back.

…but is clear in all places without hindrance or obstruction; without being stained. If it is there, there is every possibility of its being stained. Mindlessness is the right word to explain pure space, without any possibility of falling back.
…yet without dwelling in the stainlessness; viewing body and mind like dreams or illusions…
You can see his mind continuously wavering, because all these statements he must have collected from different people. Some may have been enlightened, some may have been just teachers, some may have been just learned people. He has made a good collection – but I can see that there are inconsistencies in it, because I have a criterion within me.

…viewing body and mind like dreams or illusions… If mind and body are illusions, then what is the need of making them broad, making them spacious, making them non-clinging? If they are like dreams or illusions, just wake up and they are finished. That wakefulness is mindlessness.
…yet without remaining in the perspective of dreams’ and illusions’ empty nothingness. Only when one arrives at a realm like this can it be called true mindlessness.
He is utterly messed up! He may have been helpful in bringing people to the masters, but he himself is not yet clear on what he is saying.
No, it is not lip-service mindlessness: if you have not attained true mindlessness and just go by the verbal kind…
– and that’s what he is doing –
…how is this different from the perverted Ch’an of “silent illumination”?
These people commit many mistakes because of their attachment to a certain school. Now, he is attached to a certain school – Mahayana also has different sects. First Buddhism was divided into two sects, Mahayana and Hinayana; then they started dividing into different sects. In all, there are now thirty-six sects. A man of unenlightenment is continuously trying to defend, to criticize, the other sects.
In China there has been a sect called “The Sect of Silent Illumination.” I don’t see that there is any problem – all illumination happens in silence. Silence is the illumination. But people fight over words: because they don’t call it enlightenment, they call it illumination, that has created a rift. But you can understand very easily that both words mean the same. Illumination or enlightenment – both are simply declaring that darkness has disappeared. What you choose to call it is immaterial.
“Just get to the root, don’t worry about the branches” –
He must have got this from an enlightened master. “Just get to the root, don’t worry about the branches,” because once you have cut the root, the whole tree will wither away. But just cutting the branches is not going to help; the foliage may become, on the contrary, thicker.
Emptying this mind is the root.
Not just emptying…in the first place, there is no way to empty the mind. You don’t have any control over your mind. It goes on in its own way, filled with dreams and thoughts and emotions and feelings and reactions, sadnesses, happinesses – there is no way to empty it. How are you going to empty it? From one side you will be emptying it, and from the other side a great flow will go on coming in. The only way to empty it is to go beyond it – to become awareness.
Watch the mind, and the mind disappears.
Once you get the root, the fundamental, then all kinds of language and knowledge and all your daily activities as you respond to people and adapt to circumstances, through so many upsets and downfalls, whether joyous or angry, good or bad, favorable or adverse – these are all trivial matters, the branches. If you can be spontaneously aware and knowing as you are going along with circumstances, then there is neither lack nor excess.
That is one of the most important experiences of Gautam Buddha. He says that if you are just in the middle of any two polar opposites – find exactly the middle, neither lack nor excess – if you are exactly in the middle, you will go beyond.
The middle is the beyond.
If you go to the extreme, then you will start clinging to it; from the extreme you cannot go beyond.
That was a great contribution to spiritual science and to humanity, that the middle is the beyond. Just keep yourself balanced in the middle, and suddenly you will see you have gone above both the extremes – neither good nor bad, neither ordinary nor extraordinary, neither knowledgeable nor ignorant.
This beyondness is his nirvana. Just to think about it you will feel an immense peace. Just visualize it and you will feel a great silence descending on you. And this is only visualization – what will happen in actuality if you come to the middle? You cannot conceive the ecstasy of it, the blissfulness of it, the benediction of it.
I have chosen Ta Hui to help you understand the difference between the teacher and the master, because many religions have lost their masters. For example, Jainism in India has had no masters, no enlightened persons at all, for centuries – only teachers.
Without an enlightened being, the religion loses its soul. It is only the small stream of enlightened people that keeps the religion breathing and its heart beating, that keeps it alive, flowering.
And one enlightened person is not just a singular phenomenon; he spreads his illumination all around. Wherever he is, he carries a certain energy field, and whoever is receptive will be pulled into the energy field. The teacher has no energy field. He is just repeating mechanically like a parrot.
But Ta Hui was certainly a great teacher, because he collected…he went to dozens of enlightened masters. He was so young when he was initiated into monkhood, and he gathered like a bee gathers honey from thousands of flowers. So on the one hand he is very rich; he has brought so much honey from different flowers. But on the other hand he is very poor; he has not contributed anything from his own being. But I am happy that at least in the end, at the very end of his life, he became enlightened. His small verse is certainly of great beauty:

Birth is thus – just a happening in a dream.
Death is thus – just a happening in a dream.
Verse or no verse
What is the fuss?

He has entered into a realm of ultimate serenity and silence. It does not matter whether it is life or death. It does not matter whether he is following the tradition of writing a verse, or not writing it.

Then he just let go of the writing brush and passed on.

Passed on into eternal existence. It does not matter when you become enlightened. Even if you become enlightened at the last breath of your life, it is perfectly good. You have not lost anything. You will see the whole life that you have lived as a dream.
And the moment you can see your whole life as a dream, it has lost all its impact on you. You have become totally free – free from all bondage of the body and the mind, free from all limitations. You are ready to enter into the limitless consciousness of existence itself.

============================================================

Tend the Ox

Since you’re studying this path, then at all times – in your encounters with people and responses to circumstances – you must not let wrong thoughts continue. If you cannot see through them, then the moment a wrong thought comes up you should quickly concentrate your mental energy to pull yourself away. If you always follow those thoughts and let them continue without a break, not only does this obstruct the path, but it makes you out to be a man without wisdom.
In the old days Kuei Shan asked Lazy An, “What work do you do during the twenty-four hours of the day?”
An said, “I tend an ox.”
Kuei Shan said, “How do you tend it?”
An said, “Whenever it gets into the grass, I pull it back by the nose.”
Kuei Shan said, “You’re really tending the ox!”
People who study the path, in controlling wrong thoughts, should be like Lazy An tending his ox; then gradually a wholesome ripening will take place of itself.

Do Not Grasp Another’s Bow

“Do not grasp another’s bow, do not ride another’s horse, do not meddle in another’s affairs.” Though this is a commonplace saying, it can also be sustenance, for entering the path. Just examine yourself constantly: from morning to night, what do you do to help others and help yourself? If you notice even the slightest partiality, or insensitivity, you must admonish yourself. Don’t be careless about this!
In the old days Ch’an master Tao Lin lived up in a tall pine tree on Ch’in Wang mountain; people of the time called him the “Bird’s Nest Monk.” When minister, Po Chu-Yi, was commander of Ch’ien T’ang, he made a special trip to the mountain to visit him.
Po said, “It’s very dangerous where you’re sitting, Ch’an master.”
The master said, “My danger may be very great, minister, but yours is even greater.”
Po said, “I am commander of Ch’ien T’ang: what danger is there?”
The master said, “Fuel and fire are joined, consciousness and identity do not stay: how can you not be in danger?”
Po also asked, “What is the overall meaning of the Buddhist teaching?”
The master said, “Don’t commit any evils, practice the many virtues.”
Po said, “Even a three-year-old child could say this!”
The master said, “Though a three-year-old child can say it, an eighty-year-old man cannot carry it out.” Po then bowed and departed.
Tending the ox is a very ancient symbol in the history of Zen. There exist ten paintings in China; the tenth painting has been a cause of great controversy. I would like you to understand those ten paintings, and the controversy, before we start Ta Hui’s sermon on tending the ox.
The ten paintings are immensely beautiful. In the first, the ox is lost. The man to whom the ox belongs is just standing, looking all around in the thick forest, and he cannot see where the ox has gone. He is simply bewildered, confused. It is getting late, the sun it setting; soon it will be night, and then to go into the thick forest to find the ox will become more and more difficult.
In the second picture he finds footprints of the ox. He feels a little happier; perhaps there is a possibility to find the ox – he has found the footprints. He follows the footprints.
In the third picture he sees the back of the ox standing in the thick forest. It is difficult to see, but he can figure out that it is the back of his ox. In the fourth he has reached the ox; he can see the ox now, its whole body. He rejoices.
In the fifth painting he takes hold of the ox’s horns. It is a great struggle to bring it back home, but he wins. In the sixth picture he is riding on the ox, coming back toward his home. These are beautiful paintings!
In the seventh picture the ox is tied down in his place. In the eighth picture the man is so full of joy that he starts playing on his flute. The ninth picture is an empty frame – there is nothing painted in it.
In the tenth picture, which is the cause of a great controversy, the man is going with a bottle of wine toward the marketplace, almost drunk. You can see, he cannot even walk. This tenth picture has caused a great controversy which has been raging for two thousand years.
One sect, which is the major sect of mahayana, believes that the ninth is the last picture. It represents the no-mind; you have achieved the goal. The ox is your innermost self which you have lost, and the whole series of pictures is in search of your inner self. You have found the self in the ninth. There is immense silence and peace. It is nirvana, it is no-mind.
Beyond the ninth…the people who say this is the end of the journey think that somebody has added the tenth picture, which seems to be absolutely irrelevant. But the people who belong to a small sect of Zen believe in the tenth picture too. They say that when one has become enlightened this is not the end. This is the highest peak of consciousness, it is the greatest achievement, but one has to come back to the human world, to the ordinary world. One has to become again part of the greater humanity. Only then can he share, only then can he provoke others for the search. And certainly when he comes from such height, he is absolutely drunk with ecstasy. That bottle of wine is not an ordinary wine. It is just symbolic of an ecstatic state.
When these pictures were brought to Japan, just twelve or thirteen hundred years ago, only nine pictures were brought. The tenth was troublesome; it was left in China.
I was puzzled when I first looked at the Japanese pictures. They seem to be complete. Once you have achieved nirvana, what more is there? And then I found in an old Chinese book ten pictures. I was immensely happy that somebody had the insight two thousand years ago that a buddha is not a buddha if he cannot come back to the ordinary humanity, if he cannot become again just simple, innocent, carrying his nirvana, carrying his ecstasy in the bottle of wine, utterly drunk with the divine but still going toward the marketplace.
I could see that whoever painted the tenth picture was right. Up to the ninth, it is simply logical. Beyond the ninth, the tenth, is a great realization.
According to me, up to the ninth a man is only a buddha; with the tenth he also becomes a Zorba. And this has been my constant theme: I have been insisting that the tenth picture is authentic, and if it were not there, I was going to paint it. Without it, ending in nothingness looks a little sad, looks a little serious, looks empty.
All this effort of finding yourself, meditating, going beyond the mind, realizing your being and ending up in desert of nothingness…no, there must be something more to it, something more beyond it, where flowers blossom, where songs arise, where dance is again possible – of course, on a totally different level.
But these pictures of tending the ox have been found to be tremendously significant in explaining the whole path step by step.
Ta Hui says,
Since you are studying this path…
Remember what I have said about Ta Hui – he is a teacher; otherwise no master can use the word studying. The master will say, “Since you are following this path, since you are on this path…” Studying? – that is not the way of the seeker; that is the way of the curious student who wants to know something – more information, more knowledge – but who is not interested in actually transforming himself.
But Ta Hui is a teacher. Although he tries in every possible way to pose like a master, he cannot deceive anyone who is enlightened. Here and there will be loopholes, but he cannot imagine that they will show his masterhood to be just a hypocrisy.
It would have been absolutely correct if he had said, “I am only a teacher.” But he is not saying that. When there is a possibility to be accepted as a master – even the emperor accepts him as a great master of Ch’an – then he keeps quiet. He must have known, because he seems to be a very intelligent man, he must have been aware that he is not a master. He is a very good teacher, and I would like you to remember on every point how he shows his unawareness.
Since you are studying this path… Studying belongs to students. A seeker does not study the path, a seeker gets involved. He participates in the whole pilgrimage. He is a pilgrim, he is not a student. He has no desire to know about the path; he wants to reach the goal – path or no path. He wants to come back home.
Then at all times – in your encounters with people and responses to circumstances – you must not let wrong thoughts continue.
Again, a loophole. The question is not of wrong thoughts and right thoughts; all thoughts are wrong as far as going beyond the mind is concerned. He is not even aware of the fact that the right and wrong are never separate; they are always together.
Can you separate love from hate? Millions have tried but not a single person has been able to succeed, because you are going against the very nature of things.
Can you separate darkness from light? Although they look so different, scientific inquiry into light and into darkness has proved something against common sense. The difference between darkness and light is only of degrees. Darkness simply means less light, and light simply means less darkness.
That’s why there are animals, like owls and others, for whom in the night it is as day. They have better eyes than you have, so even in lesser light – which looks to you like darkness – for them it is full light. Their eyes are more capable than your eyes. In the day they cannot open their eyes, because their eyes are so sensitive that the daylight is dazzling. In the daylight their eyes simply close; naturally they see darkness. When for you it is light, for the owls it is night. And when for you it is night, for the owls it is day, full light.
So the difference between light and darkness is only of degrees. You cannot have light without darkness, and you cannot have God without the devil.
It is strange that the religions who believe in God automatically believe in the devil too. They have to, it is just a logical necessity. And the religions who don’t believe in God don’t believe in the devil either. For example, Jainism has no God, therefore there is no devil. It is simply out of the question. But all the religions that believe in God have to accept his polar opposite, the devil.
Why this necessity? Because existence always needs a polarity. Birth is polarized by death, love is polarized by hate, compassion is polarized by cruelty. Look around life. Everything has its polar opposite, and if you can take away the polar opposite then the other will also disappear. They can exist only together.
What is a good thought and what is a bad thought? And how can you separate them? Only a teacher does not know that the final approach toward your being needs all thoughts to disappear – it does not matter whether they are good or bad. We are not talking here of morality; we are talking here of authentic religion.
Of course in morality there are good thoughts and bad thoughts, and they are all arbitrary. Because for Mohammedans, to have four wives is not a bad thought, but to everybody else in the world the very idea of having four wives is a bad thought.
To the ancient Hindus, even a woman having five husbands was not a bad thought; the woman who had five husbands is worshipped as one of the five great women of India! Of course five husbands is not the right number because the weekend remains – what to do with the weekend? Every day for five days the poor woman had to change husbands, and two days were just a holiday. So the weekend is not something new and American; it is very ancient and Indian! Nobody has condemned it as an ugly situation. No Hindu thinker or philosopher or theologian has condemned it; it was acceptable.
Yudhishthira, the eldest of the five brothers who shared one wife, is thought of by Hindus as one of the most religious men that has ever lived on the earth. He is called Dharmaraj, the “king of religiousness”. And this fellow Yudhishthira was a compulsive gambler; he gambled to the extent that he staked his whole kingdom, his whole treasury, and finally he staked his wife! All five brothers were present, and they consented. And nobody has condemned it. They still go on calling Yudhishthira one of the greatest religious men – and he has treated this woman worse than he would an animal, as if a woman were just a dead piece of property, like furniture, that you can gamble with.
So what is right?
For the Mohammedans the Koran is their holy source, and the Koran says God created all other animals for man to eat. Now if God says it, there is no harm in eating animals. Except for man, all animals can be butchered and eaten without any problem. No question of nonviolence ever arises. Then there are Jainas. Their monks keep a mask on their nose because when you exhale the air becomes hot, and in the atmosphere there are very tiny invisible living cells that hot air can kill. To protect those cells which you cannot see, they are continuously keeping their nose covered with a cloth, so by the time their hot air reaches out through the cloth it is no longer hot; the cloth is preventing it and cooling it. Now who is right?
There are Hindu monks who shave their hair, their mustache, their beard – every hair has to be removed. The reason is that they consider that hairs are dead parts of the body. In a way they are right. Dead cells in your body are being thrown out continuously in different ways. That’s why when you cut your hair you don’t feel hurt. If they were living you would have felt the pain. So hairs are just as dead as any corpse. Why carry dead things? Hindus and their monks remove them.
If you look at different people, different traditions, you will be simply surprised. But how to decide what is right and what is wrong?
In China, even eating snakes is not thought to be anything strange. It is in fact one of the most delicious foods. They just have to cut the snake’s head, because its poison is only in the mouth – just a small gland in its mouth has the poison. They chop the head, and the remaining part is just vegetable. If you are a guest in a Chinese house, they will certainly serve you with it, just as a welcome, and those who have eaten it say it is delicious.
There is not a single animal, bird, insect, which is not being eaten somewhere. It will create nausea in you – what kind of people are these? But traditionally they have accepted it as right, and once something is accepted as right, it becomes right to that tradition, to those people. They simply laugh at you – you are missing such beautiful food.
In ancient India, and even now in the South of India, the temples are nothing but whorehouses. It was a custom that everybody should donate his eldest daughter to God, but God is just a stone statue; the priest exploits the poor woman sexually, in the name of God. Then so many women start gathering in the temple, and rich people start coming to the temple. These women are called devadasis, servants of God, but their actual function is to attract the rich people to the temple. They function as religious prostitutes, and because of them the temple goes on becoming richer and richer.
You will be surprised to know that just a few days ago, in Mumbai, a survey was made of the prostitutes. Thirty percent were found to be devadasis from the temples of South India, because if the priest finds someone beautiful enough, then it is better to sell her in the Mumbai market rather than keep her in the temple. That way the priest can get a lump sum of money. Thirty percent of the prostitutes that were offered to God had reached the market of the prostitutes in Mumbai. And no Hindu has objected to it – not even today. The government takes no notice. It continues because nobody wants to irritate anybody, nobody wants to annoy anybody. Everybody is trying to look good in other people’s eyes.
Millions of women in this country have been burned alive! They had to die with their husbands; they had to jump onto the funeral pyre with the dead husband. That was called the tradition of suttee. Those women who managed this suicide – a very painful suicide – were called great women, very religious women.
But the real idea behind it was not religious; there was nothing good in it. The real idea behind it was that the man does not want that his wife, when he is dead…who knows? She may fall in love with somebody else. He wants to keep her as his possession even after death. So the only way is – because leaving her he cannot trust – that she should also die with him, just to satisfy his masochistic, male chauvinistic, stupid idea of being the owner.
They respected these women, they made memorials for them. I have been asking shankaracharyas and learned and wise Hindu monks, “If this is the case, why has not one single man in the whole history jumped with his wife when she has died?” And they have nothing to answer. They simply look embarrassed, they want to change the subject. But with me it is very difficult to change the subject! I said, “If it is something great, then man has proved himself lower than women.”
But the truth is that man has always thought that he is the master, and the woman is the possession – why should he die for the possession? He can have as many women as he wants.
In fact, in ancient India women were sold in the marketplaces – as they were sold all over the world – as slaves. And you will be surprised that the great Hindu saints, sages – because nobody looks behind the curtain – even they were going into the places where women were auctioned, and they were purchasing women.
They had wives and alongside they had purchased women. For these purchased women a special word was used. For the wife the word is patni and for the purchased woman the word is vadhu. Now the distinction is lost, because now there is no auction place for women.
But it was accepted as being perfectly right. Even the so-called seers, saints, whom you would think have gone beyond all worldly things, were not so sensitive as to have revolted against this brutal process of auctioning women, purchasing them just like any other thing you purchase in the market.
What is right? And what is wrong?
So the question is not, You must not let wrong thoughts continue. You must not let thoughts continue – no question of right, no question of wrong.
In other words: every thought is wrong.
All thoughts have to be removed from your mind so the screen of the mind is completely empty, so you have a vast sky open and nothing moves in the mind. That is authentic Zen. But that can be said only by an enlightened master.
Ta Hui has collected, from here and there, whatever he felt seems to be significant. But he had no inner criterion to judge what is the authentic path of self-realization. He was going to all kinds of teachers, and he was collecting all kinds of contradictory thoughts.
He was an intelligent man, but intelligence alone is not able to conceive the nature of your being. It falls short.
If you cannot see through them, then the moment a wrong thought comes up you should quickly concentrate your mental energy to pull yourself away.
First, every thought is wrong.
Second, you don’t have to pull your mental energy away, because mental energy is the root of all your thoughts. It is the mother of all your thought processes, good or bad. The mental energy has not to be pulled away. You have to get out of the mental energy, out of the mess of mental energy; you have to pull yourself out.
You have to stand out of your mind, as a watcher. Whatever is going on in the mind, you don’t even interfere. You simply watch. You simply go on seeing it, as if it is somebody else’s mind, and you have nothing to do with it – it is none of your business.
In this indifferent aloofness, all thoughts disappear.
And with thoughts disappearing there is no mind, because mind is nothing but a collective name of thoughts.
Ta Hui does not know anything about meditation. He has never meditated.
If you always follow those thoughts and let them continue without a break, not only does this obstruct the path, but it makes you out to be a man without wisdom.
He knows nothing about wisdom. He is using a wrong word. Whatever he is saying…only one thing can be said: If you allow thoughts to continue without a break, this will not only obstruct the path, but it makes you out to be a man without knowledge – not without wisdom.
That also has to be clearly seen. Knowledge is absolutely relevant in science. The very meaning of the word science is knowledge, and the whole effort of science is to go on changing the unknown into the known. The ultimate goal of science is that one day there will be nothing left unknown – everything will be known.
All will be reduced to knowledge. And this is the point where religion differs. And the difference is of tremendous value.
Religion says that there are not only two categories in the world, the categories of known and unknown. There is a third category which is more significant than the other two, and that is the category of the unknowable, the mysterious, the miraculous. You can live it, you can be it, you can rejoice it, you can sing it, you can dance it. But you cannot know it. Knowledge is not possible.
To enter into this realm of the unknowable is wisdom.
Wisdom is not knowledge.
Wisdom is innocence and a deep feeling of the miraculous.
A wise man’s eyes are full of wonder; just a small flower makes him wonder. It is so mysterious – why is it there?
It happened one night…

Socrates did not return to his home. His wife was very much disturbed, the whole neighborhood was disturbed. They looked all around – where has he gone? He was not a man to go anywhere; from the school where he used to teach, he used to come directly home. It had never happened before, it was unprecedented. Snow was falling, and they were very much concerned whether he had got lost somewhere in the forest. By the morning they found him. He was standing by the side of a tree, supporting his back with the tree, and looking at the sky. When they reached him he was almost frozen, because there was snow up to his knees.
They shook him – “What are you doing here?” He said, “What am I doing here? The night was so wonderful and the stars were so mysterious that I just went on gazing and gazing and gazing. Many times the thought came that it is getting late, but I was almost hypnotized by the stars and their beauty. I knew that snow was falling, I was shivering – but I could not move.”

Now this man is a man of wisdom. There are millions of people in the world who go on running here and there, never looking at the sky. It is just on top of them – no fee, no ticket, no standing in the queue before a movie house – and such a splendor! And you own it, because nobody else owns it.
A full moon night, and nothing stirs in your heart?
A rosebud opens, and nothing opens in your being?
A cuckoo starts singing its song, and you don’t get cuckoo?
Wisdom is a totally different thing than knowledge. Knowledge de-mystifies existence; wisdom mystifies it. Wisdom belongs to the mystics; knowledge belongs to scientists, to philosophers, to theologians – but they are not the people of religion. They don’t know the heartbeat of the universe.
Only people who enter into the realm of the mysterious open doors upon doors of mystery and suddenly find themselves, not in a mundane world which is meaningless, but in a fairyland where everything is so significant, so poetic, so musical, so beautiful.
This whole experience is the experience of a religious being. And this experience is possible only if you can put your mind aside. Mind is a collector of knowledge; it has no interest in mystery.
In the old days, Kuei Shan asked Lazy An, “What work do you do during the twenty-four hours of the day?” An said, “I tend an ox.” Kuei Shan said, “How do you tend it?” An said, “Whenever it gets into the grass, I pull it back by the nose.” Kuei Shan said, “You’re really tending the ox!”
Zen is full of such small dialogues, which are very special to Zen. In this small statement, just a few words are transferred between two men, but everything that has to be said about Zen has been said.
An was known in the history of Zen as a lazy man. His name became Lazy An, because he never did anything. Kuei Shan asked him, “What work do you do during twenty-four hours of the day?” – because you don’t do anything, just sitting silently.
People loved Lazy An. He was a beautiful man, of a great presence. His very being in a place made it almost holy, he had such an energy – although he was never doing anything. People used to bring food to him. He never even went to beg, which was the way of all Buddhist monks, but people took care of him. They were concerned about him. If it was cold they would bring blankets; if it was raining they would make some arrangement.
An was so lazy he would not even walk; people would have to carry him! People knew that there was no point saying anything to him, you just do whatsoever you do. And he never prevented anybody, or asked, “Where are you taking me?” Even that much was too much – to ask, “Where are you taking me?” He is a special character.
Kuei Shan was also a man of great understanding, so he asked, “What do you go on doing for twenty-four hours a day?”
An said, “I tend an ox.”
He refers to those ten pictures of tending the ox. Just a small statement…and he didn’t say anything more.
Kuei Shan said, “How do you tend it?” An said, “Whenever it gets into the grass, I pull it back by the nose.” Kuei Shan said, “You are really tending the ox!” And that is the end of the dialogue.
But Kuei Shan has given his agreement that this is the way of meditation. When your consciousness starts getting involved in the mind, pull it back. Remain aloof, stand aside. Keep a distance between your self and the mind…and there is no need to do anything else.
Kuei Shan really was satisfied that Lazy An is not lazy at all; he is doing great inner work. Outside of course he looks lazy, but one can see from his aura, his energy field, a certain sweetness surrounding him, a certain fragrance.
He does not do anything; still, wherever he is, people take care of him, on their own accord. They suddenly feel that it is their responsibility to take care of Lazy An; it is as if he is just a small child, so innocent, that anybody will immediately start taking care of him – and he was an old man.
Nobody ever told him to do something. He was doing what can be called the real doing. He was constantly doing only one thing: not allowing his consciousness to be involved in the grassland of the mind, where thoughts grow like grass, wild grass. He just went on pulling his ox back.
And it does not take much time. Once your consciousness becomes accustomed to not being involved in the mind, you don’t have to pull it again and again; to be out of the mind is so peaceful, so joyful, so blissful, that consciousness itself becomes aware that to be in the mind is to be in hell.
Now it is up to you. If you want to be in hell, you can be; otherwise it is not compulsory, it is optional. Hell is optional!
People who study the path…again he goes on using the word study…in controlling wrong thoughts – again he goes on saying wrong things – should be like Lazy An tending his ox.
He has not understood what Lazy An is doing. He is not controlling his thoughts. He is simply pulling his consciousness out of the world of thoughts, out of the area and the territory of the mind….then gradually a wholesome ripening will take place of itself.
Do Not Grasp Another’s Bow

“Do not grasp another’s bow, do not ride another’s horse, do not meddle in another’s affairs.” Though this is a commonplace saying, it can also be sustenance for entering the path.
It is an ancient saying in China: “Do not grasp another’s bow, do not ride another’s horse, do not meddle in another’s affairs.” It is tremendously beautiful, although it is just the wisdom of the people. They are saying, “Do not borrow anything from anybody.” Depend on your own resources, because unless you depend on your own resources you can never be free, and you can never be an individual. You will always remain a slave.
Ta Hui says, “Though this is a commonplace saying, it can also be sustenance for entering the path.” Once in a while, he says something which he must have gathered from someone who knows it.
Just examine yourself constantly…
But immediately he falls back into his own state. This is the trouble; if you are repeating somebody else’s knowledge, you cannot go on long. Soon you will say something which will expose you.
He says, Just examine yourself constantly.
That is not the way of Zen.
That is the way of psychoanalysis, which was not existent in those days, and which is not existent in the East even today. And if the West is not adamant, is not prejudiced, and is open to understand, psychoanalysis will disappear even from the West.
Examining yourself makes no change in you.
You can go on examining yourself constantly. Examining is another word for analyzing – why this thought, why that thought? What is the cause of it? Why did it come to me? What should I do with it? You will get into a madhouse.
No, that is not the way of the East.
The East says, “Remain aware of yourself constantly.”
And being aware is not examining yourself.
Being aware is simply being aloof, but alert. Whatever the mind is doing, let it do; whatever is going on in the mind, let it be. You simply be out of it. You should not be a participant – that’s all that is needed, and mind dies its own death.
By your examining you are entering into the territory of the mind. And mind is such a subtle phenomenon – the moment you enter into it, it starts exploiting your energy for its own purposes.
This is the experience of all the Eastern mystics. Do not analyze, do not examine, do not justify, do not condemn. Don’t make any evaluation. Simply stand aside, as if the road is full of traffic and you step by the side of the road and stand there, without bothering who is going, who is coming, who is good, who is bad.
This discovery of awareness has been such a miracle: the traffic simply disappears, just by your stepping out of it. You don’t have to examine, you don’t have to control, you don’t have to dispel anything. You don’t have to do anything at all – just pure awareness is enough to kill the mind.
From morning to night, what do you do to help others and help yourself? If you notice even the slightest partiality or insensitivity, you must admonish yourself. Don’t be careless about this.
He is simply talking like a moralist teacher, a Catholic priest! He has forgotten that once a man is aware of himself he does whatever is right, and he never does whatever is wrong. It is not a question of choice. His awareness is enough to take him toward the right, and never toward the wrong. He simply remains choicelessly alert and aware, and his whole lifestyle changes. Then whatever he does, it is always beneficial. Then he is a constant blessing to the whole world. But it is not a decision on his part. It is simply his spontaneity. It is simply his nature just to be good. Just as on a rosebush roses blossom, on the bush of awareness roses also blossom – roses of goodness, roses of beauty, roses of grace, roses of all kinds of blessings for others, for himself.
In the old days Ch’an master Tao Lin lived up in a tall pine tree on Ch’in Wang mountain; people of the time called him the “Bird’s Nest Monk.” When minister Po Chu-Yi was commander of Ch’in T’ang, he made a special trip to the mountain to visit him.
Po said, “It’s very dangerous where you’re sitting, Ch’an master.”
The master said, “My danger may be very great, minister, but yours is even greater.”
Po said, “I am commander of Ch’ien T’ang: what danger is there?”
The master said, “Fuel and fire are joined, consciousness and identity do not stay: how can you not be in danger?”
What he is saying is tremendously significant. He is saying, “I am sitting in a bird’s nest in a pine tree.” It is obvious that there is danger of falling, but are you aware that if you fall from your position you will be in a far greater danger? And your fall is possible any moment. You are commander-in-chief, the enemy is not far away. You and your enemy are just like fuel and fire joined. Just close by is fire, very near to it is fuel; they can join any moment. Any moment there can be an explosion. You are sitting on a volcano.
“I am certainly in danger if I fall – perhaps I may break a few of my bones. But it is not much of a danger. Your danger is far greater…consciousness and identity do not stay. Your consciousness is so small; that is the greatest danger in the world, because any moment you can slip into unconsciousness. Then in unconsciousness whatever you do is going to harm you. My consciousness is absolute. I can sit in a bird’s nest in this tall pine tree; I know I will not fall, because I am alert. Even when I am asleep, I am alert.”

Once Ananda had asked Gautam Buddha…he used to sleep in the same room, to take care of anything Buddha needs in the night if he suddenly feels sick. Buddha was fragile, he was old, and he was working so hard, walking continually, till his very last breath. Gautam Buddha used to sleep in the posture which is called the Lion’s posture, because it is just the way the lion sleeps. But Ananda was surprised that once Buddha had taken the posture, he remained in the same posture the whole night; he did not move his feet, he did not move his hand, he did not move anything. He remained almost like a statue. Ananda was surprised – one day perhaps one can manage, but day after day, month after month, year after year…? Finally he could not contain his curiosity. He said, “I have to ask, do you sleep or not? – because you never change your posture.”
Buddha said, “The body sleeps, the mind sleeps, but my awareness is eternal, it knows nothing of sleep. And secondly: you toss and turn because you are trying to find the right posture. I have found it – why should I toss and turn? What are you doing tossing and turning this way and that way? In fact you are trying to find the right pose. I have found it, Ananda. Now there is no need to change it. And as far as awareness is concerned, even in the night there is a small flame of awareness eternally burning within me, even in sleep.”

So the old master was right when he said, “My danger may be very great, minister, but yours is even greater.” Your consciousness is so small, and your identity is so false. You think yourself commander-in-chief, but behind your uniform you are just a mortal. Just a bullet will finish you; just an order from the emperor that you are retired or demoted and you will lose your identity.
“Nobody can take my identity back from me.”
“Nobody can tell me to retire – I am retired already. Nobody can tell me, ‘You are demoted.’ Where else can you throw me? I am already in such a situation that nobody would like to change places with me.
“Rarely people come here. You are a strange fellow, taking so much trouble to come to this mountain, to this lonely spot, and to talk to a strange man who just lives in the pine tree and never gets down.
“My identity is within my own hands. Your identity is given to you; it can be taken away – your danger, minister, is far greater.”
Po also asked, “What is the overall meaning of the Buddhist teaching?”
The master said, “Don’t commit any evils. Practice the many virtues.”
That is absolutely wrong, and I don’t think that it has been said by the Ch’an master Tao Lin; he cannot say this. This must be Ta Hui’s addition, because this is not the teaching of Buddha, and he’s asking the overall teaching of the Buddhist philosophy – just the gist.
The gist of Buddha’s philosophy is simply vipassana – in one word, meditation. Everything else is secondary and nonessential. What Ta Hui is saying is all nonessential: Don’t commit any evils. Practice the many virtues – that is not Buddha’s teaching.
That is where Buddha is unique – different from any other master of the world: his teaching can be reduced to a single statement: “Be silent, go beyond mind, then whatever you do is good.”
Po said, “Even a three-year-old child could say this!”
The master said, “Though a three-year-old child can say it, an eighty-year-old man cannot carry it out.”
That is true, because the only way to carry it out is not mentioned.
The only way to carry it out is silence.
Out of silence all the flowers blossom.
It is difficult even for an eighty-year-old man not to commit any evil and to practice all the virtues, because they are by-products. And you can not do anything which is a by-product. You have to go to the roots.
For example I will tell you… I remember a small incident in Mao Zedong life when he was very young, and his father had died. His mother was very much interested in growing roses of all colors and all varieties; she had such an aesthetic sense, and she had made such a beautiful garden around her house.
Her sister became very sick, and she was very much concerned about her roses. Mao was very young, not more than twelve years old. He said, “Don’t be worried, mother. You can go – it is only a question of a few days – you can be with your sister. As far as your garden is concerned, I will take care.”
The mother went, and Mao took as much care as you can conceive; the whole day from morning till evening he was looking after the roses. But it was very strange, they were dying – trees were dying, flowers were dying – and he could not think what he would say when his mother came back. Her whole garden looked deserted, and he had been doing so much hard work.
His mother came. She looked around the garden and laughed, because Mao was standing there with tears in his eyes. He said, “I worked continuously from morning till evening.” The mother said, “I knew this was going to happen, so don’t be worried. I just came silently and stood at the gate and watched what you were doing.”
What he was doing? – he was washing each flower with water, taking away the dust with his small brush. Naturally all the flowers…he had taken great care, but to take care of the flowers you have to take care of the roots. You don’t have to bother about the roses, they will take care of themselves; you simply take care of the roots. He never bothered about the roots – he had no idea of the roots. He never bothered the roots; he simply washed the flowers.
The trees died, the flowers died and the poor boy was in utter misery. The mother said, “I have seen…standing outside I just wanted to see what is going on, and I could see that you have destroyed the whole garden! But there is no need to cry and weep.”
His mother said to him, “This is what human beings are doing all over the world. Everybody is taking care of the flowers and nobody is concerned about the roots. And the real thing is the roots. Flowers come automatically. You don’t have to take any special care for them.”

So without meditation, even an eighty-year-old man cannot carry it out, although it is so simple that a three-year-old child can say it.
The master said, “Though a three-year-old child can say it, an eighty-year-old man cannot carry it out.” Po then bowed and departed.
This is an incomplete statement. He must have heard it from someone – secondhand, thirdhand – because the old master Tao Lin could not have left out mentioning the roots. Unless meditation is mentioned you don’t know anything about the teachings of Gautam Buddha. And he must have mentioned it: if he had not mentioned it, then Po would not have bowed down and departed. Po was absolutely satisfied, but in this conversation there was no reason to be satisfied.
My way of seeing things is very straightforward. I don’t see from this conversation why Po should be satisfied, but he must have been satisfied because he, with great honor, bowed down and departed. Certainly something is missing, something essential is missing…and it always happens. A man who does not understand, who has not experienced meditation himself, will talk about all the things which are by-products, and will forget about meditation.
This has happened so many times, in so many traditions, that it can be accepted as a rule. For example Mahavira…. It was thought by his disciples, by his followers for twenty-five centuries, that he was teaching nonviolence, that he was teaching non-possessiveness, that he was teaching being authentic and truthful.
Now these are all by-products. But Jaina monks have been following them, and I have seen their faces: they don’t show any signs of joy, of fulfillment, of contentment, of reaching to any great silence or peace or bliss. They look absolutely dry, dead. Although they are following the discipline as accurately as possible, they are just missing the foundation.
All these three things – nonviolence, non-possessiveness, authenticity and truthfulness – arise without any effort on your part…if you succeed in meditation. A man of meditation cannot lie. A man of meditation cannot hurt anybody; hence he is nonviolent.
A man of meditation knows perfectly well that all things are ephemeral. You came into the world without anything, and you will have to go from the world without anything; so you can use things – but you cannot possess them. You can use things just the way you use the railway train. Just because you are sitting in the railway train you don’t start declaring that you are the owner of the train! You are using it for a time being; at one station you get in, at another station you get out.
Life should be taken just the same way. Whatever life gives to you – use it, but don’t become the owner. Don’t cling to it, and then when it goes out of your hands, you are not sad, you are not frustrated; you don’t start thinking of committing suicide just because you have gone bankrupt, or just because your wife has escaped with somebody else.

I have heard about a man who went to the post office and started telling the postmaster, “Please write down that my wife has escaped.” The postmaster said, “I am sorry that your wife has escaped. Perhaps you are in such a disturbed state that you don’t see that this is a post office. The police office is just in front – you go there.” He said, “I am not going there and I am not telling you to take the report without knowing that it is a post office.”
The postmaster said, “This is strange. You know that this is a post office, and still you are telling me to report that your wife has escaped with somebody.”
He said, “Yes, seven days ago. And I am not going to the police station, because last time she escaped I reported it to the police station, and those idiots brought her back. This time I have remained silent for seven days to let them go as far as possible. But then my conscience started pricking and I said, ‘This is not right. At least I should report it.’ So I thought that it is better to report it to the post office. You just take the report and free me from my pricking conscience.”
The postmaster said, “It’s strange. If such is the problem, then why bother? It is good that she has escaped.”
He said, “I am not bothered about her; I am bothered about the man with whom she has escaped. What will be happening to that poor fellow? I am accustomed to her; he is new. She will kill him. Seven days have passed, and nothing has been heard.”
“Don’t you feel any problem – anything?” asked the postman.
“I am not bothered about my wife; I am bothered about the man she has got hold of. I cannot report it to the police office – you can understand my problem – but I am praying every day in the temple. Have mercy on the poor man. Save his life.’”

People are living in such misery. But even if they have been miserable with the wife or the husband, they will not separate. They will not allow freedom to each other. But why go on suffering? There is no reason at all.
This life is to rejoice.
If you can rejoice together – good.
If you can rejoice separately – even better.
All that is needed is a certain deepening of your consciousness, and that happens through meditation. Then all your actions, your behavior, your life starts changing on its own accord; you start seeing things clearly. Right now you see things through such smoke that nothing seems to be clear.

A woman went to the doctor and asked, “What kind of prescription have you given to my husband? He was so good, so obedient and suddenly, since you have given him the prescription, he has escaped.”
The doctor said, “I have not given him any medicine. I have simply prescribed new lenses for his glasses, so naturally he must have escaped. I can see you – that’s enough. He had the wrong prescription, he was not able to see you. The moment he saw you clearly, he escaped. There is no problem in it.”

All that you need is clear eyesight…into your life, into your actions, into your relationships, into everything that surrounds you. Just a clear insight – and that will change everything, without any arduous effort on your part.

============================================================

Do Not Grasp Another’s Bow

Now if you want to save mental power, do not be concerned with whether or not a three-year-old child can say it, or whether or not an eighty-year-old-man can carry it out. Just don’t do any evil and you have mastered these words. They apply whether you believe or not, so please think it over.
If worldly people whose present conduct is without illumination would correct themselves and do good, though the goodness is not yet perfect, isn’t this better than depravity and shamelessness? One who does evil on the pretext of doing good is called in the teachings one whose causal ground is not genuine, bringing on crooked results. If, with a straightforward mind and straightforward conduct, you are able to seize supreme enlightenment directly, this can be called the act of a real man of power. The concerns that have come down from numberless ages are only in the present:. If you can understand them right now, then the concerns of numberless ages will instantly disperse, like tiles being scattered or ice melting. If you don’t understand right now, you’ll pass through countless eons more, and it’ll still be just as it is. The truth that is as it is has been continuous since antiquity without ever having varied so much as a hairsbreadth.
Matters of worldly anxiety are like the links of a chain, joining together continuously without a break. If you can do away with them, do away with them immediately! Because you have become habituated to them since beginningless time, to the point where they have become totally familiar, if you don’t exert yourself to struggle with them, then as time goes on and on, with you unknowing and unawares, they will have entered deeply into you. Finally, on the last day of your life, you won’t be able to do anything about it. If you want to be able to avoid going wrong when you face the end of your life, then from now on whenever you do anything, don’t let yourself slip. If you go wrong in your present doings, it will be impossible not to go wrong when you’re facing death.
There’s a sort of person who reads scriptures, recites the Buddha-name and repents in the morning, but then in the evening runs off at the mouth, slandering and vilifying other people. The next day he does homage to Buddha and repents as before. All through the years till the end of his life he takes this as daily ritual – this is extreme folly. Such people are far from realizing that the Sanskrit word ‘kshama’ means to repent faults. This is called “cutting off the continuing mind.” Once you have cut it off, never continue it again; once you have repented, do not commit wrongdoings again – this is the meaning of repentance according to our Buddha which good people who study the path should not fail to know.
The mind, discriminating intellect, and consciousness of students of the path should be quiet and still twenty-four hours a day. When you have nothing to do, you should sit quietly and keep the mind from slackening and the body from wavering. If you practice to perfection over a long, long time, naturally body and mind will come to rest at ease, and you will have some direction in the path. The perfection of quiescence and stillness indeed settles the scattered and confused false consciousness of sentient beings, but if you cling to quiescent stillness and consider it the ultimate, then you’re in the grip of perverted “silent illumination” Ch’an.
Ta Hui reminds me of an incident in Charles Darwin’s life. His sixtieth birthday was celebrated. The children of his neighborhood also thought of something to present to him. Great people, rich people, were going to present him many things – he had become by that time a world renowned scientist – but children have their own way of seeing things.
Charles Darwin’s whole life was devoted to the study of animals, birds, insects, fish. He was working out in what steps human evolution has happened, how man has come to be. He never believed in the theory of creation. No man of intelligence can believe in it, for the simple reason that every day new things go on happening. Creation would have been a closed circle: God created everything and there was no question of any new inventions, new discoveries. God’s work has to be perfect; hence there is no space for evolution. Evolution can happen only when things are imperfect.
The children found a way. They collected many insects, dissected them – took out some insect’s head, some other insect’s leg, some other insect’s body, and piece by piece they joined and glued a totally new insect which God has not created. And they went to Charles Darwin, saying, “We have brought an insect that perhaps you would love to know. We have never seen this. Just today we have found it.”
Charles Darwin himself was a little taken aback: he had gone around the world, but he had never seen such an insect. Then he looked closely and he saw that the head belonged to some other insect – he could see the glue and he could see the children’s inventiveness – and the children wanted to know the name of the bug.
Charles Darwin said, “I know it. Its name is humbug.”
Ta Hui reminds me…he is a humbug. He has been moving from one master to another master and he was collecting things – something from one person, something from another person. He has made a good collection and glued it perfectly well, but he cannot deceive one who knows the truth. And all the masters he had visited may not have been enlightened. Some certainly must have been enlightened, because there are a few statements which only an enlightened man can make. But there are a few others which only unenlightened moralists, puritans – that kind of people – can make. They are good people; they mean well, their intentions are good, but they don’t know that just to mean well is not enough.
You should be at the very source of your being, where you can feel these three things: goodness, beauty and truth. In India we have called it the experience of sat-chit-anand – that is one expression. The other expression of the three is satyam, shivam, sunderam. I would like you to understand both statements, because they contain the very gist of the religious experience.
Sat-chit-anand is made of three words: sat, which means ultimate truth; chit, which means ultimate consciousness; anand, which means ultimate bliss. That is one set which denotes the experience of enlightenment.
But enlightenment is vast. There is another set: satyam, which means truth; shivam, which means good; sunderam, which means beautiful.
Why is this difference there? – that too is significant to understand. The first statement comes from people who are of a philosophical bent: truth, consciousness, bliss. The second set comes from people who are basically poetic. Truth remains in both the sets, but the other two qualities change. To the poet, beauty is more important than anything else – and also the quality of goodness.
So the first set comes from people who have become enlightened, but they have been of a philosophical mind. And the second group comes from people who have been poets. The only thing that joins them is truth – and truth is a vast sky – it contains all great experiences. You can choose any according to your own inclination.
Ta Hui has come across mere moralists who don’t know the source of good, but talk about good. They are ethical, not religious. He has also come in contact with some enlightened masters – I will tell you from where he has made this humbug teaching. The difference is so vast, qualitatively so different, but even a man of Ta Hui’s intelligence could not figure out that they don’t meet anywhere. You cannot glue them together – the distance is so vast. But it will be a good discipline for you – that’s why I have chosen Ta Hui. It will be a good discipline for you to learn a little discrimination; otherwise you get impressed by any nonsense.
Just the other day somebody brought a book about a woman I had known. She was just a very ordinary woman, living with Swami Muktananda – serving him, cooking his food. After the death of Muktananda, she has taken his place. Now her name is Gurumayi, the feminine of the Guru – Gurumayi Chidvilasananda, and she is followed by many people. The book has been sent to me because she is touring around the world and many people are impressed by her. She is the successor of Muktananda. He himself was a perfect idiot – now where to put this woman? You cannot be more perfect than Muktananda was.
But the problem is people simply listen to the words and they don’t have any criteria to check whether these people are saying things out of their own experience, or they have collected them from books, from other people, and are simply repeating. You can see it very clearly in Ta Hui. He is a perfect specimen.
Now if you want to save mental power…
Buddha’s whole teaching is that all the power that mind has is given by you. Mind has no power of its own; it is given by you through identification. Because you identify yourself with it, the mind becomes powerful. It is your power.
Mind has no power at all; mind is just like the walking stick of a blind man. The stick walks, but the power is coming from the blind man. The stick cannot walk on its own, although it is called a walking stick. The blind man walks, and all the power that the stick has belongs to the blind man.
Your mind is a blind man’s walking stick.
The moment you open your eyes and understand the identity, you can withdraw your power from the mind. You have given it, and the moment you withdraw your power, mind simply collapses. So to talk about mental power, he must have heard some teacher.
Do not be concerned with whether or not a three-year-old child can say it, or whether or not an eighty-year-old man can carry it out. Just don’t do any evil and you have mastered these words. They apply whether you believe or not, so please think it over.
Now he goes on committing mistakes…if you compare him to any enlightened man’s statements. First: Just don’t do any evil. No awakened being of the world has ever said that because awakening makes one clear. You go on doing evil acts because of your unconsciousness. Evil acts don’t have any grip over you.
Gautam Buddha used to say that if a house shows light from the windows, from the doors, then thieves remain away. They know that the owner of the house is yet awake. The light is enough indication for a thief not to take the risk. But if the light is put off then the thief can come closer; it is a good opportunity. In darkness he can manage to steal something.
He used to say that the situation of human beings is the same. If your eyes show light, if your very existence shows illumination, if you radiate…then evils don’t come close to you. Then whatever you do comes out of your blissfulness, and blissfulness cannot do any evil.
To teach people not to do evil is absolutely absurd.
If they are unconscious they are bound to do evil. They can try; they can force themselves to do good and not to do evil, but it will remain superficial. They don’t have even the awareness of what is evil and what is good.

Once a man, a very rich man of Calcutta, came to Ramakrishna. He wanted to do some good act. He was becoming old, and he was very rich, and he thought it would be good to donate one thousand golden rupees – at that time there were gold rupees. The word rupee simply comes from gold. It is a Sanskrit word, raupya; in Hindi it has become rupaya; in English it has become rupee – but it comes from gold. Now even a paper note is called a rupee; the word has lost all meaning, it has no relevance. But that’s how things go on changing, and we go on using the same words for new realities to which they do not belong at all.
In the beginning people used to use horses. They were the fastest vehicle, but still people ask, “How much horsepower does your car have?” Strange…horses have gone, but our old mind still manages to think about a car in terms of horsepower, and nobody thinks about the stupidity of it.
This man brought one thousand gold rupees. He was feeling very great and thinking, “Ramakrishna will be surprised, nobody will have given him such a gift. I’m going to do a great good work.” It was for the temple of Ramakrishna where he lived in Dakshineshwar, just near Calcutta.
The first thing he did was to pour from his bag all one thousand gold rupees in front of Ramakrishna…so loudly! They made so much sound that everybody in the ashram gathered: “What is happening?”
Ramakrishna said, “Do you want to exhibit what you are doing? You could have silently given the bag to me. There was no need to pour out all those one thousand rupees in front of me. That was almost as if you were trying to make everybody in the ashram curious to come and see what is happening. This is not a good act. Deep inside you it is an ego trip, but I will accept the rupees. Now put them back in the bag.”
So he put them in the bag and Ramakrishna said, “Now, are the rupees mine or yours?”
The man said, “Of course they are yours; I have offered them to you.”
Ramakrishna said, “That’s good. I offer them to the Ganges. Can you help me a little?”
The man said, “What kind of help?”
“Just go – behind the temple is the Ganges. Throw the whole bag into the Ganges. Now it is my money not yours, so you need not be worried about it.”
The man was in shock – “I got caught in unnecessary trouble. One thousand gold rupees…people would certainly say that this man is mad – offering it to the Ganges?” But he was committed, so he went to the Ganges. Hours passed.
Ramakrishna said, “What is the matter? Throwing the bag away cannot take that much time.”
He sent somebody who brought the news: “That man takes one rupee out of the bag and throws it on the stone rocks around the Ganges. A big crowd has gathered because those rupees are making so much noise and they are pure gold. Then the man throws one rupee far away in the Ganges. Then he takes another rupee, again hits it on the rocks…and more and more people are gathering there. He is making a great show.”
Ramakrishna had to go himself. He said, “You are not only an egoist, you are stupid too. One checks whether rupees are authentic or not by throwing them on the stone so that he can hear the sound of gold, and if they are not authentic, they will not give the same sound. But that is when one is collecting them. You are throwing them away! Whether they are authentic or not makes no difference.
“Secondly, one counts rupees when one is collecting them. You are throwing the rupees away. What does it matter whether there are exactly one thousand, or one rupee less or one rupee more? But perhaps you have not realized that in the name of doing good, you are just doing something stupid. This is not going to bring any blessings to you. Your one thousand rupees have gone in vain.”

But everywhere this is being done. We may think we are doing good. We may think we are not doing evil. But thinking has nothing to do with good and evil.
Good is that which comes spontaneously from your awareness and evil is that which never comes spontaneously out of your awareness.
The man of awareness does only good.
His action and his awareness are in a deep synchronicity. Evil cannot enter into the lighted house of that man.
But moralists have no idea of enlightenment or meditation. They go on teaching people disciplines: Do this, do that; this is right, that is wrong. And finally Ta Hui says, …so please think it over.
Thinking can never bring you to any conclusion.
Thousands of years of philosophy…the greatest geniuses thinking all over the world have not come to any conclusion at all. It has been such a great wastage of intelligence and genius. They cannot even think on small matters.

Immanuel Kant, a great German philosopher who belongs to the highest category of philosophers, was told by a woman, “I love you. I have waited long hoping that perhaps you may take the initiative. But you don’t seem to take initiative so I have to ask you to marry me.”
He said, “You could have asked before, but first I have to think it over. I never do anything without thinking.”
He consulted all the libraries, all the books on marriage; he collected all the pros, all the cons. The difficulty was that for three years he worked, but the pros and cons were equal. So there was no decision coming… Finally, on the pro side, one thing appeared that was more than on the con side. He came across a book that said: It is always good to experience a thing even if the experience proves to be wrong. It will give you maturity. It is never good to avoid any experience, because avoiding any experience is avoiding maturity.
This was the only point that was more in favor of marriage; otherwise both sides were equal. Seeing that he had found the solution, he rushed to the woman’s house and knocked on the door. The girl’s old father opened the door and asked, “What do you want?”
Immanuel Kant said, “Your daughter has asked me to get married to her and I have been thinking. It certainly took a long time; thinking is a long process. It took three years. I worked hard day and night and finally I have come to the conclusion that I should marry.”
The old man said, “That’s good, but my girl has married long ago. She already has two children. She could not wait. And in these three years you never showed your face even a single time.”
He said, “I was so much engaged in thinking – consulting ancient scriptures, all the manuals of marriage. It was a tremendous job to come to the conclusion.” Immanuel Kant remained unmarried his whole life.

Thinking is not the way to find the truth.
Non-thinking is the way.
Thinking always creates more muddle. Non-thinking brings clarity, spaciousness, purity and a great straightforward insight. It is not a question of pros and cons; you simply know in what direction you have to go. It is a simple understanding.
Ta Hui must have listened to some other teacher who was telling his disciples to think it over.
If worldly people whose present conduct is without illumination would correct themselves and do good, though the goodness is not yet perfect, isn’t this better than depravity and shamelessness?
These are not the words of those who have arrived. These are the words of very superficial mental activity.
One who does evil on the pretext of doing good is called in the teachings one whose causal ground is not genuine, bringing on crooked results. If, with a straightforward mind…
But it remains still the mind, and mind is never straightforward. You all have minds, so it is not a problem to understand that the mind is always crooked. It is never straightforward.
The Eastern mystics have used the tail of a dog to symbolize mind. They say even if you keep the tail of the dog straight in a hollow bamboo for twelve years, whenever you remove the bamboo the tail will again go crooked. You cannot expect that it will remain straightforward; that is just the nature of the tail.
The situation with the mind is the same – it is crooked. It never goes directly, immediately, straightforward. It is cunning, it is clever. It tries to find a way in which it can pretend to be good and yet enjoy all the pleasures that evil offers.

I have heard about a bishop who was in the confessional, and a young, beautiful woman came to confess. She said, “Father, I have been raped – and not once, but three times in the night.”
The bishop said, “But if you have been raped, you don’t have to confess. The man who raped you has to confess. You have not committed any sin.”
The woman said, “You don’t understand. I enjoyed it – that’s why I have come to confess and pray to God to forgive me – otherwise I could have done everything not to be raped. It was the same man who raped me three times in the night, and I did not scream or shout. I really enjoyed it.”
The father said, “This case is very serious. You come to the side of the room, because you have to explain to me the exact details of what that man did. He seems to be just a born devil.” Then the father kissed the young girl and asked, “Has he done this?”
The girl said, “Yes, Father.”
The father said, “He is really a devil.” Then he started playing with her breasts and asked, “Did he do this too?”
The girl said, “Yes, Father.”
And the father said, “That man should be condemned to hell! And did he tell you to undress?”
The girl said, “Yes, Father.”
He said, “That man needs eternal hell fire! You undress.”
And the father made love to her and asked, “Did he do this too?”
The girl said, “Yes, Father.”
He said, “Let that man come to my confessional. He will have to come.”
But the girl said, “He did one thing more too.”
The father said, “What! More?”
The girl said, “He gave me gonorrhea. I have told you beforehand; he is really a very evil person.”

Your so-called good people go on doing, in the name of good, all kind of evil acts – and it is bound to be so. It is not their fault. They have been brought up with a wrong teaching. They have been told to do this, to do that, but nobody has ever gone deep into their psychology – why are they doing it? What is the root source of their evil acts? And, unless that root is cut…
Man’s nature in itself is basically good. You just have to remove the wild weeds that have grown in his nature. Meditation is the only method to take out all that is evil, without much effort, and then what remains is good. Then whatever the man does, he has not to think about it – about whether it is good or evil. He simply does it. He feels a deep harmony with existence and he cannot go against that harmony.
Evil is going against nature’s harmony.
It is creating discord.
And only people who don’t know the beauty of harmony and the joy of harmony can commit evil acts. But don’t say to them, “Do this, do that.”

I have heard that God, in the beginning, first asked the Babylonians, “Would you like a commandment?”
They asked, “What is the commandment?”
God said, “Don’t look at another’s wife with an evil thought.”
The Babylonians said, “That is impossible. Keep your commandment to yourself, because if some beautiful woman comes in front of us, it does not matter whose wife she is. The evil thought arises on its own accord. We cannot do anything; before we even think anything, it is there.”
God went to the Egyptians and asked, “Would you like a commandment?”
They said, “First we want to know, what is the commandment?”
And God said, “Always do good.”
The Egyptians said, “You go to others and give this commandment to them, because if somebody gives evil to us, how are we going to defend ourselves? An eye for an eye…if he is doing evil, we will do greater evil; only can we put him right. If he is doing evil and we go on doing good, we will be crushed. Forgive us, we don’t want your commandment. You can keep it.”
Then he went to Moses and asked Moses, “Do you want a commandment?”
And Moses asked, “How much does it cost?” He did not bother to ask what the commandment is. The real thing is how much it costs.
God said, “It costs nothing.”
Moses said, “Then I will take ten!”

If it is free, then why not take ten? That’s how Jews have ten commandments. But in those ten commandments there is no commandment for meditation. They are all just moralistic, superficial teachings.
If, with a straightforward mind and straightforward conduct, you are able to seize supreme enlightenment directly, this can be called the act of a real man of power.
All this is simply crap. It is just putting things upside down.
The enlightened man is really a man of power – not power over others but simply a source of power, not a power that dominates, enslaves, but just a deep strength, stamina, courage. It is his inner source. It has nothing to do with anybody else. It is simply his power that radiates all around him. Anything that he is saying comes from that power. Then the conduct is straightforward, then the mind is straightforward. But you cannot first put the mind straightforward and your conduct straightforward, and then attain supreme enlightenment directly.
Enlightenment has to be the first thing and everything else is just a by-product. As the tree grows, the roots are needed first, although the roots are invisible. Perhaps that is the reason why thinkers have missed the basic point: roots are invisible, but once the roots are there, the tree starts growing. Foliage comes, beautiful greenery, flowers come – psychedelic and colorful – fruits come which can give great nourishment, but they are all coming because of the hidden roots.
It is not vice versa: that first you hang a few flowers and a few fruits, bring some foliage, tie it together – and then the roots will grow. It does not happen that way; that is not the course of nature. But this is what people have been taught: first become good, first become moral, first follow a certain discipline. Then you will attain to enlightenment and enlightenment will give you great power.
Enlightenment itself is power. But it has to come first, it cannot be second. And everything else will follow.
The enlightened man cannot do wrong, cannot do evil. His every breath is in the service of good, his every act is in the service of the divine. He himself is totally surrendered to the whole – allowing the whole to use him in whatever way it wants.
This is the difference between morality and religion: a religious person is moral, but the moral person is not religious.
The moral person is only a hypocrite.
But the problem has arisen because we have seen enlightened people like Gautam Buddha, but we don’t see their enlightenment. Their roots are hidden. We see their actions, their fruits, their flowers, their foliage. And the natural logic of the mind is that if we also start doing the same acts as they are doing, we will become enlightened.
You can see the logical fallacy, but it appears very rational: Buddha eats one time a day, so you eat one time a day; Buddha has only three sets of clothes, so you have only three sets of clothes; Buddha never uses any vehicle, always walks from village to village, so you always walk. You can imitate every action of Buddha without difficulty, you can repeat his words exactly the way he says them, but still you will not become enlightened, because the roots are missing. And with roots the problem is that they are always hidden; they are secret.
So Buddhists, for twenty-five centuries, have been continuously imitating: Christians have been imitating Christ, and the same is true about other religions. They have all created great imitators, but inside they are just as ordinary, as unenlightened, as anybody else. They have taken the whole thing from the wrong end.
The concerns that have come down from numberless ages are only in the present.
This sentence he must have got from someone enlightened, because he could not manage to think of it himself. It is a very pregnant sentence.
The concerns that have come down from numberless ages are only in the present: if you can understand them right now, then the concerns of numberless ages will instantly disperse, like tiles being scattered or ice melting. If you don’t understand right now, you’ll pass through countless eons more, and it’ll still be just as it is. The truth that is as it is has been continuous since antiquity without ever having varied so much as a hairsbreadth.
Now these words cannot come from a teacher. The insistence on now and the implication behind now is immensely great. He is saying that you may have committed thousands of crimes in the past, but the past is no more. Only memories of the past have remained in your mind. You may have imagined committing many crimes and evils in the future, but they are only in the mind. They are all now: your past, your present, your future are all in this moment.
This is a very tremendous statement. It means you don’t have to get rid of your past by doing good acts. It means that you don’t have to be punished for your past – because it was an unconscious action. You were not aware. If you can become aware right now, all that has been a heavy load on you will melt away like ice.
Now there is no question of doing good and there is no question of doing evil. Now the only thing is bringing a deep understanding of the present moment, an awareness of the present moment.
And that’s what meditation is. It does not care about the past, it does not care about the future; it simply becomes a pillar of light in the present. In that pillar of light in the present, all past and future simply disappear. They don’t have any actual existence.
It is as if you have slept the whole night, doing good acts and bad acts – sometimes escaping with your neighbor’s wife, sometimes becoming a saint – but in the morning when you wake up, you know you have not done anything. It was only the sleepiness that created all those dreams.
To the man of understanding, all that you have done has been done in your unconsciousness; so the only way is just to become conscious, and you will be awake. And all your past will disappear just as dreams disappear when you are awake. This statement can certainly be said to come from a source of enlightenment.
Matters of worldly anxiety are like the links of a chain, joining together continuously without a break. If you can do away with them, do away with them immediately!.
That’s why I was saying that he has done a good patchwork. He has deceived even the emperors by doing his patchwork.
Once in a while, he has got hold of the words of somebody enlightened. But in the meantime he goes on collecting all kinds of advice from teachers who have collected them from others. And they are so mixed up with each other that it is very difficult to make a clear-cut division.
But I wanted to take it whole; otherwise I could have cut out all that is nonsense and left only that which is true. I wanted to give you a certain insight in how to distinguish whether it is coming from a source of enlightenment or it is just intellectual gymnastics.
Because you have become habituated to them since beginningless time, to the point where they have become totally familiar, if you don’t exert yourself to struggle with them, then as time goes on and on, with you unknowing and unawares, they will have entered deeply into you. Finally, on the last day of your life, you won’t be able to do anything about it.
Do you see how he forgets himself? If things can be done now, in a single moment of awareness, why can’t you do it at the moment of death? That too will be a now and a single moment. And it will be easier to do at that time than it is now, because now you can postpone for tomorrow. When death is standing in front of you, there is no question of postponing; either you have to do it or not do it. And who would like to carry all his nightmares with him?
Ta Hui himself became enlightened just a minute before he was dying. Death can be of immense help, it can be a blessing in disguise, because now there is no future, no tomorrow. You cannot say, “Today I am busy, tomorrow I will meditate.” You have to drop all business. Now the only significant thing to be done is to be alert and aware, get rid of all your past, and move into death – innocent, clean, clear, unburdened. Then your very death becomes the entry into the divine. Then you are not dying; you are entering into eternal life.
But Ta Hui says as a thinker, as a teacher, Finally, on the last day of your life, you won’t be able to do anything about it.
Nothing has to be done. If one has only to become aware, he can become aware any time, whether the next moment is death or not. But death can become a great incentive to do it immediately. Just the idea of tomorrow makes you say, “It’s okay, there’s no hurry. If not today, then tomorrow” – and tomorrow never comes. It is always today. And you become habituated to postponing for tomorrow. Death for the first time makes you aware that now there is no tomorrow. If you want to be aware, be aware. And the shock of death helps awareness.
Many people at the time of death have become enlightened, although their enlightenment remains unknown, because after it they simply die. Their enlightenment never helps anybody else because there is no time, but still it is great – at least they have managed it for themselves.
If you want to be able to avoid going wrong when you face the end of your life, then from now on whenever you do anything, don’t let yourself slip.
He goes on, up and down. Those few sentences were absolutely right. Now again he has come to doing.
If you go wrong in your present doings, it will be impossible not to go wrong when you’re facing death.
Meditation is not a question of doing at all. Meditation is a question of awakening.
There’s a sort of person who reads scriptures, recites the Buddha-name, and repents in the morning, but then in the evening runs off at the mouth, slandering and vilifying other people. The next day he does homage to Buddha and repents as before. All through the years till the end of his life, he takes this as daily ritual – this is extreme folly. Such people are far from realizing that the Sanskrit word ‘kshama’ means to repent faults. This is called “cutting off the continuing mind.”
Now what he is saying is absolutely applicable to him – he is repeating good words, he is repeating scriptures. He may be worshipping the Buddha, being a Buddhist monk. What he is saying seems to be his own experience.
It is true. Millions of people in the world are doing the same – whether they are Christians or Jews or Hindus or Buddhists or Jainas, it does not make any difference. They are the same people. When they are in the temple they pretend to be religious. This one hour of religion is not going to help because twenty-three hours are canceling it continuously. Twenty-three times more they are irreligious. This one hour religion is just a self-deception.
And you can see how he goes on mixing things. The Sanskrit word kshama does not mean repenting faults. kshama means forgiving, forgiving others and forgiving yourself too – forgiving because you were unconscious and others are unconscious. This forgiveness will bring some awareness to you.
Every year Jainas have one day, Kshamavani, the day of forgiving, when even enemies have to meet each other and forgive each other. And the miracle is that after the day is gone the enemies are still enemies; nothing has happened, it’s just a ritual.
We can make a ritual of every great thing. You step on somebody’s feet and you say, “I am sorry.” Do you really mean it or is it just a social convention? It makes life smooth, but it does not come from your very being. You don’t even think about it.
But certainly he catches hold of a sentence which is not from ordinary teachers: This is called “cutting off the continuing mind.”
You can see the contradiction. A person who lives in repentance cannot be said to be “cutting his mind.”
Repentance is always about the past.
It is a feeling of guilt – “I have done wrong.”
“Cutting the mind” means that the past is no more – “it was a dark night and I was unconscious. Things that have happened were out of my sleep; now I don’t have any connection with that old past.” Not having any connection with the mind means not having any connection with the past.
Your mind is your past.
The whole past is continuously gathering in the mind. Cutting the mind away from yourself, you are cutting your past and you are starting anew, fresh.
This is what the great masters have said: Die each moment to the past, and be reborn for the new, for the fresh, for that which is coming – dying each moment because past is being created every moment.
Your present is nothing but continuously becoming past – why go on gathering an unnecessary weight? It is better that each moment you go on cutting yourself from the past. Don’t carry any scratches from the past and remain available and open to the future. Soon the future will also become past.
The moment anything becomes past, cut yourself away from it. Then you can die just like an innocent child, then your death will be just like a birth: no past, an innocent mind.
And this is the right death because it is not an ending of life, but a beginning of a greater life – of a life which will not be encased in the body, but will be spread all over existence: you will dance in the trees and you will smile in the flowers and you will shine in the stars. Your freedom will be total and you won’t have any boundaries.
Once you have cut it off, never continue it again; once you have repented, do not commit again – this is the meaning of repentance according to our Buddha.
He does not know the Buddha. Buddha does not teach repentance; he simply teaches awareness.
Repentance is a dangerous technique. It is just like Catholic confession. Every religion has managed to create some cheap substitute that everybody can do and feel good. You go to the church, you confess to the priest, and you think that you are freed. Now the priest will tell God and you are forgiven. But in reality what happens when you come out of the confessional is that you are again ready to commit the same things. There is no problem. Next week you can again confess.
Hindus go to the Ganges to take a bath. Every twelve years a great gathering – perhaps the greatest in the world – happens in Prayag. Hindus from all over the country, and even from outside the country, just come there to have a dip in the Ganges, because it is thought that the moment you take a dip in the Ganges all your sins, even all your wrongdoings, are washed away.

I used to go to Prayag many times, but I have never taken a dip in the Ganges. I love swimming and I have been swimming in many rivers, but never in the Ganges. I used to stay with a family. They said, “This is strange. You love swimming, you always go to the rivers when you are in other cities, but here where the whole country comes to take a dip…”
I said, “That is the reason – so many sins must be afloat here and for centuries people have been dipping in it. It is very dangerous. I keep away from the place because if their sins are really washed away here…as long as we can remember – at least ten thousand years – millions and millions of people have been washing their sins here. This is the dirtiest place in the whole world. I cannot step in it.”
The man was very much shocked because he was always bragging that he lived near the Ganges and took a dip in it every day. I said, “You are an idiot. Every day! You must have gathered so many sins that now even God cannot help you.”
He said, “But nobody ever thought about it.”
I said, “Who thinks? People simply go on doing what others are doing. And you are a doctor, well educated, well known in your area – at least you should not be so superstitious and stupid. If sins can be washed away by the Ganges, that simply means you are again ready to commit sins. What is the problem? Go on committing as many sins as you want to commit. The Ganges is there – just go and have a dip.”

These are the religious priests exploiting people so cunningly, giving them hope, giving them simple tricks to deceive even God.
When you have nothing to do, you should sit quietly and keep the mind from slackening and the body from wavering. If you practice to perfection over a long, long time, naturally body and mind will come to rest at ease, and you will have some direction in the path. The perfection of quiescence and stillness indeed settles the scattered and confused false consciousness of sentient beings, but if you cling to quiescent stillness and consider it the ultimate, then you’re in the grip of perverted “silent illumination” Ch’an.
This small school of silent illumination is one of the highly evolved methodologies about awareness, but Ta Hui does not belong to that small line of illumined people.
The mind always thinks of doing something.
When you are doing something, mind is nourished. When you are not doing anything, mind starts dying. Mind is almost like a bicycle. If you go on pedaling, the bicycle goes on moving. If you stop pedaling, it may go a few feet because of the old momentum, but finally it has to fall. Mind needs continuous doing. Do something…that is the pedaling that keeps the mind going on.
This school of “silent illumination” Ch’an, which Ta Hui speaks continually against, is of a far higher quality than Ta Hui can understand. These people simply sit silently. They don’t do anything – good or bad. They simply don’t do anything. If somebody offers food they can take it; if nobody offers food they remain hungry, but they don’t do anything for it.
And existence is so compassionate that if a certain person is simply sitting silently, he creates a field of silence around him. Somebody is bound to be attracted toward him. No “silent illumination” Ch’an adept has died of hunger or cold. Somebody has come to cover him, somebody has brought some food, somebody has brought water. Not even a single man of that lineage has died…and they have attained to the highest peak of illumination.
It seems Ta Hui feels a certain jealously that these people don’t do anything and still they are worshipped. These people don’t do anything; still they are thought to be living buddhas. His own leanings are for moral works, good works, service to the people. He is an intellectual. But it seems before he died he became tired of his intellectual approach, because he had not gained anything.
At the last moment of his life, he must have realized that he had wasted his life unnecessarily wandering in a desert where nothing grows. This realization, in a single moment, changed his whole character, his whole being. His whole life he was only a teacher, but he died as a master. If he had lived a little more, perhaps he would have asked forgiveness from the people who belong to the “silent illumination” ch’an. We don’t know. Perhaps inside his own being he must have asked for forgiveness.
But he seems to be jealous because he is teaching, he is doing good, he is serving people; he is moving from town to town bringing people to the feet of Gautam Buddha, and these people don’t worship Buddha. They don’t even chant Buddha’s name. They simply sit silently. They don’t have any records because they don’t say anything. Their whole being is their statement. They are themselves buddhas. Why should they chant the name of Buddha, why should they worship Buddha, why should they go to the Buddha’s temple?
My own sympathy is not with Ta Hui. My own sympathy is with those “silent illumination” Ch’an people. They are the very salt of the earth.

============================================================

Do Not Grasp Another’s Bow

Actively try to clear out your mind, then you won’t go wrong; since you don’t go wrong, correct mindfulness stands out alone. When correct mindfulness stands out alone, inner truth adapts to phenomena; when inner truth adapts to events and things, events and things come to fuse in inner truth. When phenomena fuse with their inner truth, you save power; when you feel the saving, this is the empowerment of studying the path. In gaining power you save unlimited power; in saving power you gain unlimited power.
This matter may be taken up by brilliant, quick-witted folks, but if you depend on your brilliance and quick wits, you won’t be able to bear up. It is easy for keen and bright people to enter, but hard for them to preserve it. That’s because generally their entry is not very deep and the power is meager. With the intelligent and quick-witted, as soon as they hear a spiritual friend mention this matter their eyes stir immediately, and they are already trying to gain understanding through their mind’s discriminating intellect. People like this are creating their own hindrances, and will never have a moment of awakening. “When devils from outside wreak calamity, it can still be remedied,” but this reliance on intellectual discrimination amounts to “When one’s own family creates disaster, it cannot be averted.” This is what Yung Chia meant when he said, “The loss of the wealth of the dharma, and the demise of virtue, all stem from mind’s discriminating intellect.”

The Mind’s Conceptual Discrimination

The obstruction of the path by the mind, and its conceptual discrimination, is worse than poisonous snakes or fierce tigers. Why? Because poisonous snakes and fierce tigers can still be avoided, whereas intelligent people make the mind’s conceptual discrimination their home, so that there’s never a single instant – whether they’re walking, standing, sitting, or lying down – that they’re not having dealings with it. As time goes on, unknowing and unawares they become one piece with it – and not because they want to, either, but because since beginningless time they have followed this one little road until it’s become set and familiar. Though they may see through it for a moment and wish to detach from it, they still can’t. Thus it is said that poisonous snakes and fierce tigers can still be avoided, but the mind’s conceptual discrimination truly has no place for you to escape.
The great problem with people like Ta Hui is their own intellect. Even if they are talking against intellect, it is nothing but their own intellect. The intellect is capable of creating an illusion that you are going beyond intellect, but the illusion can be easily detected.
The things that Ta Hui is saying in these sutras, he must have heard from a very right source. But he himself is only an intellectual; hence everything that passes through his intellect changes its form. This change is so subtle that unless one becomes enlightened himself, he will never see where the intellect has deceived him.
Just listen to what he is saying:
Actively try to clear out your mind.
Who are you? Do you know yourself as distinct from the mind? If you know yourself as distinct from the mind, the mind is cleared away. The question of actively trying to clear out your mind does not arise. The mind is there because you are not there; you are fast asleep, you are not alert. The darkness is there because you have not brought even a single candle, and just a small candle is enough to dispel vast darkness. This is how the mind misinterprets – and still it feels that one is going on the right path.
The enlightened man can say to you, “Dispel all darkness.” But the only way to dispel darkness is to bring light in. The intellectual will understand that dispelling darkness means actively fighting with darkness, throwing it out of the house. But can you manage to empty your room of darkness just by bringing out buckets full of darkness and throwing it away? The room will still remain dark. The only thing that will happen will be a tremendous frustration, tiredness, disgust with the whole idea. But if you had an understanding that is not from the mind, but from the beyond…that comes only through meditation, and this man is not talking about meditation at all.
It is only through meditation that your inner light, which is dormant, becomes suddenly active and alive. It is an eternal source of light. Once the light is there, darkness is automatically dispelled. Even to say dispelled is wrong, because darkness does not exist; it is only the absence of the light. Darkness does not have its own existence, so you cannot do anything directly with it.
Whatever you want to do with darkness, you will have to do something with light. If you want darkness, put the light off. If you don’t want darkness, put the light on. But you can act only with light, because light is a positive existence. Darkness is simply an absence of light – and so is the state of our mind.
Mind is your absence. The moment you are present, there is no mind.
So the absolute emphasis of all the buddhas of all the centuries has been simply this: Come to consciousness, become a presence, and there will be no place for the mind and all its ingredients – greed, anger, delusion, dreams, hallucinations, ambitions, the whole lot.
If you start listening to people like Ta Hui and working according to their idea, you will get more and more in a mess. He is saying, actively try to clear out your mind. He is giving you a wrong direction, without any intention to take you on a wrong path. But intentions don’t matter. What matters is whether the indication is in the right direction or not.
Nothing can be done directly with the mind.
He says, Actively try to clear out your mind, then you won’t go wrong, but the first condition cannot be fulfilled. You will be going wrong all the time. But he is accepting that the first condition can be fulfilled.
Not a single enlightened person has ever said that you can do anything directly with the mind, but because he accepts that idea, he goes on and on. …then you won’t go wrong; since you don’t go wrong, correct mindfulness stands out alone. Still, it is mindfulness.
Meditation is not mindfulness. Meditation is a state of no-mind.
Mindfulness is still intelligence. You can be highly intelligent – that does not mean that you know meditation.

A great contemporary British philosopher, C.E.M. Joad, was very much disturbed by the ideas of George Gurdjieff and his disciple, P.D. Ouspensky. He was sick, and he was reading P.D. Ouspensky’s book on the teachings of Gurdjieff. He was one of the great philosophers of the century.
Joad told one of his friends, “I hear Ouspensky is in London, but I am not in a good enough condition to go and talk to him. The doctors say I should rest in bed. But I cannot wait, because it may be that I am just counting my last days, any day may be the end. Can you go to Ouspensky and tell him my situation…and if he can come, it will be very kind of him. I want to talk to him, because I don’t understand what this no-mind is. Beyond mind, I cannot understand there is anything.”
Joad had worked his whole life with the mind, and he knew what the mind was, but he had never gone beyond the boundary. “In fact,” he said to the friend, “the people who go beyond the mind go into an insane asylum. We say mad people are ‘out of their mind.’ And this strange man Gurdjieff goes on talking about no-mind. You go and persuade Ouspensky! Perhaps, knowing my name, he may come.”
Ouspensky came, and Joad said to him, “I cannot understand at all what this no-mind is. I can understand mind, I can even understand mindfulness, but no-mind is simply beyond my conceivability.”
Ouspensky said, “It is a very simple matter. I am sitting here. You just close your eyes and remember one thing: whatever is going before your inner eye is the mind, and the presence in front of which the mind is passing is the no-mind.”
Joad had never done any such thing. He closed his eyes…a half hour passed, one hour passed, and his face was looking so silent, so serene. Ouspensky had some other appointment, so he had to wake him up. He told him, “I am sorry to disturb you – you were going really deep.”
And Joad said, “I am immensely grateful. I cannot express my gratitude…I had never thought about the possibility that I can watch the mind; that certainly means I am not the mind. The watcher is certainly different from the watched. And rather than explaining it to me intellectually, you gave me the experience itself. It was so beautiful and so silent. These last days, staying in bed, I have nothing else to do. I am going to continue watching my mind.”
“Perhaps Gurdjieff is right, and perhaps the Eastern mystics are right. And this is the right time for me. If I can get away from the mind into myself, into my witnessing, into my watching – what they call no-mind – perhaps I will go from life not feeling that I lived meaninglessly.”
After just ten days he died. But before his death, he dictated to his secretary a small statement to be delivered to George Gurdjieff and to Ouspensky. He said, “I am dying with great gratitude – you showed me the way. Now death does not matter, now nothing matters. I have tasted something of the beyond, of the eternal. Mind was the barrier. I was thinking mind is all that we have, but I never thought that mind is just an instrument, like any other instrument.”

You have kidneys, you have hands, you have legs; if your hand is cut off, that does not mean that you are destroyed. You are more than the total sum of your parts – that is the meaning of no-mind. You are not an arithmetical entity, you are a spiritual being.
I would like to repeat so that you remember it: You are more than the sum total of your parts, and that which is more than the sum total of your parts is your real being. A machine is not more than the sum total; a machine is exactly equal to the sum total of its parts.
It is only life which is more than its sum total.
And when life becomes conscious, it is even more.
And when consciousness becomes absolute illumination, it is tremendously more. The sum total of your parts remains far behind, a very small, tiny thing. You become as vast as the sky itself.
But Ta Hui has no understanding yet. He is still talking like a thinker.
When correct mindfulness stands out alone, inner truth adapts to phenomena; when inner truth adapts to events and things, events and things come to fuse in inner truth. When phenomena fuse with their inner truth, you save power…
That too has to be understood. Power from the lips of Ta Hui is not the same power about which a Gautam Buddha may talk.
Power – according to the mind – is always power over others. Mind is continuously trying to dominate, to enslave, to be powerful over others, because mind has no power of its own. All its power is borrowed. What does the prime minister of any country have as his power? Just the votes that he has begged. He is really the greatest beggar in the country. All his power belongs to the people; he does not have any power of his own.
So when the mind talks about power, it talks about politics, it talks about domination, it talks about possessiveness; it talks about increasing your empire of riches, of power, of prestige, in whatever way, so you can become a dominant figure.
But the power that the awakened one talks about is not power over others. He talks about it as an intrinsic explosion, just like the atomic explosion. It is not the power that is coming from outside; it is the power that was deep inside the atomic cell. Because the atom has exploded, the power is all over the place.
A very strange piece of information has come to me just the other day…a Japanese scientist had been continuously watching, studying the effects of atomic energy and its radiation in and around Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Forty years have passed since the atomic explosion happened there, when the atom bomb was dropped on Nagasaki and Hiroshima.
This one scientist really risked his life; nobody goes to Hiroshima because everything is full of radiation, but he went and lived there for a few weeks, just to see what effect the radiation would have. And when he came back he brought a great surprise to his fellow scientists. He looked ten years younger, and healthier than he had ever been.
They were all surprised, because nobody had thought…it had always been thought that radiation will kill, but he has discovered that radiation will kill only in a certain great quantity. It is a question of degrees. In small quantities it can help to destroy disease, to give man a longer life, to keep him young until his death. Now he has prepared a small ceramic paper, with a very small dose of radiation coming out of it. He thinks that keeping that in your room will be enough for you to remain healthy and younger!
I have always been saying that energy is neutral: that which can destroy, can also create; we just have to discover how it destroys and how it creates.
This Japanese scientist has done a tremendous service to the coming humanity. It means that if the nations are willing, and if their stupid politicians don’t hinder it, then all the atomic energy and nuclear weapons that they have gathered can be brought to the service of life – to bring more health to the world, to dispel illness, to dispel hunger, to dispel old age, to make man live longer and remain younger.
The power of the atomic bomb is not power coming from outside; it is the power of the atom which was dormant, sleeping, and has been awakened. If this is possible through the atom – which is part of electricity, just a small particle – what is possible if we can explode the living being of a man? A small particle of his consciousness, if it explodes, is going to bring so much light and so much power.
Perhaps the mystics who have always been talking about power were talking about the power that they were feeling inside themselves. It has nothing to do with dominating anybody. Their power has been used as compassion, their power has been used for showering flowers over others. Their power has not ever been used for any destructive purpose, in the service of death.
But the word power itself is dangerous, because ordinarily its association is with politics. When Ta Hui uses the word power he does not understand that the mystics have used it in a different way, totally opposite. He says,
When phenomena fuse with their inner truth, you save power; when you feel the saving this is the empowerment of studying the path. In gaining power you save unlimited power; in saving power you gain unlimited power.
The way he is saying it is clear: unlimited power – over whom? Why this emphasis on power?
The power that comes out of meditation does not come as power. It comes as if flowers are showering on you; it comes as fragrance, it comes as love, it comes as compassion. It brings all the great qualities and all the great values of life suddenly to their blossoming. It is the spring of your consciousness. Everything suddenly becomes green, everything becomes cool; the breeze becomes full of fragrance, because you are bursting forth into flowers which cannot be seen by the eye. But those who have the heart and the courage to open to it will certainly feel it. They will feel its song, they will feel its dance.
But the word power is not to be used. It has been associated with wrong people – they have contaminated it.
This matter may be taken up by brilliant, quick-witted folks…
And he himself is nothing but a brilliant, quick-witted folk.
…but if you depend on your brilliance and quick wits, you won’t be able to bear up. It is easy for keen and bright people to enter, but hard for them to preserve it. That’s because generally their entry is not very deep and the power is meager. With the intelligent and quick-witted, as soon as they hear a spiritual friend mention this matter, their eyes stir immediately and they are already trying to gain understanding through their mind’s discriminating intellect.
Ta Hui has a misunderstanding. Mind has only one power and that is the discriminating intellect; it has no other power.
Because of its discriminating intellect, mind is so useful in science, and it is absolutely a hindrance in spiritual growth. There you don’t need any intellect. All that you need is a deep trust in existence, a deep reverence for life.
Intellect is never trust, it is always doubt. Spiritual growth is hindered more by doubt than anything else, but how can you gain trust? Doubt is natural to the mind; trust is not part of the mind. How can you come to trust?
That’s why all spiritual teachings emphasize a deep intimate relationship with someone who has gone ahead of you. You need to be related to one who is already awakened. His very awakening will become an evidence, an argument for you to dispel all doubt, and to dispel all mind.
You have to come in contact with a man who lives as a no-mind, who lives as silence.
His silence is luminous. It is contagious. If you come close to such a man, you are bound to be caught in the net of his radiating love, his radiating awareness. Only that experience will create trust in you, will give you the feeling that if this beautiful flowering can happen to one man…and I am also a man. It will remind you of your own potential: there is no need to doubt; if this man can blossom into such a beautiful flower…I am also a man.
The presence of the enlightened person brings a great dignity to you, a great pride, which is not ego…a pride that you are a human being full of the potential of being a buddha.
And once trust has arisen in you, you are on the path.
Trust is another name of the path.
Doubt is the name of going astray.
Intellect is nothing but another name of doubt. Doubt is a beautiful instrument as far as science is concerned, but doubt is not of any help to go beyond the mind. To go beyond the mind you need trust, and trust has a beauty of its own. Doubt has no beauty, it is ugly. It does not give you integrity, it always keeps you suspicious.
Once trust has arisen in you, you are beyond the dangers of the mind.
But Ta Hui has not understood, although he has been from one master to another – to many masters. Perhaps that has created the whole confusion in him. In those many masters, a few may have been just teachers, a few may not have even been teachers, but people who love to advise – whether they know anything or not. They enjoy advising, because in advising they become higher than you; you are ignorant, and they are knowledgeable.

I have been part of a psychology department in a university. There were four other psychologists in the department, and they were all practicing psychoanalysis, except me. I never believed in any kind of analysis, any kind of psychology, because I don’t want to do anything with the mind at all. But you will be surprised, they were giving counseling to sick people – mentally sick, psychologically sick. They were analyzing, and they were earning much money, but they were suffering from the same problems.
I was the only one available, so they were all asking me, “What to do with this problem that never leaves us?”
I said, “You are great psychoanalysts; you counsel people, you help people.”
They said, “Don’t make a laughingstock of us! We know the technique, we have learned psychoanalysis, and we advise.”
But I said, “If you cannot follow your own advice, what right have you got to give it to somebody else?”
I used to tell them an ancient Sufi story. A woman was very much disturbed by her young child – she had only one child, and her husband had died. She was rich, but she had lost all interest in life. She was living simply because of this small child, and certainly in such circumstances, children are spoiled; the child would not eat anything except sweets. The doctors were saying, “This is bad, his whole health will be spoiled.” But the child was not listening.
The woman used to go to the Sufi mystic, so one day she thought, “He does not listen to me, but perhaps he may listen to the mystic, because the man is so radiant that anybody who goes close to him feels impressed.”
She took the child and she told the mystic, “He does not listen to anybody. Doctors tell him that his health will be spoiled, and I am telling him every day. His whole food consists only of sweets; otherwise he prefers to remain hungry. He is my only child, my husband is dead, and I am only living for him. I cannot see him hungry, so I have to give him sweets, knowing well that I am giving poison to him – white sugar is white poison. So I have brought him. You tell him something! You are a man of God, perhaps your words may have a different impact.”
The mystic looked at the child. He said, “My son, I am not in a position to answer you right now because I myself love to eat sweets. You come back after two weeks. For two weeks I will not eat sweets, if I can manage it. Only then can I advise; otherwise, I am not the right person to advise.”
The woman could not believe it. This could even be dangerous…but the child was immensely impressed. He touched the feet of the mystic. He said, “I have been taken to many people; my mother goes on taking me to this wise guy, to that wise guy, and they all go on advising immediately. You are the first man who is sincere. I will come after two weeks, and whatever you say, I will do. I can trust you.”
A man who confesses before a child… “Right now I am not in the right position even to advise you, because I myself like sweets; so for two weeks I will have to try my advice on myself, and then you come.
“If I fail, I will say, ‘I am sorry, I cannot advise you.’ If I succeed, then I will say, ‘Don’t be worried, if I can succeed – an old man – you are so young and so powerful, and so intelligent, you can succeed also. Just give it a try!’”
The mother was shocked. If the mystic says after two weeks that he cannot succeed, then the whole thing is finished; then there is nobody else to whom she can take the child.
After two weeks, they came back. The mystic said, “My son, it is difficult but not impossible. I managed not to eat sweets for two weeks, and I promise you that my whole life I will not touch sweets again. Do you think I can advise you? If you allow me to advise, only then will I do so.”
The child said, “There is no need to say anything. I have received the message. I am grateful to you. A man like you who is ready to drop eating sweets for his whole life just to give me the advice that he himself practices, is worthy of trust. I trust you. I also promise you that I will not eat sweets from this moment onward.”
I used to tell these psychologists, “When you advise other people, have you ever thought that the advice is coming from somebody who himself suffers from the same problem?”

So this Ta Hui must have gone to learned people, to the knowledgeable, to teachers of all kinds. Once in a while perhaps he may have accidentally met an awakened man, a master, a mystic, and he has collected from all these sources; so once in a while there is a statement that seems to be absolutely right. But mostly he has collected all kinds of pieces from sources which are as ignorant as he is, but they were as willing to advise as he is willing to advise.
I would like my people to remember it: never advise unless it is your experience. In the world, advice is the only thing which everybody gives and nobody takes, so why bother? Everybody enjoys giving advice and nobody ever takes it, and the reason is that everybody knows that advice is meant for others – not for yourself.
I would like my people to remember: never advise, unless it has been your own authentic experience. Then too you can simply say, “This has been my experience. It is not necessary that it will be right for you – you can experiment. If you feel that it brings more harmony to your life, more joy, you can go ahead. If you feel it is not bringing anything…because individuals are different. What fits me may not fit you, what is medicine to me may be simply poison to you.”
An absolutely alert man is always alert about what advice to give and what not to give. Even if he gives advice, it is always conditional – conditional upon experiment. He says it only as a hypothesis: “You try a little bit – perhaps it works. If it works, good. If it does not work, don’t go on doing it. It has helped me, that’s true, but that does not mean that it will help everybody on the earth.”
People are different; each individual is unique, and each individual needs a unique way that suits him.
People like this are creating their own hindrances, and will never have a moment of awakening. “When devils from outside wreak calamity, it can still be remedied,” but this reliance on intellectual discrimination amounts to “When one’s own family creates disaster, it cannot be averted.”
He is giving good advice, but he has no experience. I am so certain that he has no experience because so many sentences, so many sutras, give clear-cut indications of ignorance.
This is what Yung Chia meant when he said, “The loss of the wealth of the dharma and the demise of virtue all stem from mind’s discriminating intellect.”
What he is saying is right, but he himself is not the right person to say it. All his understanding is based on intellect.
The statement of Yung Chia is absolutely right: “The loss of the wealth of the dharma and the demise of virtue all stem from mind’s discriminating intellect.”
Yung Chia was an enlightened master. He is saying that because of the mind, the world has become irreligious; because of the mind, all that is great has disappeared. It was perfectly true for Yung Chia to say it; it was his own experience. But Ta Hui is simply repeating it. The words are beautiful, the sentence is beautiful – he is collecting beautiful flowers from everywhere.
The obstruction of the path by the mind, and its conceptual discrimination, is worse than poisonous snakes or fierce tigers.
One simply cannot believe that a man is saying things which he has not experienced! And he has not gone beyond them.
Why? Because poisonous snakes and fierce tigers can still be avoided, whereas intelligent people make the mind’s conceptual discrimination their home, so that there’s never a single instant, whether they’re walking, standing, sitting, or lying down, that they’re not having dealings with it. As time goes on, unknowing and unawares, they become one piece with it – and not because they want to, either, but because since beginningless time they have followed this one little road until it has become set and familiar. Though they may see through it for a moment, and wish to detach from it, they still can’t. Thus it is said that poisonous snakes and fierce tigers can still be avoided, but the mind’s conceptual discrimination truly has no place for you to escape.
All that he is saying is right – but he is not. This has to be understood clearly: a wrong man can say right things, although a right man can never say wrong things. For the right man to say wrong things is impossible, but for the wrong man to say right things is very possible because it hides his wrongness. It becomes a cover-up to his ignorance.
In the world there are millions of teachers, priests, monks, belonging to different religions and different paths; they are all repeating beautiful words, but because they come from them, they lose all beauty.
They are the same words spoken by Zarathustra, by Lao Tzu, by Jesus Christ, by Gautam Buddha; they are the same words, but the man who is speaking is not the same. And those words have significance only if they are supported by an existential individual standing behind them. Those words are living only if they come from a living source. Hence, my insistence is: never bother about dead saints, never bother about holy scriptures.
Try to find a living master.
The living master contains all the scriptures and all the dead saints. Through the living master, whatever comes to you goes directly into your heart.
The living master never misses the target.
A beautiful story for the end.

There was a carnival going on in the town, and Mulla Nasruddin asked all his disciples to come with him. He would take them to the carnival to teach them a few things; that was his usual method, to take his disciples to actual situations. As they entered, the whole crowd there became interested, because they always knew that wherever Nasruddin is, something interesting is going to happen.
He was there with his fifty disciples following him. He went directly into a stall, where people were putting down money; if they could hit the bull’s-eye with the arrow, the stall keeper would give them three times as much money, and if they missed, their money was gone. Many people were trying, but it is not easy unless you are an archer.
Mulla Nasruddin went there, put ten rupees on the table, and took the bow and arrow. There was great silence. His fifty disciples were standing behind him, and a great crowd watching and thinking, “We never thought that this Mulla Nasruddin is an archer also. Now let us see what happens!” He took a shot, and the arrow simply went far away beyond the bull’s-eye.
Everybody laughed! He said, “Stop!” He turned toward his disciples and said, “Look, this is the arrow of a man who is too ambitious. He always misses the point, he goes far away.” Even the stall keeper became interested….
Nasruddin took out another arrow, took a shot, and the arrow fell just in front of him. Again people laughed. He said, “You idiots, stop! I have brought my disciples here to teach them something.” And he turned to the disciples, and said, “Look, this is the arrow of a man who is always hesitant, wishy-washy – to die or not to die? Because of this either/or situation, he always falls short; he never hits the bull’s-eye.” The people became silent – “He is right.”
He pulled out the third arrow, and the stall keeper was also silent – “This man has some ideas and he is not wrong.” And Mulla hit the bull’s-eye, took his ten rupee note, and asked for twenty more.
The stall keeper said, “What!”
Mulla said, “This is Mulla Nasruddin’s arrow; he never misses the target. You just bring twenty rupees!”
People laughed, but the stall keeper had to give twenty rupees. The disciples also said, “This is too much! In fact, if he had missed again, he would again have brought some explanation; this is just accidental. But he is a great man, there is no doubt about it.”
He was able to bring as many explanations as possible. If you go on shooting, one time it is going to hit; whenever it hits, it is Mulla Nasruddin’s arrow.
Mulla Nasruddin walked away with his thirty rupees and his disciples. He said, “Come on, you can enjoy some sweets, some fruits. Take these twenty rupees. Just leave my ten rupees, because only those ten belong to me; the other twenty came only from tricks.”

The so-called teachers like Ta Hui go on saying things, and among so many things, once in a while there may be one arrow hitting the target. But my concern is to show you how humanity has been deceived by teachers. Ta Hui was honored by the emperor of China as a great Ch’an master, a great Zen master, and he has been accepted as a great Zen master since then. When the emperor honored him with the title, who is going to dispute it?
It is now almost one thousand years ago, and nobody has raised the question that these are not the words of a man who is enlightened. It is basically to teach you a certain awareness and clarity, so that when you hear someone or read someone you can feel whether it is coming from an enlightened source or from a dark source – from someone who knows how to collect beautiful words, someone who is knowledgeable, someone who can deceive even emperors. But emperors are nothing but human beings – just like you!
For one thousand years, even Zen people have not taken Ta Hui to task. That is also something to be understood. Every tradition goes on protecting its people; whether they are right or wrong is not the question. The question is that they belong to their tradition; they have to be right.
This has messed up the whole atmosphere of the world. It has created such confusion for the whole of humanity. It seems that people are not interested in helping humanity grow into consciousness; they are more interested in their own line, in their own heritage, and in proving that it is right.
Naturally nobody else interferes. Perhaps I am the only man who goes on searching. I don’t care whether the person is Hindu, or a Mohammedan, or a Christian, or a Buddhist, or a Jew, or a Jaina.
To me the whole humanity is one.
And the whole heritage of the past is mind.
I would like to make a clear-cut distinction for the future, so that all those who are not right should be known as not right, and those who are right – to whichever tradition they belong – should be declared right.
In fact, in other words: I would like in the world only two traditions – the people who are right and the people who are wrong – to simplify things. Their future generations don’t have to worry; otherwise it is such a confusing mess. You are not supposed to say that anything wrong is wrong, because it belongs to your heritage.

It happened that in my village, between my house and a temple, there was a piece of land. For some technical reason, my father was able to win the case if he took it to court – only on technical reasons. The land was not ours, the land belonged to the temple. But the technical reason was this: the map of the temple did not show that the land was in their territory. It was some fault of the municipal committee’s clerical staff; they had put the land onto my father’s property.
Naturally in court there was no question; the temple had no right to say that it was their land. Everybody knew it was their land, my father knew it was their land. But the land was precious, it was just on the main street, and every technical and legal support was on my father’s side. He brought the case to the court.
I told him, “Listen” – I must have been not more than eleven years old – “I will go to the court to support the temple. I don’t have anything to do with the temple, I have never even gone inside the temple, whatever it is, but you know perfectly well that the land is not yours.”
He said, “What kind of son are you? You will witness against your own father?”
I said, “It is not a question of father and son; in the court it is a question of what is true. And not only will your son be there; your father I have also convinced.”
He said, “What!”
I had a very deep friendship with my grandfather, so we had consulted. I had told him, “You have to support me because I am only eleven years old. The court may not accept my witnessing because I am not an adult, so you have to support me. You know perfectly well that the land is not ours.”
He said, “I am with you.”
So I told my father, “Just listen, from both sides, from your father and from your son…you simply withdraw the case; otherwise you will be in such a trouble, you will lose the case. It is only technically that you are able to claim. But we are not going to support a technical mistake on the part of the municipal clerk.”
He said, “You don’t understand a simple thing, that a family means…you have to support your family.”
I said, “No, I will support the family only if the family is right. I will support whoever is right.”
He talked to my grandfather who said, “I have already promised your son that I will be going with him.”
My father said, “That means I will have to withdraw the case and lose that valuable piece of land!”
He said, “What can be done about it? Your son is going to create trouble for you, and seeing the situation, that he will not in any way be persuaded, I have agreed with him – just to make his position stronger so that you can withdraw; it is better to withdraw than to get defeated.”
My father said, “But this is a strange family! I am working for you all. I am working for you, I am working for my son – I am not working for myself. If we can have a beautiful shop on that land you will have a better, more comfortable old age; he will have a better education in a better university. And you are against me.”
My grandfather said, “I am not against anybody, but he has taken my promise, and I cannot go against my word – at least as far as he is concerned – because he is dangerous, he may put me in some trouble. So I cannot deceive him; I will say whatever he is saying. And he is saying the truth – and you know it.”
So my father had to withdraw the case – reluctantly…but he had to withdraw the case. I asked my grandfather to bring some sweets so we can distribute them in the neighborhood. My father has come to his senses, it has to be celebrated. He said, “That seems to be the right thing to do.”
When my father saw that I was distributing sweets, he asked, “What are you doing? – for what? What has happened?”
I said, “You have come back to your senses. Truth is victorious.” And I gave him a sweet also.
He laughed. He said, “I can understand your standpoint, and my own father is with you, so I thought it is better that I should also be with you. It is better to withdraw without any problem. But I have learned a lesson.” He said to me, “I cannot depend on my family. If there is any trouble they are not going to support me just because they belong to me as father, as son, as brother. They are going to support whatever is true.”
And since that time no other situation ever arose, because he never did anything in which we had to disagree. He remained truthful and sincere.
Many times in his life he told me, “It was so good of you; otherwise I was going to take that land, and I would have committed a crime knowingly. You prevented me, and not only from that crime, you prevented me from then onward. Whenever there was a similar situation, I always decided in favor of truth, whatever the loss. But now I can see: truth is the only treasure. You can lose your whole life, but don’t lose your truth.”

This is what I want you to learn from Ta Hui’s teachings: to experiment in seeing what is right and why it is right, what is wrong and why it is wrong, and also to know that even right becomes wrong when it comes from a wrong mind, from a wrong person.
Truth needs to be born out of an experience of truthfulness. It is a very delicate flower but the most precious treasure in life, because it brings liberation, it brings freedom, it brings to you your own immortality.
But never be a borrower, never depend on the other’s knowledge. A small piece of your own experience is far more important than all the Vedas, all the Korans, all the Bibles, all the Talmuds. A little experience of your own inner being is more valuable than all the buddhas of all the ages.
Truth has to be your own.
Only then is it alive, with a beating heart.

============================================================

There Is Nothing to Attain

Gentlemen of affairs often take the mind, which assumes there is something to attain, to seek the dharma, wherein there is nothing to attain. What do I mean by “the mind, which assumes there is something to attain”? It’s the intellectually clever one, the one that ponders and judges. What do I mean by “the dharma, wherein there is nothing to attain”? It’s the imponderable, the incalculable, where there’s no way to apply intelligence or cleverness.
Haven’t you read of old Shakyamuni at the assembly of the lotus of the true dharma? Three times Sariputta earnestly entreated him to preach, but there was simply no way for him to begin. Afterward, using all his power, he managed to say that this dharma is not something that can be understood by thought or discrimination. This was old Shakyamuni taking this matter to its ultimate conclusion, opening the gateway of expedient means as a starting point for the teaching of the true nature of reality.
When Hsueh Feng, a truly awakened master, heard of the teaching of Chou, master of the adamantine wisdom scripture, on Te Shan, he went to his abode. One day he asked Te Shan, “In the custom of the school that has come down from high antiquity, what doctrine is used to instruct people?” Te Shan said, “Our school has no verbal expression, nor does it have any doctrine to teach people.” Later Hsueh Feng also asked, “Do I have any share in the business of the vehicle of this ancient school?” Te Shan picked up his staff and immediately hit him saying, “What are you saying?” Under this blow Hsueh Feng finally smashed the lacquer bucket of his ignorance. From this we observe that in this sect intelligence and cleverness, thought and judgment, are of no use at all.
An ancient worthy had a saying: “Transcendent wisdom is like a great mass of fire. Approach it and it burns off your face.” If you hesitate in thought and speculation, you immediately fall into conceptual discrimination. Yung Chia said, “Loss of the wealth of the dharma and destruction of virtue all stems from the mind’s conceptual discrimination.”
Once you have the intent to investigate this path to the end, you must settle your resolve and vow to the end of your days not to retreat or fall back so long as you have not yet reached the great rest, the great surcease, the great liberation. There’s not much to the buddha dharma, but it’s always been hard to find capable people.
One of the greatest contributions of Gautam the Buddha to humanity is that religion is not to attain something. That which you want to attain you already have, so any effort to attain it is simply stupid. You have got your illumination within, you have got your enlightenment ready to explode at any moment, but the problem is you are never here and now. You are wandering and searching all over the world, and this search, this constant urge to achieve, has a certain psychology in it.
The mind is empty, and emptiness hurts like a wound. The mind cannot look back, it can only look ahead. To fill its emptiness it goes on achieving money, power, prestige, respectability. But nothing satisfies it because its emptiness is infinite. It may have any amount of money – still more is needed. It may have any amount of power – still more is needed.
The constant urge in the mind is for more and more, that’s why it is never at rest. It cannot be at rest; it has to achieve more. No one in the whole history of mankind has ever said that his mind is satisfied; such a statement does not exist in the annals of history.
Mind means dissatisfaction, mind means complaints, mind means unfulfilled greed, mind means incomplete desire.
Mind is by its very nature a beggar.

Diogenes asked Alexander, “Are you satisfied with conquering so many lands?”
He said, “No, unless I conquer the whole world I will not be satisfied.”
Diogenes said, “Remember my words. Even if you conquer the whole world, the mind will ask for more, and there is no other world to conquer. Remember…you have conquered the world that is, and there is no other world to conquer – and mind is asking for more. You will be in such a frustration that you cannot conceive of it right now.”
The day Alexander died, he remembered Diogenes. He had conquered the whole known world, and he was dying in utter frustration because the mind was not content.
Mind, by its very nature, cannot be content.
In fact, it is the name of your discontent.
Before his death, Alexander told his generals and ministers, “When you take my coffin to the grave, let my hands hang out of the coffin.”
They said, “What kind of strange idea has come to you? That is not the way – it has never been done! And what is the reason for it?”
He said, “I want everybody to know that even Alexander is going with empty hands. A whole life’s effort, not a single moment’s rest, running after more and more, and the ultimate result is just empty hands. Because millions of people will be standing by the side of the road to watch the procession, it will be the right moment to let them see and think. And when they ask, tell them why my hands are hanging out – I am going as unfulfilled as I had come.”

Gautam Buddha is very clear about the situation that, if you remain in the mind, you cannot get out of the trap of “more and more.” The only way to get out of the trap of more and more is to get out of the mind.
Mind is the greatest disease.
Ta Hui is in a strange situation. Sometimes he rises and grasps something of immense importance, but it is still intellectual. His words don’t sound authentic because immediately he says something else that spoils it completely. He certainly has a genius for understanding people, and he has been with many teachers and many masters.
In the first place, when somebody is with many teachers and many masters one thing is certain – that he has not yet found the man to be with. Seeing someone, the bells of his heart do not start ringing. He is still searching. This is also because of the mind, which wants more and more. He has understood this teacher, now he wants something more. He goes to another teacher.
Ta Hui went on and on searching for teachers his whole life, but this too is in a strange way the same trip – it is not different. Yes, once in a while he had come across a master, but he had not the eyes to recognize him. So he collected his words, but mixed them with the words of those who didn’t know anything. His whole philosophy is a hodgepodge, but we can take out those beautiful diamonds that have fallen into the mud. A diamond is still a diamond although it may be covered with mud.
This sutra, There Is Nothing to Attain, he must have heard from someone who really knows. But he has not been able to understand exactly why there is nothing to attain. That is possible to understand only when you are enlightened. That is possible only when you see that all that you had wanted to attain is already given to you; it is intrinsic in your self nature – that’s why there is nothing to attain.

He says,
Gentlemen of affairs often take the mind, which assumes there is something to attain, to seek the dharma, wherein there is nothing to attain.
But he does not give the reason why there is nothing to attain. Truth has to be attained, bliss has to be attained, beauty has to be attained, immortality has to be attained: mind can think only in terms of attainment.
I have been talking to thousands of people and so many times people have come to tell me, “You insist on meditation, but you never say what we will attain by it. Even if we meditate, we have to be certain what we are going to attain.”
I said, “You don’t understand. Meditation is not for attainment; meditation is just to discover who you are. Whether you discover it or not, you are the same from eternity. It is not an attainment, only a discovery.”
Ta Hui, listening to the masters, starts talking against the mind, but in a way which only a man of mind can do. You can see it in his language, his way of stating.
What do I mean by “the mind, which assumes there is something to attain”? It is the intellectually clever one, the one that ponders and judges. What do I mean by “the dharma, wherein there is nothing to attain”?
But he himself is not aware of why there is nothing to attain – because you already have it!
I have said many times that my function is to take away from you all that you don’t have, and to give you all that you already have. Just a thin layer of unconsciousness is covering your treasures. But because the mind becomes worried about its emptiness, its ignorance, naturally it starts seeking and searching somewhere to be somebody. But it can never be somebody. Just behind it, it is already a god, already a buddha, already the awakened one. It is a very strange situation that the emperor is so much surrounded by beggars that slowly, slowly you only know the beggars and you can’t see the emperor behind them.
It’s the imponderable, the incalculable, where there’s no way to apply intelligence or cleverness.
My difficulty with Ta Hui is that I can see he is simply repeating like a parrot. He himself does not understand what he is saying. He is intelligent enough to grasp the words spoken by the awakened ones, and his memory is good – he can repeat them. But I don’t feel at all that he understands what he is saying.
Haven’t you read of old Shakyamuni at the assembly of the lotus of the true dharma? Three times Sariputta earnestly entreated him to preach, but there was simply no way for him to begin. Afterward, using all his power, he managed to say that this dharma is not something that can be understood by thought or discrimination. This was old Shakyamuni taking this matter to its ultimate conclusion, opening the gateway of expedient means as a starting point for the teaching of the true nature of reality.
Even when he relates an incident of tremendous importance like this… Every year Gautam Buddha used to have a special assembly called the lotus assembly of the authentic religion. This was a special occasion, when all the wandering monks would gather together, thousands of monks.
In one assembly this incident really happened.

Sariputta was one of his most intimate disciples, and Sariputta was the head of the lotus assembly. He asked Gautam – entreated him three times – to preach, but Gautam Buddha remained silent. Ta Hui has not understood that silence is his preaching.
It was an assembly of people who could understand why he remains silent. Buddha had said all that was needed to be said: Become silent and you will know it. He did not say it, because by saying it, it is defiled, contaminated; he was simply showing it by his own silence. And certainly when Buddha was utterly silent with his eyes closed, the whole assembly became as if there was nobody – a ‘pin drop’ silence.
Sariputta asked again and again, and Buddha remained silent. In fact, he had preached, he had given the golden key; he had blessed the whole assembly by his silence.
That reminds me of Jesus. Pontius Pilate, the Roman governor of Judea, wanted somehow to release Jesus because he could see he was innocent, he had not done any harm to anybody. He said things which hurt the traditional people – but that was their problem. And they were not able to convince him…that would have been the human way.
If you disagree with me, it is perfectly okay. Disagreeing does not mean that you have to crucify me; that is not an argument, and that does not prove you right. In fact, on the contrary, it proves you wrong! Because you could not answer the man, you became angry – so angry, so bloodthirsty, that you killed the man.
By crucifying Jesus, his contemporaries sealed his truth, recognized his truth. Crucifixion is a recognition that they accepted their defeat. But before it happened, Pontius Pilate tried to talk to Jesus…and Jesus answered everything. Finally Pontius Pilate asked, “What is truth?”
Jesus looked into his eyes and remained silent. Pontius Pilate asked again, “What is truth?” – exactly three times. And Jesus went on looking into his eyes, but not saying a word. Those who don’t understand may think Jesus does not know the truth; otherwise why is he silent? But the reality is: he is silent because that is the only language in which truth can be expressed.
Ta Hui has not got the point. He thinks that, Afterward, using all his power, he managed to say that this dharma is not something that can be understood by thought or discrimination.
Buddha never said that; it is not part of authentic history. He remained silent. The assembly was dispersed for that day, and Sariputta declared to the assembly, “I have asked your question – it was not my question. My question he has answered long ago. It was your question, you wanted to know. I asked on your behalf three times, and he has answered three times. I am grateful, and I thank him. The assembly is dispersed for today.”

What Ta Hui is saying is really to fill the loophole in his own nonunderstanding with some words. This has never happened: Afterward, using all his power, he managed to say that this dharma is not something that can be understood by thought or discrimination.
This is Ta Hui’s own invention, and the reason why he has to invent it is that he himself must be feeling uneasy about the incident with the three silences. He could not understand that Buddha has said it, and now there is nothing else to be said.
The assembly was dispersed, and Sariputta knew that this was the answer. There are things which cannot be said, but can be understood. Truth is one of them.
This was old Shakyamuni taking this matter to its ultimate conclusion, opening the gateway of expedient means as a starting point for the teaching of the true nature of reality.
Again he falls back to the true teaching of the nature of reality. There cannot be any teaching of a true nature: all teaching is philosophizing, all teaching is thinking, all teaching is diametrically opposite to the reality.
It is true Buddha went on teaching for forty-two years, but what he is saying is not the truth. Then why he is teaching? He is teaching just to attract people who are entrapped in their intellects. Once they are convinced intellectually, they come closer to him, they become intimate with him. And in that intimacy is the transfer, in that intimacy the silence can be heard. So the forty-two years’ teaching should not be taken at face value…he was doing it only as a device.
I am not teaching you anything at all.
I am simply preparing you to listen to my silence.
Certainly teaching can be used to create silence, just as sound can be used to create silence. But the sound is not the real music…the real music is between the sounds, the gaps, the intervals. Ta Hui has not got the point at all.
When Hsueh Feng, a truly awakened master, heard of the teaching of Chou, master of the adamantine wisdom scripture, on Te Shan, he went to his abode. One day he asked Te Shan, “In the custom of the school that has come down from high antiquity, what doctrine is used to instruct people?”
Te Shan said, “Our school has no verbal expression, nor does it have any doctrine to teach people.” Later Hsueh Feng also asked, “Do I have any share in the business of the vehicle of this ancient school?”
Te Shan picked up his staff and immediately hit him saying, “What are you saying?” Under this blow Hsueh Feng finally smashed the lacquer bucket of his ignorance.
But Ta Hui is not able to convey correctly the incident that has happened, to tell what has transpired. Hitting him with the staff, do you think ignorance can be dispelled?
Te Shan was one of the most famous masters of China, and Hsueh Feng was also a truly awakened master, so there is no question of his ignorance being dispelled by hitting him with the staff.
Hsueh Feng went to Te Shan and asked him, “What doctrine is used to instruct people?”
The master said, “Our school has no verbal expression, nor does it have any doctrine to teach people.”
Hsueh Feng also asked, “Do I have any share in the business of the vehicle of this ancient school?”
At this point, the master took his staff and immediately hit him saying, “What are you saying?”
This was just playfulness between two enlightened people; it has nothing to do with destroying his ignorance. Nobody can destroy anybody’s ignorance by hitting him with a staff; otherwise things would be so easy! I can just call each of you and give a good hit, and your ignorance disappears and you become enlightened.
No, this was simply a playfulness. The master hit just to show Hsueh Feng, “You cannot deceive me…you are asking in a different way so that I may say something which is not right. I have answered you already: we don’t have any doctrine, and we don’t have any expression in our school. It is an absolutely silent school. We don’t talk, we don’t read scriptures, we don’t worship Buddha – we simply sit silently on this mountain. Slowly, slowly the mind disappears. It has nothing – no work, no possibility of ambition, no question of achieving anything – it disappears.”
And because he asked again – Te Shan had answered completely – now to ask him again in a different way, in a tricky way…. It was a tradition in Zen that masters used to go to each other – Zen is a very joyful, playful, nonserious religion – and as Te Shan saw that Hsueh Feng was trying to bring the question again from a different angle, he hit him with his staff and said, “What are you saying? Have you not heard – we don’t have any verbal expression, we don’t have any doctrine, so in what way can you serve? In what way can you be a vehicle for this ancient school? The only way to be part of this school…you cannot be a vehicle, you cannot be a messenger, you cannot be a missionary because we don’t have any message and we don’t have any doctrine. You can participate in the school, you can be part of it, but to be part of it means just to fall into utter silence.”
But Ta Hui could not understand what happened, so he says…and this kind of translation in the Western world is creating a very strange impression. People think that perhaps there was a special way of hitting with the staff, because it is absolutely absurd that by hitting with the staff all his ignorance is dispelled.
This is not the case. Hsueh Feng is already an awakened master, he is just being playful. But Te Shan has a direct insight…you cannot be playful with him, you cannot catch him in some way so that he goes against what he has said. He has hit Hsueh Feng with the staff just to tell him, “It is enough! I have said everything, now the only way I can put your questions to silence is by hitting on your head. We don’t need your head, we don’t need your mind.” By hitting his head Te Shan is saying, “Your mind should not be here at all. These people are living in a state of no-mind, and that is our school.”
From this we observe…you can see the words that Ta Hui is using are the words of a schoolteacher. From this we observe that in this sect intelligence and cleverness, thought and judgment, are of no use at all. Observe? He is still behaving like a student who is studying, observing – what is the doctrine of this school, what is the philosophy of that school? He himself is not a participant.
An ancient worthy had a saying: “Transcendent wisdom is like a great mass of fire. Approach it and it burns off your face.” If you hesitate in thought and speculation, you immediately fall into conceptual discrimination. Yung Chia said, “Loss of the wealth of the dharma and destruction of virtue all stems from the mind’s conceptual discrimination.”

Once you have the intent to investigate…
Just look at his words. They are words of a man who writes a thesis; they are not the words of a master who knows his own illumined nature.
Once you have the intent to investigate this path to the end, you must settle your resolve and vow to the end of your days not to retreat or fall back so long as you have not yet reached the great rest…
The enlightened masters have never used such phrases, such paragraphs, such long complicated sentences. This is the intellectual approach.

One Zen master was sitting on the seashore, and a man came and said to him, “I have been looking for you, but life has so many responsibilities that I could never come to you. It was just by coincidence I was passing and I saw you. I thought, ‘This is an opportunity I should not lose.’ I want to ask – just explain to me in a very simple way the master key of your religion.”
The master remained sitting just like a marble statue, not saying anything, not even blinking his eyes. The man was a little bit afraid. He asked loudly, “Have you heard me or not?”
The master laughed and said, “This is the question I should have asked you. Have you heard me or not?”
The man said, “But you have not said anything.”
The master said, “That’s what my teaching is: there is nothing to say, but only to experience.”
The man said, “That does not help me. Just give me a little more; I may not be able to come to you again.”
So the master wrote in the sand with his finger: “dhyana…meditation.” The man said, “That’s perfectly right, but it doesn’t make much sense to me. Can’t you explain it a little bit more?” So the master wrote dhyana, in bigger letters. The man said, “Smaller letters or bigger letters, it is not going to help me.”
The master said, “I cannot lie just to help you. I have gone as far as truth will allow. Beyond that, you please forgive me. I have told you everything that my religion consists of: silence is its flowering, and meditation is its root. Now get lost!”

Zen masters, or any enlightened masters, don’t speak like intellectuals, like the intelligensia. They have their own way…a very special way. Only those who are ready to open their hearts to them can be filled with their energy, can allow a few rays of light to enter into their being, may have some flowers showered on them – because it is not in the words that the transmission happens. It is possible only when both persons, the master and the questioner, are moving on the same wavelength, in the same state of silence.
Ta Hui says, …the great liberation, the great rest, the great surcease…

And still he goes on:
“There is not much to the buddha dharma, but it’s always…hard to find capable people.”
He is expressing his own understanding. All that is possible in Gautam Buddha’s approach to reality; in fact, it is the richest religion in the whole world. No religion has come to such heights, such peaks, and no religion has been able to produce so many enlightened beings in the world. Most of the religions have remained very mundane, very worldly.
Buddha stands out completely alone as far as the growth of human consciousness is concerned; he is the greatest contributor. Most of the enlightened people have come out of his insight, so it is stupid to say, “There’s not much to the buddha dharma.” And why is he saying this? Because buddha dharma, the religion of Gautam Buddha, does not have great philosophical treatises, but simple things: silence, no-mind, meditation, living totally, witnessing. Just on two hands…ten fingers may be enough to count the whole buddha dharma.
Naturally, to an intellectual this does not seem to be much. But the intellectual does not understand that you can have a huge mountain made only of rocks; it will be great as far as weight is concerned, but just one Kohinoor is enough…it is far more valuable than your whole mountain. Other religions have great doctrines….
Buddha has said again and again, “I am just a finger pointing to the moon, and my insistence is: ‘Don’t look at my finger but look at the moon.’ My finger does not mean anything; the reality is there in the moon. Forget my finger, and look at the moon.” So even whatsoever little he has said, he has insisted that it is only an arrow showing you the path and the direction. Naturally, for an intellectual, a philosopher, this is not much.
Ta Hui’s whole approach is such that it is mixed. To sort out what he has got from enlightened people, what he has got from learned people, and what he has made up himself is not difficult for me, but it will be difficult for you. And that’s the reason I have chosen the book. This will give you the idea that whenever you are reading someone or listening to someone you must be very alert. Has the man the presence, the depth, the silence, the authority that comes out of one’s own experience? Or is he just a knowledgeable person? And ask people, “Do you know it yourself?” and you will immediately find…if they hesitate even for a single moment or are taken aback, they were not expecting that you will ask this.

From my very childhood that has been the most interesting game that I have been engaged in. I have never played with the boys of my age. My whole time was involved in a different kind of game. One swami, Swarupananda, used to come to the town often, and he used to stay with one of my father’s friends. The friend was very rich and was well known as a wise man; all the saints used to stay in his guest house. But he was very angry with me, because whenever he arranged a meeting for his saints, I was always in the front row.
I always used to take my grandfather with me, and my grandfather was really, even in his old age, a very juicy man. He would go on hitting me, saying “Start! Do something.”
And I would suggest, “But let him speak, let him say something that I can find fault with.” And in the middle I would stand up and ask just a single question, “Is this your own feeling, your own experience? And remember, you are in the temple of God” – these meetings used to happen in the most beautiful temple in the city – “so you cannot lie!” And the man would hesitate, and I would say, “Your hesitation is saying everything! Either you know, or you don’t know. Where is the space for hesitation?”

Intellectuals can talk about all kinds of things. Catch hold of their necks and ask them, “Is it your own experience?” – and just look in their eyes. You will be surprised that out of a hundred perhaps you may find one man who is speaking out of some experience; otherwise, all is borrowed. And all that is borrowed is simply crap. These people have harmed humanity more than anybody else because they speak beautiful words, but those beautiful words are dead. And because of these people it has become difficult to find a real master, because there are so many fake teachers all over the world.
This is the greatest dishonesty that man can do to humanity. You can cheat people out of money, there is nothing much in it; you can be a con-man and do all kinds of deceiving…it is all okay with me because it does not matter whether the money is in one’s pocket or in somebody else’s pocket; the money is in the pocket – that’s all. It is not a great loss in any way.
But the people without experience who are pretending to be masters are really harming you spiritually. They are giving you words which are dead – they mean nothing – and they are preventing you from finding the right man. When there are so many fake people, the greater is the possibility that you will get caught by some fake person. And the fake person is always nicer, more persuasive; he talks in a way that supports your prejudices.
The master does not care about your prejudices…he is out to destroy them. He cannot be nice like the fake people, he has to be hard. Only those who have a real longing – like a thirst – to become enlightened, to reach to the source of their life, can tolerate the hardness, the strange behavior of the master. He is not going to be according to you. You have to be according to him. The fake master is always ready to be according to you – that fulfills your ego.
But the real master cannot be according to you. He is bent upon destroying your ego completely, he is bent upon taking away your mind completely. He leaves you only a clean space. In that silent, clean space is your realization. It is not an achievement, it is only a discovery.

============================================================

There Is Nothing to Attain

Only if the person truly possesses the faculty of wisdom and will power will he consent to step back and reflect.
Yung Chia also said, “The real nature of ignorance is identical to the nature of enlightenment. Original inherent nature is the naturally real enlightened one.” If you think like this, suddenly, in the place where thought cannot reach, you will see the body of reality in which there is not a single thing – this is the place for you to get out of birth and death. What I said before, that one cannot seek the dharma, which has nothing to attain, with the attitude that there is something to attain, is just this principle.
Gentlemen of affairs make their living within the confines of thought and judgment their whole lives: as soon as they hear a man of knowledge speak of the dharma in which there is nothing to attain, in their hearts there is doubt and confusion, and they fear falling into emptiness.
As soon as you hear it said that you shouldn’t think, immediately you are at a loss and can’t find your grip. You’re far from realizing that this very lack of anywhere to get a grip is the time for you to let go of your body and your life.
If correct mindfulness is present at all times, and the attitude of fear for birth and death doesn’t waver, then, over long days and months, what was unfamiliar will naturally become familiar, and what was stale will naturally become fresh. But what is the stale? It’s the brilliance and cleverness, that which thinks and judges. What is the unfamiliar? It’s enlightenment, nirvana, true thusness, the buddha-nature – where there’s no thought or discrimination, where figuring and calculating cannot reach, where there’s no way for you to use your mental arrangements.
This is a special evening, because one of us has left for the other shore. Anand Maitreya was certainly a man of tremendous courage. He met me sometime near 1960. He had already been a member of parliament for twelve years and he was very close to the first prime minister of India, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru. But the moment he heard me he simply dropped his whole political career.
Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru tried to persuade him, saying, “There is every chance for you to become the chief minister of your state.” – he was from Bihar, the land of Buddha.
But Maitreya said, “I want one thing understood clearly: ambition is hell and I am not going to look back; politics is finished for me. All ambitions are finished for me.” And since then he has been with me.
He has never asked a single question. He has never doubted, his trust was absolute. In these years, thousands of people have come to me; many have been lost, but he remained unwavering. He could not conceive how people can find contradictions in my statements.
Sometime in 1984 Maitreya became enlightened, but he had chosen to remain silent, so he remained silent. He did not even tell me what had happened to him. But the day it happened I called a small meeting of a few sannyasins in Rancho Rajneesh in America. I declared that there were going to be three special committees: one of mahasattvas, the great beings who are destined to become enlightened in this very life; the second of sambuddhas, who have already become enlightened; and the third of bodhisattvas, who will also become enlightened…but perhaps they will take a little longer than the other two categories, but certainly before their death.
Because I had included Maitreya’s name, he was shocked. He wanted to keep it completely to himself, not to say anything about enlightenment to anybody. As he left the meeting, he told a few people outside, “It is very strange, I have not said – I have been trying to hide it – but somehow he has seen it. And not only has he seen it, he has declared me enlightened.”
And his response was truly a response of great love. He said, “Osho is really a rascal.”
All these years before his enlightenment and after his enlightenment, he just remained absolutely ordinary, with no ego, with no desire, with no greed.
Just before I came back to Pune, Maitreya told me in Bombay, “I have got ten thousand rupees in a post office deposit in Patna, Bihar; that’s all I have, but now I will not need it.” Certainly he was becoming aware that his time of departure was coming closer. And he transferred the money to Neelam for the ashram. He died without anything, any possessions. And he slipped very slowly, very silently, from sleep into eternal sleep.
I am saying this evening is special, because one of us has moved from the world of mortals to the world of immortals. He will not be born again. He has attained to the freedom and the liberation we have been talking about.
This is a moment of great celebration and rejoicing. It happens very rarely. In millions of people perhaps one comes to this silent explosion of light and disappears into the ocean of consciousness that surrounds existence.
I would like these talks to be dedicated to Swami Anand Maitreya, who slipped from sleep into eternal sleep. But he was not asleep! He has gone in full awakening. He has gone with full awareness. You will keep him in your memories because he has shown the path to you, too. He lived joyously, although he had nothing, and he died peacefully, blissfully.
That’s what attaining to one’s destiny means. Those who live in misery and die in misery go on missing their destiny. They are failures, and because they have failed so many times, they become accustomed to failing again and again. But even if one person among you succeeds, it is your success, too. He has proved that what we have been talking about is not mere philosophy – it is an authentic path to self-realization.
Maitreya will be missed. Just the other night, when I last saw him, I had a certain strange feeling…as if he is going to depart very soon. And this feeling happened to many other people too; it was as if he was gathering himself and preparing for the eternal pilgrimage. He has gone the way a man should go – joyously, ecstatically.
You have to remember that his whole experience was based on two things: one, that he has fallen in trust with me… It is a strange language that I am using. You may not have ever heard the phrase ‘falling in trust’. Falling in love happens every day. Falling in trust happens only once in a while.
And secondly, not for a single moment since he has met me has he missed entering into meditation as much as possible. His death was not an end to life, but the ultimate culmination of a tremendous trust and meditativeness. Where trust and meditation meet, one attains to one’s potential in its whole glory and splendor.
Now the sutras:
Only if the person truly possesses the faculty of wisdom and will power will he consent to step back and reflect.
Ta Hui is a strange mixture. Perhaps he is not even aware that the words he is using are not the right words. For example, wisdom is not a faculty; intelligence is a faculty.
Wisdom is your whole being. Wisdom is you. It is not a faculty, it is your wholeness that becomes luminous.
But Ta Hui is an intellectual and is trying his best to teach people something which even those who have attained find it difficult to teach. And he is meddling in people’s minds: faculty of wisdom – and then the second word he uses, will power.
Will power is nothing but another name of ego power. A man of wisdom has no will, just as he has no mind – because to will means to keep yourself separate from existence. It is a little subtle, but try to feel it. The moment you will it means you are always willing against things as they are. You want them to be some other way.
A man of enlightenment has no will. The universal will is enough, there is no need of having an individual will. He has surrendered his individual will to the universe, now wherever the river takes him, he goes. He is not even swimming, he is simply floating.
Will is struggle, fight.
Will To Power is the name of the book by Friedrich Nietzsche. It was published after his death because even Nietzsche himself could not imagine how he would face the world when the book was published. It will be criticized, because will to power means a continuous struggle, violence – for money, for power, for position. Life becomes a war field, no more a rejoicing. It is simply competition – and a very terrific competition because everybody is trying to reach to the same place.
Ta Hui uses the word without understanding the nature of meditation: there is no will power, there is no faculty of wisdom. And he goes on to say,
Only if the person truly possesses the faculty of wisdom and will power will he consent to step back and reflect.
The man of wisdom does not reflect. Reflection is another name for thinking, a superior kind of contemplation. But howsoever superior it may be, it is a form of thinking. The man who has eyes knows that light is; he never thinks about whether light is or is not. And if a man reflects about whether the light is or is not, one thing is certain: he has no eyes. Eyes don’t have to think. Eyes simply know, spontaneously know that light is.
The same is true when you have gone beyond the mind. There is no question of any reflection; you simply see whatsoever is the case. And because it is the nature of things, it cannot be otherwise; hence there arises a tremendous acceptance, called by Buddha tathata – ‘suchness’ or ‘thusness’. You cannot do anything. It is simply the nature of things.
All that is needed is for you to relax, be at rest, and accept the reality as it is – a total “yes,” holding nothing back. Naturally in this state of thusness there cannot be any misery and there cannot be any suffering. There is only immense silence and tremendous joy. Your whole being is continuously surrounded by music; you are still, and yet in a dance – a dance without movements and a song without words.
But Ta Hui is not yet aware of it. He goes on quoting masters whom he has been meeting.
Yung Chia also said, “The real nature of ignorance is identical to the nature of enlightenment. Original inherent nature is the naturally real enlightened one.”
He is quoting Yung Chia, but I don’t see that he understands what he is saying, or what he is quoting, because the following sentences show his ignorance. He has not understood Yung Chia.
He says,
If you think like this, suddenly, in the place where thought cannot reach, you will see the body of reality in which there is not a single thing – this is the place for you to get out of birth and death.
Can you see the contradiction?
First, Yung Chia’s statement is of great importance. He is saying “The real nature of ignorance…” What is the real nature of ignorance? Perhaps you have never thought about it.
What is the real nature of ignorance? The real nature of ignorance is innocence. It knows nothing; hence it is clean, pure, unpolluted.
Yung Chia is saying, “The real nature of ignorance is identical to the nature of enlightenment” – because the enlightened man also knows nothing. He is also innocent, just like a small child. A very strange statement…it can disturb many who think only intellectually. The question is bound to arise in their minds: if the real nature of enlightenment is the same as the real nature of ignorance, then why bother? You are already ignorant. Now meditating and contemplating and concentrating, and standing on your head, and doing yoga postures, and fasting, and going to the caves and to the Himalayas, renouncing the world… Why do this whole circus if the nature of enlightenment is just the same as the nature of ignorance? In a way it is the same; in a way it is not.
As far as innocence is concerned, it is the same. But the child’s innocence is corruptible, and the enlightened man’s innocence is incorruptible – there is the difference. The child will become knowledgeable; he cannot resist. There is no way to keep the child continuously ignorant. The child’s innocence will soon be lost. In fact every effort is being made so that he will soon become knowledgeable and adult, mature.
But the sage has passed through all those stages of knowledge, maturity; he has come round the whole circle. He is incorruptible. Now nobody can tell him, “You should try to know something.” He has known everything and dropped it. He has not only dropped knowledge, he has dropped the very faculty of knowing: the mind. He has seen that the whole game is simply futile; his innocence is now incorruptible. So there is a similarity – and there is a great unbridgeable difference.
Ta Hui is quoting this great statement, but I don’t have the feeling, looking at the following statements, that he has understood it. If you think like this he says… It is not a thinking. You cannot think like this. Thinking always leads to knowledge, never to innocence. So the moment he says, If you think like this, he misses the whole point. And you can see how very intellectual people can behave in a very stupid way.
Listen to the whole sentence: If you think like this, suddenly, in the place where thought cannot reach…and he is asking you to think, and to think about a place where thought cannot reach. …you will see the body of reality in which there is not a single thing – this is the place for you to get out of birth and death. One does not get out of birth and death; one simply becomes awakened, and one is out of death, out of birth.
It is not a question of first becoming aware…and then you have to do something to get out of the circle of birth and death. No, the moment you are aware, you are out of it. They are simultaneous.
Just as in the morning when you get up – have you to do something to get out of your dreams? The moment you get up, you are out of your dreams already; otherwise it would have been very difficult to know whether you are dreaming or whether you are awake. If there were some effort needed to get out of your dreams, who will make the effort? You are fast asleep, you are dreaming – who will get out of the dreams?
You must have had dreams, once in a while, when you dream that you are awake. And only when you really become awake you find, “My God, that was only a dream, and I was thinking that I am awake.” Awakening and getting out of the dreams have to be simultaneous.
This life, this birth, this death, this whole circle of events – in which we go on and on moving from one life into another – is only because we are spiritually asleep.
Meditation wakes you up.
It is simply a method of awakening, and the moment you are awake, you are out of the whole circle of birth and death.
But Ta Hui is still talking about having “to get out of birth and death.” You don’t have to get out. Even if you want to get in, you cannot get in either.

I have heard…one night Mulla Nasruddin saw an angel who said, “You have been so virtuous, Mulla, I am going to give you a gift.” And he gave him one rupee note.
Mulla said, “Are you joking? For my virtues, just one rupee reward! I cannot accept it, it is humiliating.”
Haggling, the angel said, “Okay, two, three, four” …finally they came to ninety-nine rupees.
Mulla said, “Listen, just for one rupee, don’t destroy the whole thing. Make it just a one hundred rupee note. That seems to be correct, complete. Ninety-nine looks so incomplete.” But he said it so loudly – “Make it one hundred!” – that his wife woke up. She thought, “What is he saying and to whom is he talking?” So she shook him and he woke up.
Mulla said, “You idiot! You don’t understand that I was getting one hundred rupees from an angel. My whole night I have been haggling and haggling, and that was such a miserly angel. I have never seen such a miserly person. He was stuck at ninety-nine, and now you have awakened me. Just bring my glasses. I will go to sleep again, but I need glasses because I suspect that that angel is so miserly, the hundred rupee note may be false. Be quick!”
The poor woman thought, “This is absolutely stupid; in sleep you don’t need glasses.” But not wanting to quarrel in the middle of the night and disturb the neighbors, she brought the glasses and Mulla put them on. And then he started, “Come on! Where have you gone? Okay, ninety-nine. I will settle even for ninety-eight.” And in this way he went down again, but the angel was nowhere to be seen. When a dream is broken, you cannot reconnect it. Finally he said, “Okay, one rupee. Now don’t hide.”
His wife was listening to the whole thing. She said, “Don’t waste your night. You can take one rupee from me, and just go to sleep. You will not get that dream sequence again, and for God’s sake, take those glasses off; otherwise you will break them in your sleep. And sleeping by your side, knowing that you have your glasses on, I cannot sleep. I feel uneasy…what kind of thing is happening?”
So Mulla said, “Okay, you give me one rupee. In fact, you disturbed the whole thing. I was going to manage that fellow for one hundred rupees. If I and pull him from one rupee to ninety-nine, and then it was only a question of one rupee more…I was going to convince him! You woke me up and disturbed the whole thing, and meanwhile that miserly fellow has escaped. Now when I close my eyes, he is not there – nowhere to be seen.”

You cannot continue the same dream again. Once you are awake, to enter into the same dream is impossible – and this is about ordinary awakening. When you are truly awakened, your whole being conscious, there is no question of getting out of birth and death. You are out of it. Now even if you want to get into it, it is not possible.

A young boy, not more than seven years old, was arguing with his father: “You said yesterday, ‘Always remember, nothing is impossible.’ And you said this statement is from Napoleon Bonaparte. And I say to you that I have found one thing which is impossible.”
The father asked, “You have found something which is impossible? What is it?”
The boy said, “It is just in our bathroom.”
The father said, “Just show me.”
The boy brought the tube of toothpaste and he said, “This is impossible – even if Napoleon Bonaparte wants to do it, he cannot do it – once you take it out, to put it back in. I have tried my best, it does not go back. Once the toothpaste is out of the tube, no Napoleon Bonaparte can put it back in. You try! You are a great fan of Napoleon Bonaparte. Do this small thing. Just the other day you were bragging that nothing is impossible in the world, and in your bathroom, the impossible thing is there.”

The most impossible thing in the world is: once you are awake, you cannot go back to your unconsciousness. There is just no way. Even if you want, even if you try, nothing is going to succeed. Just as you cannot go back in time, you cannot go back to yesterday, to the day before yesterday. You cannot go back into a state of unconsciousness.
All your problems of life and death are of unconsciousness.
So although these are very small mistakes, they show a great misunderstanding on the part of Ta Hui. He has listened to masters, but he is only an intellectual. He has not experienced… So it is very easy to detect where the loopholes are.
What I said before, that one cannot seek the dharma, which has nothing to attain, with the attitude that there is something to attain, is just this principle.
Gentlemen of affairs make their living within the confines of thought and judgment their whole lives: as soon as they hear a man of knowledge speak of the dharma, in which there is nothing to attain, in their hearts there is doubt and confusion and they fear falling into emptiness.
In the first place, he uses the phrase, “a man of knowledge,” which is never used for anyone who is enlightened. He can be called a man of wisdom, he can be called a man of knowing, he can be called a man of innocence, but he cannot be called a man of knowledge. Knowledge always belongs to the mind.
What is the difference between knowing and knowledge? Knowing is actual experience in the moment. Knowledge is when knowing goes dead, when knowing becomes past. Knowledge is stale, knowing is fresh.
Knowing is the rose dancing in the sun, yet connected with the roots deep in the earth, alive. Knowledge is a roseflower you have put in your holy scripture. It still has the shape of the flower but the color has faded, the fragrance is no longer there, and there is no way to make it dance in the sun, in the wind, in the rain. It is dead, it is a corpse.
Knowing is living experience.
Knowledge is a corpse.
A man of enlightenment can be called a man of knowing, of experiencing, but not a man of experience, not a man of knowledge. These are subtle differences, but they make one thing clear: Ta Hui does not have any experience of the things he is talking about. And to talk about things when you don’t have the experience is one of the greatest crimes – because you will stuff people’s minds with all your nonsense.
As soon as you hear it said that you shouldn’t think, immediately you are at a loss and can’t find your grip.
Perhaps he is saying it about himself. Tell any thinker, “You should not think; only then can you enter into the temple of meditation,” and he cannot conceive the idea – without thinking? He immediately imagines that without thinking he will fall into a darkness, into emptiness, into ignorance, into stupidity – without thinking, he will be lost. Thinking is the only light that he has.
He is saying it about others, but my feeling is that it is his own experience.
As soon as you hear it said that you shouldn’t think, immediately you are at a loss and can’t find your grip. You’re far from realizing that this very lack of anywhere to get a grip is the time for you to let go of your body and your life.
If correct mindfulness is present at all times…
Now he sometimes talks so stupidly that it is amazing that he has been thought to be a great master. He is saying: If correct mindfulness…which means there is a possibility of incorrect mindfulness. There is no possibility of incorrect mindfulness. Mindfulness is simply awareness. It is the wrong word for awareness, but it actually means awareness.
Buddha has used a word which has been translated in all these languages: Chinese, and Japanese, and Korean. That word is sammasati. Samma means right, and sati means remembering. Sammasati has been translated as correct mindfulness. But in the case of sammasati, it can be said that this is not a contradiction.
Sammasati is Pali for the Sanskrit words, samyak smriti. From language to language, small nuances go on changing. Samyak smriti is the root word. And samyak smriti means balanced remembrance. In Pali, it becomes sammasati. There it also means right remembrance. Remembrance can be wrong. There are two kinds of remembrance, right and wrong.
Right remembrance is concerned with your own being, when you remember yourself. When you are aware of yourself that is sammasati. When you remember other things that is not right remembrance. You may remember a thousand and one things, but if you don’t remember yourself, your remembrance is wrong.
But when it is translated as mindfulness, then the whole word has taken on a new meaning. There cannot be any wrong mindfulness. All mindfulness is right. And mindfulness doesn’t mean anything to do with the mind; it simply means you are conscious, alert, aware. If you are walking mindfully, it means you are walking with consciousness. If I am moving my hand mindfully, it means I am moving it knowingly, not just like a robot.
If correct mindfulness is present at all times, and the attitude of fear for birth and death doesn’t waver, then, over long days and months, what was unfamiliar will naturally become familiar, and what was stale will naturally become fresh.
What he is saying is so stupid that even to call it stupid does not seem right; he needs something more powerful. He is saying something which can be perfectly right for an intellectual, but it is not right as an experience. And you can see it if you are just a little bit aware.
First, whenever one becomes aware, one becomes aware for twenty-four hours. It is not a question of becoming aware and then losing it, and then becoming aware again – it is not like that.
Awareness is just like your heartbeat.
When you are asleep, the heart is beating, when you are working, the heart is beating, when you are talking, the heart is beating. Whatever you are doing or not doing, the heart is continuously functioning. When your awareness becomes just like a continuous undercurrent, only then is it worthy of being called awareness. So to say, If correct mindfulness is present at all times – it is present at all times – …and the attitude of fear for birth and death does not waver…is nonsense.
A man of awareness has no problem of fear as far as birth and death are concerned. Once awareness has arisen, you are free from the fear of birth and death; there is no question of wavering. Wavering can arise only if it is just an intellectual conviction, not an actual experience. Then doubts can always arise; in fact they will arise.
And then Ta Hui goes on and on making wrong statements: …then, over long days and months, what was unfamiliar will naturally become familiar…
He is thinking of awareness as if it were a habit which you have to practice continuously, so after months and days, slowly, slowly it will become familiar.
Awareness is not a gradual phenomenon. It does not come slowly, slowly, in installments. It is an explosion, it is always sudden; it comes to you in its totality. It is not that slowly, slowly it comes and you become familiar with it.
And because he is making a wrong statement, he goes on round and round making more wrong statements: …and what was stale will naturally become fresh.
Now that which was stale, after days and months will become fresh. Can you see the contradiction? What is fresh may become stale after months. He is saying what was stale in the beginning, after days and months becomes fresh. He is not aware that even a small child who has nothing to do with enlightenment can say that this is stupid. As time passes, fresh things become stale, not vice versa.
The same is true about awareness. It goes on and on being fresh because it never becomes old. For consciousness there is no time – neither days, nor months, nor years, nor lives.
Awareness is beyond time and beyond mind.
It never becomes stale, and it has never been stale. First you were unaware of it; now you are aware of it.
It’s the brilliance and cleverness, that which thinks and judges. What is the unfamiliar? It’s enlightenment, nirvana, true thusness, the buddha-nature – where there is no thought or discrimination, where figuring and calculating cannot reach, where there’s no way for you to use your mental arrangements.
Ta Hui is important for you to understand, because he is a representative of thousands of intellectuals in the world who go on deceiving themselves because they can consistently, logically, think about experiences that have not happened to them. Perhaps they are influenced by people who have actually experienced, and that impact is so great that they start believing that certainly such things happen. Then they are capable of intellectual systematizing – and they can go on systematizing – but underneath they don’t know a thing.
These people are the theologians, these people are religious heads, these people are philosophers, these people are great professors. These people dominate humanity, and they are the wrong people – wrong because they are dishonest, wrong because they don’t accept that it is not their experience. They simply go on fabricating beautiful words and theories and creating an illusion in the minds of people that perhaps they are authentic seers, enlightened people.

I will tell you an actual incident that happened, just at the beginning of this century. One young man, Ramateertha, was a professor of mathematics in Lahore University, and he was certainly a genius. He is well known for this incident – perhaps nobody else has done it this way… In examinations, the question paper comes with a note, “Answer any five out of the seven questions.” When he was a student this was his consistent practice: he would answer all seven questions with a note, “Examine any five questions.” He always answered all seven questions exactly right, so there was no problem for him – you could choose any five yourself, whichever ones you wanted to examine. When he passed his post-graduation – he topped the university in mathematics, he was a gold medalist – he was immediately appointed as a professor. He had the caliber of a great intellectual. And just then Vivekananda returned from America.
Vivekananda was a monk and a disciple of Ramakrishna, who was an enlightened man but uneducated. Ramakrishna was not articulate enough to manage to say something about his experience, so he had chosen Vivekananda, who was a very intelligent person, from the cream of Bengal’s intelligentsia. Vivekananda impressed people all over the world, wherever he went; now he had come back from America and was going around India. He came to Lahore, to the university where Ramateertha was a professor, and Ramateertha was so much impressed by Vivekananda that he wanted to be initiated by him immediately.
Vivekananda himself was just an intellectual, but a very forceful personality, a very imposing personality. He appealed to Ramateertha immediately because they were both intellectuals, so there was immediately a harmony, a synchronicity between their minds. Vivekananda initiated him into sannyas, and Ramateertha left for a world tour himself.
Ramateertha was far more articulate than Vivekananda himself, far more poetic, far more impressive…not as a personality, because Vivekananda looked like a giant – he had a huge body – but Ramateertha seems to have been far superior, intellectually. In particular, he was so much drowned in Persian, Arabic, and Urdu poetry, which are all unique as far as their mysticism is concerned – they all belong to the Sufi tradition of mystics.
So Ramateertha had some new area about which Vivekananda had no knowledge. He also impressed people very much wherever he went. And the problem with the mind is that if people are impressed by you, slowly, slowly, it has a feedback effect. Because they get impressed by you, you become impressed by yourself: “I must be carrying some great message; otherwise why are so many people mad about me?” He became convinced that he was enlightened. The crowd that was following him everywhere convinced him that he was enlightened.
When he came back to India, he was imagining a great reception… Naturally, an enlightened person coming back home, after impressing the whole world… He went directly to Varanasi, which has been the Hindu citadel for centuries, and where the Hindu learned people have their council which decides who is enlightened and who is not. None of these learned people is enlightened, but they are immensely learned as far as scriptures are concerned. So Ramateertha first approached the council of the learned to get recognition.
Now to me, even the idea of getting recognition from someone means you are not certain about your own attainment – you are asking recognition from those who are not enlightened! On what grounds do they have the authority to recognize you?
In the first place, your asking makes it certain that you are not enlightened. Secondly, you are asking people who are not enlightened themselves – that reinforces that you don’t understand what enlightenment is. It never needs anybody’s recognition; it is a self-evident phenomenon. Even if the whole world says you are not enlightened, it does not matter. And even if the whole world says you are enlightened and you are not, then too, you will not become enlightened.
Something very strange happened there: one scholar of the council asked Ramateertha – It was sheer stupidity for Ramateertha to go to the council – one scholar asked, “Do you know Sanskrit?” And Ramateertha had no knowledge of Sanskrit, because he came from the part that is now in Pakistan. It was a Mohammedan area; there the language of the learned people was Arabic, Persian, Urdu. It was not the part where Sanskrit had any influence. So he was very deeply rooted in Persian and Arabic literature, and certainly Sufi literature has a beauty which Sanskrit literature does not have.
Sanskrit literature is very dry, like mathematics. Sufi literature is pure poetry. It has a certain juiciness about it, because the whole of Sufism is based on a foundation of love. Sufis are the only people in the world who think of God as the beloved, like a girlfriend. Naturally they have written beautiful poetry for the beloved. God is not a man, but a beautiful woman! No poetry can reach to the heights of Sufi poetry.
Ramateertha was at a loss. He said, “No, I don’t know anything about Sanskrit. I come from the part of the country where Sanskrit is far away; even Hindi is not spoken.
All those scholars laughed, and they said, “Without knowing Sanskrit, do you think one can become enlightened? First learn Sanskrit.”
I can forgive all those idiots, but I cannot forgive Ramateertha, because he started learning Sanskrit! – just to get the recognition from unenlightened people that he is enlightened.

I have always liked his discourses, but I have always found places in them which show decisively that the man is only an intellectual. He has no experience of his own. He knows beautiful poetry, he can talk in a very poetic way; he knows beautiful Sufi stories, he can explain those stories very impressively. But he himself is a beggar – his bowl is empty.
Such is the situation of Ta Hui. Understanding Ta Hui will help you to understand many others who are in the same boat.
Ramateertha went to the Himalayas, to a small state called Tihri Garhwal. The king of that state was very much impressed by Ramateertha, so he made him a special bungalow in the mountains, where he was learning Sanskrit in order to be recognized.
One day it happened…

Ramateertha had a secretary, a certain Sardar Pooran Singh who was a great writer in Punjabi, certainly a very refined writer – his prose is almost like poetry. He was so impressed by Ramateertha that he dropped his job, became Ramateertha’s secretary and was taking care of his body, his letters and the correspondence from all over the world…
One day, looking out of the window, Ramateertha saw his wife coming. He had been married, but he had renounced his poor wife and become a sannyasin. The wife was so poor that she was doing all kinds of jobs in the village, grinding people’s wheat or washing people’s clothes. She did not even have the tickets for traveling…
When she heard that Ramateertha was in Tihri Garhwal, she had sold a few ornaments that had been given to her at the time of their marriage. She just wanted to touch the feet of Ramateertha. She had not come to complain – she was really glad. In the East that has been the tradition: if the husband becomes a world-renowned sannyasin…even though the wife was living in rotten circumstances, still she was very happy that she had a husband whose name would go down in the corridors of history.
When Ramateertha saw his wife coming, he told Sardar Pooran Singh, “Close the window and close the door, and go out on the verandah. My wife is coming. Tell her that I am not here, that I have gone into seclusion in the forest, and nobody knows when I am supposed to return. Just somehow get rid of her.”
Sardar Pooran Singh was a very sincere man. He said, “This is strange, because I have seen you allowing people, both men and women, to see you. Why are you preventing your own wife, whom you have renounced? Now she is no longer any relation to you. Your preventing her means that deep down your mind still believes that she is your wife. Why are you discriminating between other women and her? And why are you so afraid?
“Certainly that poor woman cannot do anything to you. It must be something inside you of which you are afraid. I am not going to close the window or the door. And I cannot lie to the woman. You have to decide one thing: either you have to see her or I am no longer your secretary, no longer your disciple. I am going.”
Ramateertha could not afford for Pooran Singh to go. He was dependent on him for everything. So he said, “Okay, if you insist, I will see her.” And his wife came with tears of joy and just touched the earth, not even his feet. And Pooran Singh wrote in his diary, “Even my tears started flowing. The woman is so respectful, she does not consider him her husband anymore. He has become so divine to her that even to touch his feet will be defiling him.”
Pooran Singh touched the feet of Ramateertha’s wife. He said, “To me you are more religious and more understanding than Ramateertha.” And Ramateertha felt so ashamed…you will not believe what he did: he immediately changed his clothes. He was wearing the orange robe of a Hindu sannyasin. He dropped that and took clothes from Sardar Pooran Singh – ordinary clothes, not those of a sannyasin. Sardar Pooran Singh asked, “What are you doing?”
Ramateertha said, “I am so ashamed. I am not enlightened; I am not even worthy to be called a sannyasin. The recognition has come to me, although late, but still it is good that it has come to me. I have been believing that I am enlightened, that I have renounced the world. No, seeing my wife I could see all my lust, all my repressed sexuality. I am not worthy of these orange clothes.” And then he went out of the bungalow, and jumped from the mountains into the Ganges – the Ganges flows just nearby, coming down from the mountains. He committed suicide.

But such is the hypocrisy of the society that the same learned people who refused to accept him as enlightened started saying that he had “renounced his body” – not that he committed suicide, not that he had committed a crime. Their actual word is jal samadhi: “He has dropped into the water and become one with existence.”
And still there exists a Ramateertha League, and there are followers…and his books are published, and people are reading those books in order to become enlightened.
Intellect can deceive you, can deceive others.
Beware of the intellect.
Beware of the mind.
Be very careful; don’t be impressed easily. Certainly don’t be impressed through intellect. If suddenly a connection happens from being to being, that’s another matter.

============================================================

See the Moon, Forget the Pointing Finger

You must see the moon and forget the fingers. Don’t develop an understanding based on the words.
An ancient worthy said, “The buddhas expounded all teachings to save all minds; I have no mind at all, so what’s the use of all the teachings?” If they can be like this when reading the scriptures, only then will people of resolve have some comprehension of the intent of the sages.

Stories and Sayings

These days, in the Ch’an communities, they use the extraordinary words and marvelous sayings of the ancients to question and answer – considering them situations for discrimination, and beguiling students. They are far from getting to the root of their reality.
When people engaged in meditation read the scriptural teachings, and the stories of the circumstances in which the ancient worthies entered the path, they should just empty their minds. Don’t look for the original marvel, or seek enlightenment in sounds, names, and verbal meanings. If you take this attitude, you’re obstructing your own correct knowledge and perception, and you’ll never have an entry.
P’an Shan said, “It’s like hurling a sword at the sky: no talk of whether it reaches or not!” Don’t be careless! Vimalkirti said that the truth goes beyond eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, and intellect.
Te Shan would see a monk enter the door and immediately strike him with his staff; Lin Chi would see a monk enter the door and immediately shout! Venerable adepts everywhere call this “bringing it up face to face,” “imparting it directly,” but I call it first class trailing mud and dripping water. Even if you can take it up with your whole being at a single blow or shout, already you are not a man of power – in fact you have been doused over the head by someone else with a ladleful of foul water. How much more so, if at a shout or blow you are looking for marvels or seeking subtle understanding – this is the stupidest of the stupid.
Ta Hui is a strange fellow, but he represents all those people who try to find their self-nature by intellectual effort. The problem with these people is that they have a good intellect. They can grasp words from masters, they can repeat them; they can deceive people and they can be deceived themselves.
Now this is one of the most stupid sutras among all his teachings, and I will show you why I am saying that. As I go more and more into Ta Hui, I am wondering whether to call him a great teacher or just a pseudo teacher. A master certainly he is not; a teacher he may have been, but there are things which are even below the status of a teacher. He seems to be a pseudo teacher. He has not fulfilled even the qualifications for being an authentic teacher, just transmitting knowledge from the masters to the masses.
He cannot even understand what has been happening in the school of Zen. It is so special that a very rare insight is needed to comprehend it, and unless you have your own experience there will always remain something of a doubt in you.
For example, Zen is the only school in the world where the masters have slapped the disciples, hit them with their staffs, or even physically thrown students out of the window. Not only that, one master jumped on top of a disciple; sitting on his chest he asked, “Got it?”
The Zen master is mysterious in his working. People who simply read the anecdotes cannot make any sense out of them because they don’t know the inner story which cannot be compiled in the anecdotes. It is a happening between the master and the disciple: it is the invisible transfer of energy.
Just to give you an insight so that you can see the stupidity of Ta Hui… An understanding of this man who has been thrown out of the window by Lin Chi, who then jumped on him and asked, “Got it?”, needs the total background to the story and the intrinsic undercurrent running through it.

The disciple had been working for almost a year on a koan which is the most famous koan in Zen – ‘the sound of one hand clapping.’ Now, there cannot be any sound of one hand clapping. You can go on clapping one hand, but sound is not possible. Sound is only produced when two things clash; if there is only one thing, sound is not possible.
So the first thing to understand is that a Zen koan is not an ordinary puzzle which can be solved. It needs a different approach – not that of solution, but that of dissolution.
The poor student went, sat under a tree, thought about it, meditated – what can be the sound of one hand clapping? Do you hear the cuckoo…? He heard a cuckoo from a faraway bamboo grove. He said, “This is it!” – so beautiful, so peaceful, bringing such joy. He rushed back and told the master, “I have heard it. It is the song of a cuckoo.”
The master slapped him and said, “You idiot! I have told you to find out the sound of one hand clapping! What does a poor cuckoo have to do with it? Just go back and meditate.”
He was very much puzzled, because his mind was searching for sounds – which sound is it? One day he heard a breeze passing through the pine trees and he said, “This must be it!” And he rushed back….
This went on for one year. He would find some sound, the sound of running water, and he would go back. A point came when the master had no need to hear his answer. The moment he saw him, he slapped him, and he would say, “Go back.”
He replied, “But I have not even said anything….”
The master said, “As long as you go on finding, you will not have found it. Just go back. I know you have brought some stupid sound again!”
This was the student…. After one year, when he came in, the master saw that slapping was not going to do it – he had been slapping him for one year continually! He just took hold of him and threw him out of the window. It was a two-story building….
It was such a shock to the student. He was expecting a slap, but he was not expecting to be thrown from the window into a ditch. And besides that, the master jumped on top of him, so the few bones which had been left unbroken were now broken. He had multiple fractures! And on top of all that, the master was asking, “Got it?” The shock was such that his mind stopped – it was so unexpected.

Mind stops only when there is something unexpected – so unexpected that the mind cannot figure it out…it stops.
Absolute silence…and tears of joy in the eyes of the disciple. He touched the feet of the master and said, “Why have you waited for one year? You could have done it on the very first day.”
The master said, “It would not have worked. I had to wait for the right moment, when you were ripe. You had worked hard with your mind. Your mind was tired, utterly tired; it had lost all hope that there is any possibility to find the answer. This was the moment when, if something unexpected happens to you, the mind may stop – just for a single moment. And that’s enough to hear the sound of one hand clapping.”
The words are deceiving. It is not the sound of one hand clapping; it is the silence when the mind stops. Now anybody looking at the anecdote and not knowing the whole inner process – just an outsider – is bound to think this is simply stupid. But the disciple became enlightened, and it is always the end which decides whether the means were right or wrong.
Ta Hui is just an intellectual, so sometimes he repeats beautiful words. But here he has shown his reality, because he could not conceive any meaning in the stories and the anecdotes. I will go into them.
You must see the moon and forget the fingers.
This is so easy to repeat, because for the thousands of years since Gautam Buddha this has been one of the most important statements: the buddha only points the finger toward the moon.
His ‘finger’ means all that he says, all that he does, and it is only an indication – a hint. You should not get too much attached to the finger, because the finger is not the point. What he is saying, what he is preaching, is not the point; it is only an indication. You should not get attached to the philosophy, you should not become a Buddhist. You should look at the moon.
And if you want to look at the moon, the most fundamental thing is to forget all about the finger. If your eyes are focused on the finger, how are you going to see the moon? Unless you move your eyes from the finger toward the faraway moon in the sky, it is not possible.
Buddha was saying, “Don’t get attached to what I say, don’t get attached to any doctrine, to what I preach; don’t get attached to my personality. These are all just fingers pointing to the moon. Forget me, don’t start worshipping me; just look at the moon. And once you have looked at the moon, I don’t matter at all.”
It is a very pregnant statement, and a very courageous one, to make to one’s own disciples: “Don’t bother about what I say. I am not preaching any doctrine and I am not delivering to you a system of beliefs or a philosophy. These are all devices to indicate the truth. It is beyond all words, but words can be used as a finger pointing to it. They cannot express it, but they can indicate it.”
It is very easy to repeat it, but I don’t think Ta Hui understands.
You must see the moon and forget the fingers. Don’t develop an understanding based on the words.
But that’s actually what he has done. All his understanding is based on words.
An ancient worthy said, “The buddhas expounded all teachings to save all minds; I have no mind at all, so what is the use of all the teachings?”
The quotation is perfectly right, but this is what Buddha means by saving: The understanding arising in you that you don’t have any mind, that you are a no-mind. And then there is no question of saving. While you are attached to the mind you are in a bondage, and you need to be brought out of the bondage.
So the ancient worthy is right when he says, “The buddhas expounded all teachings to save all minds. I have no mind at all” – he is a saved man – “so, what’s the use of all the teachings?”
Certainly when you are saved there is no use. When you have seen the moon, what is the use of the fingers? When your disease is cured, what is the use of the medicine? Are you going to worship the bottle of medicine? Are you going to carry it wherever you go because it has saved you from a disease? The moment you are cured, you throw the medicine bottle; it is finished, its work is done.
It is almost as if you have a thorn in your foot: you take another thorn to take the first thorn out. The other thorn is as much a thorn as the first one, but you can manage to take out the first thorn with the other one. Now what are you going to do with the other thorn? Are you going to put it in the wound that has been created by the first thorn because it has saved you from that thorn? That would be utter stupidity – then you still have what was wrong in the first place. No, once the first thorn is taken out, you throw away both the thorns together.
All teachings are just like that. The ancient worthy is saying it right, but Ta Hui does not understand what he is saying. He says,
If they can be like this when reading the scriptures, only then will people of resolve have some comprehension of the intent of the sages.
Ta Hui is saying that you can understand what the sage has said only if you are reading the scriptures; only if you are a man of resolve and determination, a man of comprehension, will you be able to understand the intent of the sages.
All the words that he is using are not needed to understand the sages. What is needed is an experience. Not your comprehension, because all comprehension is intellectual; nor your resolve, because all resolve is of the mind; nor your reading of the scriptures, because that is all your intellectuality – these things are not going to help you understand such a profound statement as, “The moment you have seen the moon, forget all about the fingers.”
This kind of statement can be experienced only through experience. Ta Hui has no experience at all, and that becomes very clear when he comes to the stories and sayings. Any intellectual, even today, will condemn Zen stories or simply laugh, thinking that perhaps they are just jokes, because they don’t make any sense to the mind.
These days in the Ch’an communities, they use the extraordinary words and marvelous sayings of the ancients to question and answer – considering them situations for discrimination, and beguiling students. They are far from getting to the root of their reality.
When people engaged in meditation read the scriptural teachings, and the stories of the circumstances in which the ancient worthies entered the path, they should just empty their minds.
He is not even aware that he goes on saying things in which he contradicts himself. Just look: When people engaged in meditation read the scriptures… A man who is engaged in meditation does not need to read the scriptures, because whatever the scriptures contain is a faraway echo of somebody’s meditation. And if you are yourself meditating, you are at the very source. Why should you bother about faraway echoes, corrupted, distorted by the interpretations of intellectuals, teachers, pedagogues, commentators?
When you are at the very source yourself, you are at the very root from where all scriptures have arisen. A man of meditation has no necessity to read the scriptures and the teachings in the scriptures, but that is what Ta Hui is saying. Then immediately he says: …and the stories of the circumstances in which the ancient worthies entered the path, they should just empty their minds.
How can you empty your mind when you are reading scriptures, teachings, and stories of how the ancient sages entered the path? you are filling the mind, not emptying the mind.
Meditation empties the mind; studying anything only fills it. They are diametrically opposite to each other. But Ta Hui, in a single sentence, is bringing the whole opposition together, without ever being aware that what he is doing will be thought utterly idiotic by anyone who knows what meditation is.
Don’t look for the original marvel, or seek enlightenment in sounds, names, and verbal meanings.
How are you going to read the scriptures if you don’t look for the verbal meanings? What other kind of meanings are there? In a scripture there are only words and nothing else; you can read the scripture only as verbal meanings.
If you take this attitude, you’re obstructing your own correct knowledge and perception and you will never have an entry.
He has no idea that knowledge is the problem. One has to get free of it. It is not knowledge that gives you perception; it is knowledge that hinders your perception. It is removing the knowledge that clears the sky, just as when the clouds have moved there is absolute clear perception.
But this is bound to happen to a man who has been gathering things from here and there and who has not gone into meditation himself. Not a single thing shows that he has had any taste of meditation.
P’an Shan said…
He quotes people because he has been going to teachers, masters; he must have been taking notes of what they were saying. He quotes many people.
P’an Shan said, “It’s like hurling a sword at the sky: no talk of whether it reaches or not!” Don’t be careless! Vimalkirti said that the truth goes beyond eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, and intellect.
I am simply amazed! This man quotes Vimalkirti, and Vimalkirti is saying, “Unless you go beyond intellect and all your senses, you will not have the perception of reality, you will not know your self nature.” But it does not strike him that he is simply working through the intellect.
Te Shan would see a monk enter the door and immediately strike him with his staff; Lin Chi would see a monk enter the door and immediately shout! Venerable adepts everywhere call this “bringing it up face to face,” “imparting it directly,” but I call it first class trailing mud and dripping water. Even if you can take it up with your whole being at a single blow or shout, already you are not a man of power – in fact you have been doused over the head by someone else with a ladleful of foul water. How much more so, if at a shout or blow you are looking for marvels or seeking subtle understanding – this is the stupidest of the stupid.
Because he cannot understand, because he has no experience of his own, he calls it stupidest of the stupid. I will try to explain to you exactly what these people were doing. They were immensely successful, and they are not stupid. Ta Hui is the stupidest of the stupid.
Te Shan is famous and a great master. A monk would enter the door and immediately he would strike him with his staff. You have to understand the situation. The master sees the disciple; he gives him a certain koan, an unsolvable puzzle. Then whenever he finds the right answer to it, he has to come and report to the master. Now there is really no answer for it – so whenever a disciple enters to give him an answer, why waste time? He would simply hit him hard. He is making it as clear as possible that all answers are wrong, so there is no need to listen to your answer. Although it looks very strange that you have not given the answer and he is hitting you – if you were wrong, he could have hit you…but you may have been right. But that is the problem: no answer is going to be right, only silence.
So it happened many times that the student will get hit – many, many times. Then for a few days he will not appear, and Te Shan will inquire, “Where is he?” He will go to the place – it was a big monastery, a beautiful Zen garden – and he will find the disciple sitting under a tree, in utter silence. His face showed that the mind is no longer functioning, that there is no wavering inside, that everything is quiet and calm.
And the same Te Shan who has been hitting this disciple will touch his feet. As he will touch his feet, the disciple will open his eyes and he will say, “Master, what are you doing?”
Te Shan will say, “I am touching your feet because you have found the answer. I suspected that something else had happened, because for many days you did not come. It happens that students only stop coming when they have found, because what to say? – there is no answer. And they are enjoying their silence so tremendously…they have forgotten the koan, they have forgotten the master, they have forgotten everything. They are living in such an ecstasy that everything is left far away.”
Te Shan used to find the disciples, and it always proved right – his hitting had helped. His hitting finally made them aware that he is so compassionate and so loving, he will not hit unnecessarily. His hitting again and again shows only one thing: that whatever answer you have found is wrong. There is no need to hear it because there is no possibility of a right answer. By hitting he is making it clear that there is no possibility of a right answer; mind is absolutely impotent to give you the answer.
Slowly, slowly, the disciple forgets about the koan, forgets about the sound, because it brings nothing but a hit from the staff of the master. But the moment he forgets the mind, and the koan, and the master, and the search for any answer, he falls into a deep, abysmal silence. That silence is the answer, but you cannot say anything about it. And it is so wonderful, mysterious…you are so contented with it that there is no need for recognition from the master that you have found the answer. All these things have become trivia.
But Ta Hui does not understand it at all, and perhaps nobody – not even the greatest philosopher in the world – will be able to understand what kind of things these are. It looks simply absurd: first you give him a koan, and then you don’t even listen to his answer. But it is a strategy, a strategy of great love and great compassion.
The master touches the feet and asks to be forgiven for all the hits that he has given…he had to do it: “There was no other way to destroy your stubborn mind, to destroy your clinging with the mind, to destroy the idea that you can find an answer through the mind. It was not only you that was hurt by my staff, I was hurt more. For all that I touch your feet, and I ask for your forgiveness.”
Te Shan was loved by his disciples even though he hit them with his staff; Ta Hui has no understanding at all.

Lin chi would see a monk enter the door and immediately shout! Any intellectual will make a laughingstock of the whole thing. What is the point? – you give the appointment to the student, to the disciple, to come to your room, and then you suddenly shout for no reason at all.

In my childhood I came across a man. His name was Sardar Chanchal Singh. He had been with Subhash Chandra Bose, a great Indian revolutionary, who had escaped from the jails of the British government. He had gone first in disguise to Germany to see Adolf Hitler, because he wanted to suggest, “You are fighting with the British. We are also fighting them, and we need your help. If you can give us help, the British Empire can be attacked from two sides. We can attack from inside and you can go on attacking it from the outside.”
The policy was absolutely clear…and you will be surprised, Adolf Hitler never introduced any man to his armies the way he introduced Subhash Chandra Bose. He said to the armies, “Respect this man more than you respect me, because I am a fuhrer of only a small nation; this man is a revolutionary and the leader of a vast continent.” And he gave him – although he was not in any political position – a guard of honor.
It was Adolf Hitler and Subhash Chandra’s plan…they worked out that it would be better that Subhash Chandra went to Japan. In Japan there were thousands of Indian soldiers who were fighting for the British government against Japan.
It was a very clever policy: Subhash Chandra would go to Japan and Hitler would inform Japan – because Japan was an ally with Germany against the British, against the Americans…. He would inform them, “Allow Subhash to talk to all the Indian soldiers who are prisoners in Japanese jails. I have every certainty that this man is capable.” – and he was a man of immense charisma – “and that he will convince those soldiers, ‘You are fighting for the British empire, which keeps your slavery intact. Instead, come with me, and we will make an army and fight against the British Empire.’”
It was so logical and simple that the prisoners were ready. First…if they are ready, they will not be prisoners anymore; they will be guests of Japan. Secondly, they may have been fighting for the British, but deep down they were against the empire; just for their bread and butter, they had sold their souls.
Once Subhash told them, “You have sold your souls…” then all the camps of prisoners were opened. A new army – the Indian National Army – was created by Subhash Chandra Bose. Sardar Chanchal Singh was one of the close colleagues of Subhash. He was also a prisoner. He had had a high post in the Indian army, and he also had a very high post in the Indian National Army that was going to attack from Japan.
They succeeded as far as Rangoon; they defeated the British armies. Even Calcutta started feeling the fear that after Rangoon the next attack would be on Calcutta. All British were removed from Calcutta, and people who had enough money all moved from there. Calcutta was a danger point.
At that very moment Germany was defeated. Atom bombs were thrown on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, so Japan surrendered.
Subhash was in a strange position. Now, both friends who were supporting him were defeated. He had a small army – but although he was winning, how long could he go on? He could not even reach Calcutta, which was his home town. So he escaped from Rangoon….
It is still a mystery what happened to him. There are stories that he has been seen in the Soviet Union; there are stories that he lives in Tibet; there are stories which seem to have been created by himself…. The plane he had taken from Rangoon fell in Taipei and burned. The pilot and somebody else – nobody knows who the other man was – were immediately burned, without any press conference or without any medical examination. They were already burned in the crash, and because they were both Hindus, they were put on a funeral pyre.
Most probably, Subhash had been dropped somewhere else, and this plane was purposely burned to create the impression to the British Empire that Subhash was dead; otherwise he was enemy number one, to be caught dead or alive. So, this was a good fiction: he is dead, now there is no point…and he has even been burned.
Taipei gave out the report that he had been put on the funeral pyre – but there was no point, the bodies were already burned, they were unrecognizable. They had not even photographed those bodies – which is absolutely necessary for a man with the status of Subhash, for whom the British Empire was bloodthirsty. They should have taken photographs, they should have called medical people to examine the bodies. They should, in fact, have delivered the body to the British Empire. But my feeling is that it was not the body of Subhash; it was just a created facade. And that was the feeling of Sardar Chanchal Singh also.
He, by chance, met me in a restaurant in Jabalpur. He had been released from the Indian jail…. After Subhash left, all the Indian National Army people were again in jail – but now they were in the jails of the British. But a case was fought for them, and Chanchal Singh was released. He was searching for employment, so I told him, “If you have learned any martial arts in Japan, I can arrange a group of college and university students. You can teach them martial arts, and they will pay you enough so that you can survive until you can get other employment.”
I have told you about Chanchal Singh because he had learned from someone to shout exactly the way Lin Chi must have been shouting – and I have heard him shout! I don’t know Lin Chi – he must have been more articulate in his shouting…but even if this man Chanchal Singh shouted at you, your mind would stop immediately. If you were going to strike him with a sword, and he shouted, your hand would stop.
His shout was so deep, so much penetrating in you, that whatever you were doing you would simply stop. We had tried bringing wrestlers to hit him, to punch his nose. They were expert boxers, but the moment he would shout, their hands would just stop, close to his nose…. Something strange in his sound.
Just jokingly we used to use him. somebody was urinating and we would say, “Chanchal Singh, give a good shout.” He would give a good shout and the urination would stop! The man would look all around – what happened?

I know perfectly well that there are many stories about Lin Chi, whose shout has awakened people, but it was not an ordinary shout. It was a certain training that enters into the deepest core of your being. The whole problem is that man is asleep. A good shout can wake him up.
Even today, in the school of Lin Chi, the shout is being used. But it is not being used on every disciple – only when a disciple has worked hard with his mind and his mind is tired. Those koans are so tiring because you know that they are absurd. But if the master says, “Find the answer,” and you have come to the master to become awakened, then you have to follow whatever discipline he gives you.
Those shouts are given only when the mind is almost on the brink of failure, and it is the understanding of the master that now is the time. Then a disciple enters in Lin Chi’s room, without expecting that he will shout like a lion’s roar for no reason at all…jump and shout as if he is going to kill the disciple. The disciple will remain just…the whole mind stops. And just for a moment he can see his self-nature.
The question is not of time. If you know your self-nature, even for a moment, things become easy. Now you know the way. Now you know yourself, you can reach to it again and again. Now a shout is not needed every time; it was only an arbitrary device.
But Ta Hui condemns it because he does not understand the deep compassion, the psychology, the articulateness behind it. He proves himself to be an ordinary intellectual. Only in one thing is he right, when he uses the words stupidest of the stupid. But those words belong to him, not to Lin Chi, not to the master Te Shan.
These people were using absolutely new methods to awaken people. Their contribution is great. Zen has made more people enlightened than any other school of any other religion. Even in one monastery you can find many enlightened people. And this has been the only living current which has not stopped somewhere in the past; it is still alive. There are still people like Te Shan and Lin Chi, but they have fallen into obscurity.
America has corrupted the Japanese atmosphere completely; otherwise, Japan would be a totally different world. Its whole genius was concentrated on how to become enlightened. Now, under the American rule, their whole energy has been diverted toward money. And, they are people of great integrity, so great that now their money has the greatest value. Even the dollar, the American dollar, is left far behind. They are one of the richest nations in the world, and their money is more trustworthy than any other nation’s currency. But this is not a success; it is a tremendous failure.
America has corrupted Japan’s universities. What is being taught now in their universities is borrowed from America; they are completely imitating America, competing with America. Certainly they have made America afraid: although their products are very highly taxed when they enter America, still they are able to compete in the American market with American products, which are not taxed at all. The taxation has been going higher and higher to prevent the American market from being completely taken over by Japan.
But even though the Americans are raising the taxation on any import, Japan is still competing very well on every front in the American market. And America is absolutely impotent to compete in the Japanese market.
The Japanese work hard, work totally, work intensely. Their only problem is that they don’t have much land to create more factories. So just a few days ago they have succeeded in floating an artificial island. On this artificial island they will be making factories. Once they succeed on one island, they will float many other islands. They are creating land for the first time.
Ta Hui does not understand. And this is the sign of a stupid person – that without understanding anything, he criticizes it. Intellectuals are very willing to criticize anything that does not come within their comprehension.
But there are methods which work whether you can comprehend them or not. You should look at the ultimate result. Although the Japanese monasteries have fallen into darkness, still there are people who are working with devices which can create awakening.
Ta Hui is absolutely wrong. I was thinking to call his teachings, “Teachings of a Great Teacher.” But as I am going into his sutras, I will have to change the title of the book. It will be “Zen Teachings of a Pseudo Teacher – Ta Hui.”

============================================================

Enlightenment and Delusion

“Buddha” is the medicine for sentient beings; once the disease of sentient beings is removed, the medicine has no further use.
If you want to attain oneness, just give up both buddhas and sentient beings at once!
An ancient worthy said, “Just perceive nothingness in the midst of things.”
“I formed the repository of thusness with subtle illumination that is neither destroyed nor born; and the repository of thusness is only the illumination of sublime enlightenment shining throughout the whole cosmos.”
Nevertheless, both are ultimately empty falsehoods. If one abandons the power of actions to grasp the power of the path, then I would say that this person does not understand the skill in means of all the buddhas in expounding the truth as is appropriate to the occasion. Why? Have you not read how old Shakyamuni said, “If you cling to the truth aspect, you are attached to self, personality, living beings, and life; if you cling to the non-truth aspect, you are attached to self, personality, living beings, and life.” Thus it is said, “The Buddha only uses provisional terms in guiding sentient beings.”
As soon as the source of the sickness was pointed out to him by an old adept, Chang Ch’o, the famous scholar in the old days understood enough to say:
Trying to eliminate passion aggravates the disease; rushing toward true suchness is also wrong. There is no obstruction in worldly circumstances according to one’s lot: “nirvana” and “birth and death” are equally illusions.
Be like the stillness of water, like the clarity of a mirror, so that whether good or bad, beautiful or ugly approach, you don’t make the slightest move to avoid them. Then you will truly know that the mindless world of spontaneity is inconceivable.
Ta Hui in these sutras comes very close to truth. But even to be close to truth is not to attain it. Even the closeness is a distance.
Whatever he is saying could have been said by an enlightened being, and then its meaning would be totally different. He is repeating very cleverly the statements of ancient enlightened people, but they sound phony, they don’t sound alive. It seems something is dead inside them. He does not show that what he is saying is his own experience; there is no authority in it.
But we will try to understand, because the statements that he is quoting from others are significant in themselves. Alas that he himself has not experienced them! And experience makes such a great difference. A blind man can describe all the qualities of light; he can describe all the beauties of a rainbow, but in his description something essential will be missing. And anybody who knows light and knows the colors of the rainbow will immediately feel that the man is blind. Perhaps he has heard about light, but he has not seen it. And I will tell you how different would be the same statement from a man of enlightenment.
The first sutra:
“Buddha” is the medicine for sentient beings; once the disease of sentient beings is removed, the medicine has no further use.
It is perfectly true as far as medicine is concerned, but buddha is not the medicine. Buddha is the state when you are cured and no medicine is needed. Buddha is your innermost nature.
A man who knows through experience would have said, “Meditation is the medicine for sentient beings. Once the disease of sentient beings is removed, the medicine has no further use. Meditation is no longer needed for one who is enlightened.”
But to use the word buddha instead of meditation shows tremendous confusion in the mind of the person. He may have heard someone talking about how once the disease is gone the medicine has no use. That’s true, but is buddha the medicine? Buddha is your absolute help. He is your intrinsic eternal nature – you cannot discard it. It is you, in your very innermost authentic being.
Meditation is a method, and the method is for a particular purpose. When the purpose is fulfilled, the method is not of any use. Do you think I meditate? The disease is gone and at the same moment, simultaneously, meditation has also disappeared.
I have told you before that the words meditation and medicine come from the same root. Medicine is to cure the body, and meditation is to cure the consciousness, but their function is to cure. Once the cure has happened they become of no use, but to use the word buddha is absolutely absurd. That’s how a man who tries intellectually to understand is bound to commit small mistakes, and he will not be able to figure out where he is committing the mistake. He is very careful, but carefulness alone is not going to help. Consciousness is needed.
If you want to attain oneness, just give up both buddhas and sentient beings at once.
The same mistake continues. It is true: if you want to attain oneness you have to drop all kinds of duality. The duality between the ignorant and knowledgeable, the duality between birth and death, all kinds of dualities have to be dropped.
But buddhahood is another name of oneness. There is nothing opposite to buddha. It is not part of the world of dualities, it is the very transcendence beyond the dualities. Every duality will disappear…then you will know oneness, then you will know your enlightenment, then you will be a buddha.
Buddha has not to be dropped the way other dualities have to be dropped, because it is not part of any duality. Have you ever met anybody who is a non-buddha? Everybody is a buddha; a few are asleep, a few are awake, but there is not a single sentient being who can be called a non-buddha. This word buddha has no opposite to it, hence it is exactly of the same meaning as oneness.
“I formed the repository of thusness with subtle illumination that is neither destroyed nor born; and the repository of thusness is only the illumination of sublime enlightenment shining throughout the whole cosmos.”
He is again quoting someone: this statement is within quotes. But this is the problem with all the intellectuals in the world: they can quote perfectly, but the whole quotation goes against the previous sutras. As it is, if they are right then this quotation cannot be right. This quotation can be right only with my changes: instead of “buddha”, “meditation”, and instead of “dropping buddhas and sentient beings to attain oneness”, “dropping all dualities to attain buddhahood” – because buddhahood is another name of oneness. If these corrections are made then this quotation is right.
I will read it again so you can understand why I am saying that it can be right only with corrections in the previous sutras. “I formed the repository of thusness with subtle illumination that is neither destroyed nor born; and the repository of thusness is only the illumination of sublime enlightenment shining throughout the whole cosmos.”
Now, what is this illumination of sublime enlightenment, except buddhahood? – just a different name. And if even this has to be dropped, then what remains?
Dualities have to be dropped, not oneness. Birth and death have to be dropped, not life. Life is eternal, it is beyond birth and beyond death. Now he is accepting that the subtle illumination…and what is illumination other than the state of buddhahood? These are different names only – illumination, enlightenment, awareness, buddhahood – but he does not seem to understand that they are names of the same experience.

This subtle illumination…is neither destroyed nor born…
There is only one thing that is neither destroyed nor born, and it is the very principle of life. Birth happens in it, death happens in it – thousands of times – but life continues. Birth and death are small incidents in the eternal flow of life-energies. Birth is not the beginning and death is not the end…just small incidents in the eternity of life and existence.
Nevertheless both are ultimately empty falsehoods.
Now this is his own statement, without quotation-marks, and immediately he falls into his intellectual state…
Nevertheless both are ultimately empty falsehoods. If one abandons the power of actions to grasp the power of the path, then I would say that this person does not understand the skill in means of all the buddhas in expounding the truth as it is…
To say that both are ultimately empty falsehoods means the ignorant people are false, and the awakened people are also false; ignorance is false and illumination is also false – then what remains that you can call true? And if there is nothing true, there is no criterion to call anything false. False is possible only if there is something which is not false; unless the not-false is there, the false cannot exist.
Ta Hui is saying both are false: the not-false and the false, the true and the untrue – both are false. And he thinks that he is making a great statement. He is simply showing his utter ignorance! All intellectuals are ignorant people with great borrowed knowledge, with beautiful words, with great philosophical jargon – but no understanding or experience of truth.
Have you not read how old Shakyamuni said, “If you cling to the truth aspect, you are attached to self, personality, living beings, and life; if you cling to the non-truth aspect, you are attached to self, personality, living beings, and life.” Thus it is said, “The Buddha only uses provisional terms in guiding sentient beings.”
It is a little subtle but not impossible to understand. He is quoting Gautam Buddha, but in the quotation there is something missing. If you cling to the truth aspect… If you cling to any aspect, true or false, you cling to the part – and the part is never the whole. The part becomes the barrier to attaining the whole. So Buddha is right when he says, “Don’t cling to the truth aspect and don’t get attached to it.” He also says, “Don’t cling to the non-truth aspect.”
But remember the word aspect which Ta Hui has forgotten. He is not saying that both truth and untruth have to be dropped. If truth and untruth both have to be dropped, then what remains? What are you going to call it?
Buddha is saying a totally different thing, and Ta Hui misunderstands – naturally, because an intellectual cannot do more than that. Buddha is saying, “Don’t cling to any aspect, whether it is the aspect of truth or the aspect of non-truth. Just don’t cling.”
His insistence is for not clinging, for nonattachment – because every attachment, every clinging will keep you in a bondage, will keep you in ignorance. Even if you feel, “This is true,” don’t cling. The question is not of truth or untruth, the question is of clinging. His emphasis is on nonclinging…don’t cling even to the truth!
That does not mean that truth has to be abandoned. It simply means clinging has to be abandoned. Clinging makes everything a bondage, an imprisonment. Nonclinging brings freedom to you, and truth can be alive only in absolute freedom.
You cannot keep truth in bondage, in any kind of imprisonment. You cannot grasp truth, because truth is almost like the open sky. You can have it in your open hand – the whole sky is yours, all the stars are yours – but don’t try to make a fist. The moment you make a fist, the whole sky has slipped out of your hand.
His insistence: is not to be attached. Certainly, not to be attached to untruth is simple to understand; that’s why he is making it clear…even if you are attached to truth, the very attachment is a poison which will kill even the truth itself.
So remain aloof, unattached, just a witness.
Then the whole truth is available to you, and the whole untruth simply disappears. It has never been there. It was your own projection – you had created it.
But Ta Hui thinks that Buddha is saying: “Truth and non-truth both have to be dropped.” That certainly Buddha has never said, and he is not saying it even in this statement.
To support his idea Ta Hui again says, Thus it is said, “The Buddha only uses provisional terms in guiding sentient beings.”
It is true that Buddha uses provisional terms, arbitrary terms – but not for any special reason. There is no possibility to bring the truth into knowledge, into words, into language – so he uses only provisional terms, approximate, as close as possible to the truth. But it is provisional.
Once you have reached the realm of truth, you will have to abandon all those terms and words and theories and doctrines and scriptures. They have helped you. When the finger points to the moon, certainly the finger is helping, but the finger is not the moon. And when you have seen the moon, the finger is of no use. There is no need to cling to the finger; there is no need to worship the finger because it has shown you the moon. That will be simply foolishness.
The finger pointing to the moon is just like the arrows on the mile-stones which show you how far you are from the place you are going to, and how far you have come from the place you have left. But you never worship those arrows; you never even say to them, “Thank you, sir.”
They are provisional means, and they are of great utility. All the words used by enlightened people are of great utility – but they don’t have the essential truth in them. They are only arrows pointing toward it. But without them perhaps you may never look at the moon.
If the buddhas were not insistent, continuously emphasizing, “You are asleep, wake up!” – if they were not making all kinds of devices to wake you up, perhaps you might never wake up. But once you are awake, you don’t worship the alarm clock. The alarm clock has been of great utility, it has awakened you, but a thing of utility is not a thing to which you have to be grateful.
As soon as the source of the sickness was pointed out to him by an old adept, Chang Ch’o, the famous scholar in the old days understood enough to say:
Now to use for Chang Ch’o the word scholar is not right, he is not a scholar – Ta Hui is a scholar. Chang Ch’o is a buddha, he has come to know the reality. And we can see in his statement the fire, the illumination, the celebration – and a subtle presence of truth. Even though you may not have experienced it, if you can just for a moment, be silent and listen to what Chang Ch’o says, you can see the difference between the words of a scholar and the words of a man of enlightenment.
These are the words of Chang Ch’o:
“Trying to eliminate passion aggravates the disease…”
I have been condemned for years because I have been saying, “Don’t repress anything that is natural to you.” That has become a world-wide antagonism against me in the minds of the priests of all the religions, without exception. They think that I am supporting people’s biological instincts. What I am doing is simply what Chang Ch’o is saying… “Trying to eliminate passion aggravates the disease…”

All the people who have been teaching celibacy, anti-life attitudes, controlling your sex, controlling your hunger, controlling everything that nature requires you to fulfill – it has not helped anybody. It has only created perverted people, sick people – psychologically, spiritually, physically, all kinds of perversions have been created.
This man Chang Ch’o must have been a man of absolute enlightenment, because thousands of years ago he was saying exactly what the world even today is not willing to understand.
Trying to eliminate passion aggravates the disease; rushing toward true suchness is also wrong…
…because you cannot desire suchness. Rushing is a desire – you want to reach quickly to the state of suchness where you can relax, rest, and accept whatsoever life brings to you.
It is not a question of rushing toward some place: it is simply a question of relaxing right now. It is not a desire and it is not a goal; it is not a destination that you have to reach. It is a simple understanding…and you are already – wherever you are – able to live the beautiful experience of suchness.
Chang Ch’o is right when he says; …rushing toward true suchness is also wrong…because you cannot make a goal of it, you cannot make a destination of it. It cannot be an object of your desire and your will. It is simply a pure understanding, a silent understanding that whatsoever life brings to you – rejoice in it. No complaint, no grudge, no asking for more…just in a silent moment relish the feeling.
Then this very moment, suchness is yours.
There is nowhere else to go.
Suchness is your nature.
There is no obstruction in worldly circumstances according to one’s lot…
I started telling the monks – Hindu monks, Jaina monks, Christian monks – that renouncing the world is simply cowardliness. It does not show your understanding, it simply shows your fear. It is escapist. There is no obstruction in worldly circumstances…
If you are living in suchness and let-go there is nothing in the world which can disturb you. There is no obstruction, because you are able to accept everything – even the obstruction. You will absorb it without any complaint. You will simply say, “Such is my lot, such is my destiny.” You will not ask that it should have been otherwise. So why escape from the world? Escaping means that you wanted a different kind of place, where you can be at ease. But you can never be at ease anywhere.

I have heard about a man who had a very angry nature, and was very quick in reacting. He would not think for a single moment what he was doing, and he would repent it for his whole life. He became a nuisance in the whole town; he asked a monk who was visiting the town, “What should I do? Everybody seems to be boycotting me. I understand that I am temperamental, and I get angry very quickly. It comes with such force that I don’t have any time to think about it, and I act according to my anger. Then I repent – I should not have said that, I should not have done that. But now I have made the whole town my enemy.”
The monk said, “It is not your fault. This world never allows anybody to live peacefully, silently, prayerfully. One has to renounce it; it is a world full of sins and full of sinners. What do you think…all the great religions’ founders have renounced the world – were they fools? Renounce this world! Come along with me!”
The logic was clear. It is very easy to throw the responsibility on other people’s shoulders: the world is wrong, you are perfectly right, but what can you do if the whole world is wrong and it drives you into wrong paths? And from everywhere the incentive is to do wrong.
The monk convinced him, “Just come with me. I am going to the Himalayas. Live silently in a cave – nobody will provoke you and the anger will disappear. How can you be angry when there is nobody else except you?” It was so convincing and so ego-fulfilling to think, “I was not wrong, the whole world is wrong.” That’s why all great religious teachers renounced it, went into seclusion, into isolation. If they could not cope with this world… “I am a small man, how can I cope with it?”
So he renounced the world and went into the forest. Sitting under a tree he was feeling very good, thinking that this is true: “Those who have renounced the world have known eternal peace.” And just at that moment a crow pissed over him. You can renounce the world, but there are monk crows who have also renounced the world and they live in the mountains…
Immediately he jumped up! He became very angry, forgot all about renunciation, and started throwing rocks at the crow. The master who had brought him came out of his cave, asking “What is the matter?”
And he became angry at the master: “Yes, you are the matter! You have told me to renounce the world and there will be no anger. And I am sitting here silently, doing nothing, no provocation from my side – and a crow comes and pisses over me!”
The master who had brought him began to think that he had brought a very dangerous fellow. He may get angry with him at any moment, for any reason. He said, “It is better…forgive me for suggesting to you the idea of renouncing. You go back to the world.”
The man said, “I cannot go back to the world. I have suffered there enough, and I have suffered here. I am going to commit suicide!”
The master said, “It is up to you, but I am not suggesting it because I don’t want to take the responsibility.” And the man left. Just nearby there was a village and he collected wood for his funeral pyre on the bank of the river.
The village people gathered out of curiosity: “What is going on, what are you doing?”
He said, “I am going to commit suicide. I am going to burn these logs of wood and jump into the fire, alive. Enough is enough – I have seen the world, I have seen renunciation. Now the only thing left is to see whether in death people can get peace or not!”
The villagers said, “Your idea perhaps is right, but do one thing: don’t make your funeral pyre here, because when you are burning… We poor people live here. It will stink and the smoke will come to our huts. Can’t you go somewhere else?”
Now he was really angry. He said, “This is a strange world. They don’t let you live, they don’t let you die! I cannot even choose the place for my death!”

If you start thinking in such terms – that others are responsible, that the world is the problem, other people are the problem – then you are looking from a very wrong perspective. Chang Ch’o’s perspective is absolutely right when he says,
There is no obstruction in worldly circumstances according to one’s lot: “nirvana” and “birth and death” are all equally illusions.
What he is saying is that people think that if they can achieve nirvana then there will be no birth, no death, no misery, no problem. Nirvana, according to their mind, is just a golden paradise. But the nirvana conceived by the ignorant people cannot be the true nirvana; hence Chang Ch’o has put ‘nirvana’ into inverted commas.
He does not mean the real state of nirvana; he means the conception of nirvana according to ignorant people. Because of their ignorance they will think about nirvana also, but it cannot be the true nirvana. Their nirvana, their birth and death, are all equally illusions. When they have gone beyond all illusions they will find the space which Buddha calls nirvana. That will not be the same as they were thinking it would be.
It used to happen almost every day in Gautam Buddha’s life, because he was the first man to use a negative term for the ultimate state…. In India, Jainas use for the ultimate state the word kaivalya. It means to be absolutely alone in your pure consciousness; it is a concept of freedom. The Hindus have the word moksha, which actually means absolute freedom. These are positive terms.
Buddha perhaps is the only man in the whole of history who uses for the ultimate state a word which is negative. Nirvana means nothingness, emptiness. As a word it literally means blowing out the candle.
When you blow out the candle, what remains? Just darkness…. Darkness – people want to attain to eternal light, not to eternal darkness. People want to be part of a paradise with all the comforts and luxuries that they are missing here; they don’t want to enter into a state of emptiness. People want to become gods; they don’t want to become just pure nothingness.
So every day people were telling Gautam Buddha, “If you go on using this word nirvana, nobody is going to follow you – because who wants emptiness, who wants nothingness, who wants eternal darkness?” Buddha said, “What you want is out of your ignorance. It is out of your unawareness that the desire is coming. So your paradise, your heaven, your moksha are nothing but projections of your ignorance. What I am saying is simply to negate your projections.
“By emptiness, I am saying all that you can conceive will not be there – and what will be there you cannot conceive, neither can I speak about it. I am saying whatever you think are comforts, luxuries, joys, happiness will not be there, and what will be there you don’t have any way even to dream about. Hence I am using the word nothingness. It is just to negate you!
“I am not talking about a negative state. I am talking about a very positive state, but that positive state is beyond expression, beyond words. So the only way is to negate you. If you can understand that your mind, your self, your personality will all be gone…if you can accept this tremendous idea of entering into an absolutely unknowable world, only then can you taste something of meditation. And finally, you can taste what I call nirvana, enlightenment, illumination.”
He was immensely courageous to use the word nirvana. People want their desires to be fulfilled – they want consolations, they want opium, they want beautiful opportunities – then they are ready to do fasting, they are ready to do austerities, they are ready to do any kind of stupid thing you ask in the hope that it is only a question of a few days, and after that…eternal carnival, circus, movies, love-affairs. Deep down in their unconscious, these are the projections.
Buddha is cutting their projections in the single blow of a sword. He says, “Nothing of all this nonsense! You will be attaining to eternal peace and silence and serenity – which can be very closely expressed as emptiness, as nothingness, as blowing out the candle, as nirvana.” And I can understand that he was right.
People should not be supported in their illusions. They have lived millions of lives in their illusions, and religions go on supporting and nourishing their illusions: “You will be getting this, you will be getting that. Just the same desires that you are not able to fulfill here, you will be able to fulfill there in the ultimate state.” This is a very dangerous game that priests are playing with the whole of humanity. The greatest deception, the greatest cheating, the ugliest profession, is that of the priests. Buddha is very much against the priests. He is very much against all those people who are trying to persuade you.
I am reminded…

One day I was going to the university and a beautiful woman waved to stop my car, so I stopped the car. She came close to me and she gave me a beautiful leaflet. On the front of the leaflet there was a picture of a very beautiful house by the side of a beach and the ocean, and on the other side a thick pine-forest. And the caption on this picture said, “Do you want to have such a house?”
I said, “Strange, is there such a house available in this city?” So I looked inside; I thought perhaps it is just for sale or something, and I wanted to look. I would have loved to have that house – the house was really great, and the situation was fabulous.
I looked at the back and it said, “If you follow Jesus Christ then in paradise this house will be allotted to you.” This in short is the whole history of religions. They are telling you that you will get this, you will get that.
Buddha is the only man who says, “You won’t get a thing. All that you have will be taken away.” He does not even allow you, as a self. You will be just a consciousness without any idea of “I.”
In Pali, the language he used to speak, atta means the self. Just as in Sanskrit atman means the self, the supreme self, atta is the supreme self. Buddha used the word anatta – no-self. He has used all the negatives – and yet the man must have been of tremendous charisma, because he persuaded people to lose everything, to drop everything and enter into eternal nothingness.
His persuasion is in his silence, in his blissfulness, in his grace. People have felt, “If this man has entered into nothingness, and out of nothingness has come so much flowering and so much fragrance, then there is no need to be worried…this nothingness seems to be better than all our conceptions and dreams.” Your nirvana is not the nirvana of Gautam Buddha.
Chang Ch’o is certainly a man of enlightenment. His statement is so clear. Three things he is saying: One, don’t try to eliminate passion, because that will aggravate the disease – and this is two thousand years before Sigmund Freud. …rushing toward true suchness is also wrong.
This is against all religions, who want you to be greedy for a life after death, for a heaven where you will be rewarded, where your virtues will be rewarded – and there seems to be no criterion as to how the virtues will be rewarded.
I have heard Hindu saints saying that if you donate one rupee to a saint here…of course, to a saint – and there is no saint other than himself in the vicinity – you will get one crore rupees in heaven as a reward. It seems to be a kind of lottery, just for one rupee. And it is worth risking just one rupee! It is better to have a ready-made account there; when you reach there will be millions of rupees in your account. Then enjoy all the luxuries that you could not manage on the earth!
But it is written in Hindu scriptures that one million times more…whatever virtue you gain, it becomes one million times more in heaven. This is simply exploiting people’s desires, people’s minds. Gautam Buddha perhaps is the only great teacher who has not exploited anybody.
Ta Hui goes on quoting from great enlightened people, but he does not seem to understand that scholarship and enlightenment are not one. There are so many scholars – you can get them for one rupee a dozen. They are all around, all the universities are full, all the churches are full, all the synagogues are full – great rabbis, great pundits, great bishops and cardinals, but they are all scholars. They have studied much, they have gained much knowledge – but they have not gained much being.
Wisdom belongs to those whose being expands to its ultimate limits.
But it is good to see how an intellectual person, a genius, can go on committing mistakes – what to say about ordinary people? If they commit mistakes they have to be forgiven; even geniuses go on committing mistakes!
Perhaps the basic problem with intellectuals is that they cannot conceive of anything greater and better than intelligence. Meditation is certainly that which goes far above anything that intelligence can even conceive.
In the whole world there are so many learned people, but these learned people are not interested in meditation. They think learning is enough: “Learn more! There is so much to learn.” – and every year knowledge goes on growing so fast that to keep pace with it has become almost impossible. Who has time for meditation?
I have been with so many learned people in this country and I have asked them, “After all your learning, hasn’t the idea of meditation ever occurred to you?”
They said, “Why should it happen to us? There is nothing better than intelligence…” It hurts them, their ego is wounded, to hear that there is something greater than intelligence – meditation.
An incident happened…

I was a student, but I used to go to conferences and other places to speak on different subjects. There was a meeting on the birthday of Nanak, the founder of Sikhism. The president of the meeting was the chief justice of Madhya Pradesh high court, and I was the speaker. I was just a student but this man, whose name was Ganesh Bhatt, was a rare man. I have never come across another man of his quality.
He was the chief justice and I was only a postgraduate student. After I spoke he simply declared to the assembly of almost ten thousand sikhs, “Now there is nothing more to be said. At least I cannot say anything better than has been said by this young man, so I will not deliver the presidential address, because that may spoil what he has said to you. I would rather that you go home silently pondering over what he has said, and meditating upon it.”
The Sikhs were surprised, everybody was surprised, and as I was stepping down from the podium the chief justice, Ganesh Bhatt, touched my feet. I said, “What are you doing? You are of the age of my father. You are a learned man, you are a brahmin.”
He said, “Nothing matters – neither my being a brahmin, nor my age, nor my prestige, nor my being the chief justice. What matters is that whatever you have said has come from the deepest being. It was unexpected…I have presided over many meetings and I have listened to many learned people, but all that they say is within quotation marks. For the first time I have heard a man who speaks directly, without any quotation marks – who speaks on his own authority. So don’t prevent me. I am showing my gratitude by touching your feet.”
The judges had come because the chief justice was presiding over the meeting, and the advocates of the high court had come because the chief justice was there – they were all shocked! But Ganesh Bhatt became a regular visitor to my house. It became almost a regular routine that his car would be standing in front of my house.
People whose cases were being heard in the high court started coming to me. I said, “I cannot help you.”
They said, “Just a word from you, and he will not do anything against it.”
I said, “I cannot do any such thing. He comes here with such respect toward me that I cannot bring up such trivia.”
It became a problem. I had to keep a servant in front of my house to send these people away, otherwise everybody was coming to the house saying, “I am in much trouble, and just a little support from you will get me out of it.”
After he retired from the chief justice-ship he became the vice-chancellor of Sagar University. By that time I had become a professor in Jabalpur University, and I had gone to Sagar to speak in a public conference of all religions. He heard that I had come, so he invited me to the university where he was now the vice-chancellor.
Once I had been a student in that university, and because the vice-chancellor had called the meeting, all the professors and all the students, everybody was present. I was worried about only one thing – that he may do the same act again. The professors who had taught me were there, and thousands of students were there who had also been students, junior to me – and he did his act.
As I went on the podium he stood, touched my feet, and said to the audience, “To be learned is one thing, and to know on your own experience – face to face – is a totally different thing. In my long life I have been in high positions, and I have come across so many learned people, and I can say with absolute confidence that learning brings no transformation to their being. The transformation of one’s being comes through some other door, not through the doors of mind.”
It was a great shock! Many of them were my teachers, many of them were students who knew me when I was a student in that university, and their vice-chancellor touching my feet…. My old professors gathered when I came down after speaking, saying, “This is a strange phenomenon. We had never expected…”
I said, “I was studying under you, but you never looked deeply into me, you never looked into my eyes. You never thought about the questions I was asking. You simply thought of one thing – that I was just creating trouble for you because you had no answer, and you were not courageous enough to say, ‘I don’t know.’”

Intellectuals are very weak about one point. They cannot say, “I don’t know.”
Only an enlightened being can say, “I don’t know.” His innocence and his enlightenment are synonymous.

============================================================

The Great Affair

This affair is like the bright sun in the blue sky, shining clearly, changeless and motionless, without diminishing or increasing. It shines everywhere in the daily activities of everyone, appearing in everything. Though you try to grasp it, you cannot get it; though you try to abandon it, it always remains. It is vast and unobstructed, utterly empty. Like a gourd floating on water, it cannot be reined in or held down. Since ancient times, when good people of the path have attained this, they’ve appeared and disappeared in the sea of birth and death, able to use it fully. There is no deficit or surplus: like cutting up sandalwood, each piece is it.
Since there is no place to locate it, buddha is illusion and dharma is illusion: the three worlds, twenty-five states of being, the sense organs, sense objects, and consciousness are utterly empty. When you get to this realm, there’s no place to put even the word ‘buddha’; if even the word ‘buddha’ has no applicability, where is there true thusness, buddha-nature, enlightenment or nirvana? Thus the great being Fu said, “Fearing that people will give rise to a view of annihilation, we provisionally establish empty names.”
In all the sutras up to now, Ta Hui has not been able to establish himself as an enlightened being. He is trying hard, he is using the most logical and intellectual methods, but they are empty; they don’t carry any weight. For example, when he says, “All the senses, self-nature, dharma, all are illusory,” one has to ask him, “To whom are you talking?” And, “Who is talking?” He has used the word illusory without understanding its implications.
Anybody who is not aware of both the intellectual potentialities and the nature of ‘no-mind’ will not be able to figure out whether this man is authentic or pseudo.

Before I go into his sutras, I am reminded of a beautiful incident about the Adi Shankaracharya, the first Shankaracharya, who established four temples – the four seats of shankaracharyas for all the four directions. Perhaps in the whole world, he is the most famous of those philosophers who are trying to establish that everything is illusory. Without doubt he was a great logician, because he went on conquering other philosophers; he moved all over the country and defeated all other schools of philosophy. He established his philosophy as the only right vision, the only right perspective: that all is maya, illusion.
Shankaracharya was in Varanasi. One day, early in the morning – it was still dark because traditionally the Hindu monks take a bath before sunrise – he took a bath. And as he was coming up the steps, a man touched him on purpose, not accidentally, and told him, “Please forgive me. I am a sudra, I am untouchable. I am sorry, but you will have to take another bath to clean yourself.”
Shankaracharya was very angry. He said, “It was not accidental, the way you did that; you did it on purpose. You should be punished in hell.”
The man said, “When all is illusory, it seems only hell remains real.” That took Shankaracharya aback.
The man said, “Before you go for your bath, you have to answer my few questions. If you don’t answer me, each time you come up after your bath, I will touch you.”
It was lonely and nobody else was there, so Shankaracharya said, “You seem to be a very strange person. What are your questions?”
He said, “My first question is: Is my body illusory? Is your body illusory? And if two illusions touch each other, what is the problem? Why are you going to take another bath? You are not practicing what you are preaching. How, in an illusory world, can there be a distinction between the untouchable and the brahmin? – the pure and the impure? – when both are illusory, when both are made of the same stuff as dreams are made of? What is the fuss?”
Shankaracharya, who had been conquering great philosophers, could not answer this simple man because any answer was going to be against his philosophy. If he says they are illusory, then there is no point in being angry about it. If he says they are real, then at least he accepts the reality of bodies…but then there is a problem. If human bodies are real, then animal bodies, the bodies of the trees, the bodies of the planets, the stars…then everything is real.
And the man said, “I know you cannot answer this – it will finish your whole philosophy. I’ll ask you another question: I am a sudra, untouchable, impure, but where is my impurity – in my body or in my soul? I have heard you declaring that the soul is absolutely and forever pure, and there is no way to make it impure; so how can there be a distinction between souls? Both are pure, absolutely pure, and there are no degrees of impurity – that somebody is more pure and somebody is less pure. So perhaps it is my soul that has made you impure and you have to take another bath?”

That was even more difficult. But he had never been in such trouble – actual, practical, in a way scientific. Rather than arguing about words, the sudra had created a situation in which the great Adi Shankaracharya accepted his defeat. And the sudra said, “Then don’t go take another bath. Anyway there is no river, no me, no you; all is a dream. Just go in the temple – that too is a dream – and pray to God. He too is a dream, because he is a projection of a mind which is illusory, and an illusory mind cannot project anything real.
What Ta Hui is saying here is something similar. He does not understand the implications. Let us look into each sutra.
This affair…
– this affair of enlightenment –
…is like the bright sun in the blue sky, shining clearly, changeless and motionless, without diminishing or increasing. It shines everywhere in the daily activities of everyone, appearing in everything. Though you try to grasp it, you cannot get it; though you try to abandon it, it always remains. It is vast and unobstructed, utterly empty.
These words he must have borrowed, because these are the words of a man who knows. Each single sentence is impeccably true. This affair – the affair of enlightenment or liberation or self-realization – is like the bright sun. It has been the experience of thousands of mystics that when they reach the highest peak of their consciousness there is an explosion of light, something like an atomic explosion.
One of the great mystics, Kabir, says, “It is shining so much that it seems one thousand suns have risen suddenly around me. Wherever I look, the sun that I used to see seems completely paled…the brightness of these one thousand suns is so much. It has purified every fiber and cell of my being, as if I have passed through fire the way gold does. All that is not gold is destroyed by the fire and only the pure gold comes out.
“Passing through this experience of one thousand suns, for the first time I know what purity means – its fragrance, its freshness, its absolute newness. It is never stale, it is never past, it is never present, it is never future. You cannot divide it into time segments. It always is; it is the very nature of existence itself.”
So Ta Hui is quoting these words without quotation marks, which is one of the cunning strategies of all the intellectuals of the world. They go on stealing from every source, and pretending that it is their own experience. But they cannot manage it – sooner or later something immediately shows their stupidity.
This affair is like the bright sun in the blue sky, shining clearly, changeless and motionless, without diminishing or increasing. It shines everywhere in the daily activities of everyone, appearing in everything. Though you try to grasp it, you cannot get it; though you try to abandon it, it always remains. It is vast and unobstructed, utterly empty.
These sentences are certainly stolen from someone who knows. And the reason I am saying they are stolen is because just as we enter into further sutras it becomes clear that he is not aware that they are showing his ignorance.
Like a gourd floating on water, it cannot be reined in or held down. Since ancient times, when good people of the path have attained this, they’ve appeared and disappeared in the sea of birth and death, able to use it fully. There is no deficit or surplus: like cutting up sandalwood, each piece is it.
The first thing that he has wrong is that enlightened people are not, and cannot be called, good people. One can become a good person without being enlightened; in fact one can become a good person even without believing that there is consciousness, soul, or God. Do you think the atheists have not produced good people? Epicurus in Greece was a great atheist but you cannot find a better man; you cannot find anything to blame in his life.
In India there has been a big school of atheists called Charvakas. They did not believe in any other world, in God, in reincarnation, in the existence of the soul. They were purely materialists, but they produced such good people that even the theist Hindu scriptures mention their originator with great respect as Acharya Brihaspati, the great master Brihaspati. They don’t agree with his ideas, but they cannot disagree with his character, with his goodness.
The enlightened person is beyond good and evil. You cannot confine him to the word good. He is neither good nor evil, he is simply aware. Good passes in front of him and evil passes in front of him, and he remains unaffected. Whatever he does, he does not follow any ethical code or any morality; he simply follows his own awareness. So the good is not a goal for him, it is simply a by-product of his awareness. He is not doing virtuous things and he is not waiting for any reward. He is simply conscious; he has eyes.
Do you think that because you have eyes and you can see the trees and the sun, you need some reward for it? Or because you can see the door and can go out or come in, do you think you need some reward for it?
The man of awareness simply has eyes.
The moralist has no eyes of his own. He is practicing what has been said traditionally to be good. He does not know exactly whether it is good or not; people just say it is good. He is born among people who believe it is good, and because by doing it he is honored, respected – his ego is fulfilled – he goes on doing it. It is a beautiful arrangement; here it is ego-fulfilling and there in the other world, after death, he will be showered with great rewards. He is really doing a good business.
The enlightened man has no reward. He has the greatest thing in the world: a total awareness. Now nothing can be added to his richness. He is neither good nor bad; this is where Ta Hui shows his ignorance about the enlightened people.
Secondly he says, …they’ve appeared and disappeared in the sea of birth and death.
That is absolutely wrong. Once a man is enlightened, he never comes back into a womb; he goes beyond birth and death. Good men are bound to be born, are bound to die, but not the enlightened one. The very foundation of enlightenment is to get free from the wheel of birth and death, and to enter into universal life – formless, without a body. A body is a confinement, it is an imprisonment. Consciousness need not have a body; it can be just pure, formless space.
Once a man is enlightened, he never comes back into another body. And because Ta Hui is saying that “he appears and disappears in the sea of birth and death,” he is showing his ignorance about the whole affair of enlightenment.
The last sentence is certainly beautiful and significant, but it is again stolen; it is stolen from Gautam Buddha himself. Buddha was always asked, “Does the experience of awakening, in different people, have the same taste, the same flower, or is it different?” And he has used two statements. One is: “The sea is vast, but you can taste it from anywhere and it is always salty; it has the same taste.” And second: “Like cutting up sandalwood, each piece is it.” You can cut the sandalwood into many pieces, but each piece will have the same fragrance; it will not be different in different pieces.
This is a famous statement of Gautam Buddha. Ta Hui has simply used it.
There is no deficit or surplus: like cutting up sandalwood, each piece is it.

Since there is no place to locate it, buddha is illusion and dharma is illusion…
The reason that he is giving for why buddha is illusion and why dharma, the nature of enlightenment, is illusion is that you cannot find a place to locate them. Can you find a place to locate space? Can you find a place to locate time? Is time illusory? Is space illusory?
Just because you cannot locate them…they are formless, hence location is not possible. If you make it a criterion that anything that cannot be located and pointed at is not real, then only things which have boundaries will be real and things that don’t have any boundaries will not be real. Then your body will be real, because it can be located, and your consciousness will be unreal, because it cannot be located.
Ta Hui does not understand the implication of what he is saying. Just in the beginning he was talking about the affair of enlightenment, and there he did not mention at all that he was talking about an illusory affair. It was…bright sun in the blue sky, shining clearly, changeless and motionless, without diminishing or increasing. It shines everywhere…
A thing that shines everywhere, of course, cannot be located. You can locate a thing which exists somewhere, but a thing that exists everywhere cannot be located.
…appearing in everything. If it were appearing in some things, to locate it would be possible, but if it is appearing in everything…. If rocks are also buddhas, fast asleep, and they don’t have any qualitative difference from enlightened beings…. They are aware and the rocks are fast asleep, but being asleep or awake doesn’t make any difference to their basic reality.
In all those statements…he is saying, Though you try to grasp it, you cannot get it – you cannot grasp it because it is so vast, and so formless…though you try to abandon it, it always remains.
You cannot abandon it because it is everywhere; wherever you go you will find it. It is within you, it is without you. Those statements were absolutely right, but they are not his experiences.
The later sutras show that he cannot befool, he cannot deceive: Since there is no place to locate it, buddha is illusory.
Suddenly, that which was shining in the blue sky like the bright sun has become illusory. And even the nature of awareness, which is dharma, has become illusory.
…the three worlds – hell, earth and heaven – twenty-five states of being, the sense organs, sense objects, and consciousness are utterly empty He is not leaving anything which is real. Then to whom is he talking? Their ears are illusory, their eyes are illusory, and so it is the case with Ta Hui himself. All the senses are illusory. The sense of seeing the people to whom he is talking, the very fact of talking…if everything is illusory, then he is simply mad. What is the point of writing these sutras? For whom is he writing these sutras? And if everything is illusory, do you think that the paper on which these sutras are written…only the ink and the paper are real? – although the man who was writing was illusory.
When you get to this realm, there is no place to put even the word ‘buddha’;
But that does not make buddha illusory, it simply makes the word inapplicable. In that experience no word is applicable. All words are just tentatively used. When one has become awakened he cannot say anything about his experience of awakening. It is true: there is not even space to place the word buddha.
…if even the word ‘buddha’ has no applicability, where is there true thusness, buddha-nature, enlightenment, or nirvana?
And he was talking about this affair in the beginning of the sutras, where it extended throughout space. You could not grasp it because it was too vast, and you could not abandon it because where will you abandon it? Wherever you go, you will find it. You are in it, you are it.
Those statements were perfectly true. But now he is saying, …if even the word ‘buddha’ has no applicability, where is there true thusness?
Now where is the great idea of true thusness, or buddha-nature, or enlightenment, or nirvana? Now everything is denied.
In these small sutras he has done a great job! What he says in the beginning, and says very clearly, he denies in the end. It is just intellectual gymnastics. It is true, the word buddha is arbitrary – not because the existence of that for which we are using the word buddha is illusory, but because the experience is so vast that even the word buddha cannot contain it.
It is not that the experience of thusness is illusory; in fact it is one of the greatest disciplines of awareness that has arisen in thousands of years.
If one can say and feel and experience the nature of thusness, tathata, he will not be disturbed by pain, he will not be disturbed by pleasure, he will not be disturbed by failure, he will not be disturbed by success. He will simply say, “Thus is the case. Such is the way things happen in nature. I am just a witness. Right now success is passing in front of me like a cloud. Soon failure will follow, just as day is followed by night. This moment it is pleasure, soon it will bring pain, but I am absolutely aloof – they don’t even touch me. I am beyond their grasp.”
This is one of the greatest approaches to reality that has come to man’s understanding: the idea of ‘thusness’ or ‘suchness.’ And Ta Hui is saying it is illusory! and then that even enlightenment is illusory, buddha-nature is illusory, nirvana is illusory. One has to ask Ta Hui how you can call something illusory unless there is something real in existence; otherwise, how will you compare?
You can call something illusory only because something else is real. But if there is nothing real, then there is nothing illusory either. They have to exist together. He does not talk about what is real; in fact, all that is great and real, he is calling illusory. Now what is real? And if he says there is nothing which is real, then he has no right to call anything illusory.
Thus the great being Fu said, “Fearing that people will give rise to a view of annihilation, we provisionally establish empty names.”
He goes on quoting enlightened people out of context. What the great Master Fu said does not mean what Ta Hui wants it to mean. He has put it in a context: he is calling enlightenment, buddhahood, thusness, nirvana, all illusory, and then he quotes Master Fu, “Fearing that people will give rise to a view of annihilation” if they are told that everything is illusory….
That’s why buddhas have not said that. They have talked about enlightenment and thusness and buddha-nature and nirvana, just so that people don’t get the view of a total negativity, of an utter emptiness, annihilation.
…we provisionally establish empty names. All these names are empty, but Fu’s meaning is totally different. What Ta Hui wants him to mean is not his meaning. He is saying: “We are giving provisional, empty names – but the empty names are given to realities, not to illusions. They are provisional and empty because they cannot contain the vast reality of nirvana, enlightenment, thusness, buddha-nature. So just to give a small indication we have used provisional, empty names.” But once a person comes to experience himself, he will be able to see that all names were only provisional.
To tell them in the beginning that everything is illusory…. They are already in misery, they are in deep anguish, and he tells them that there is no possibility of getting beyond it because everything that can take one beyond is illusory! But very strange is the fact that he does not call people’s misery illusory: their sadness is illusory, their egos are illusory, their intellects are illusory, their minds are illusory – he does not mention these things.
And if everything is truly illusory, then what is the fear? If illusory people feel afraid, what is wrong in it? The people don’t exist, so let them fear! Non-existential people are fearing annihilation; they are already no more – so what more annihilation can happen to them?
No, the people are real, although their conception about themselves is not real. They have to find their authentic reality, and that authentic reality is so vast that we have to give it provisional names – provisional, because once you have reached it you will see that those names were just utilitarian. They don’t define and they don’t confine the experience. That’s what master Fu meant when he said, …we provisionally establish empty names.
But if there is nobody, if master Fu is illusory and the people he is concerned about – the ones that may become afraid of annihilation – don’t exist, then what is the problem? Everything is solved: there is no need of any preaching, there is no need of any scriptures, there is no need of any meditation, there is no need to go beyond your anguish, anxiety, misery. You yourself don’t exist; how can you be miserable? Have you ever heard of somebody who does not exist feeling very much worried, someone who has never existed going through a migraine? The very idea is so stupid.
Ta Hui’s whole approach is to pick up all the great statements from different masters, to compile them and give a fallacious impression to people that he himself is enlightened. But enlightenment is far away. He is living in a very deceptive state. He is deceiving others, but that is not so important; he is deceiving himself. And this is the case not only with Ta Hui; this is the case with ninety-nine percent of so-called religious scriptures.
I am talking about all this nonsense to make you aware that whenever you come across the same kind of nonsense again somewhere else – beware! Don’t get caught in it. Enlightened people have been respected so greatly that intellectuals have had a great jealousy, and they have tried in every way to imitate the enlightened people’s statements. There are thousands of treatises which have been produced by intellectual people – and they are clever enough. They have the acumen, the logic, the reason…they can deceive millions of people without any difficulty.
Ta Hui even deceived the emperor of China, who honored him by offering the title: The Great Zen Master. In fact, the word Ta Hui itself means The Great Zen Master. The word Ta Hui is not his real name; it has been conferred on him by the emperor of China. If he can deceive the emperor, what to say about ordinary people?
I am talking about Ta Hui just to make you aware. Don’t get caught. Be very watchful. When you are reading something or listening to something, be alert and see whether those words are coming from a space of realization…or are they just mind games? And whenever you find any kind of mind game, throw it.
Just the other day I was looking at a picture of a Zen master who is very famous in Japan for his actions. In the picture he is tearing up scriptures and throwing them away; scriptures are flying all around in the air while he is tearing them up. And he became famous for this act!
Looking into the picture, I was trying to find out whether Ta Hui’s sutras are in them or not…

============================================================

Lecture at the Request of Wei Ch’iang

Haven’t you seen the saying of the man of old: “Even if there were something surpassing nirvana, I would say that it too is like a dream, an illusion.” If in the midst of dreamlike illusion, you are able to witness it as it really is, to understand it as it really is, to work on it as it really is, and to act on it as it really is, then you can use the method of ‘according with reality’ to subdue yourself, and, arousing an attitude of great compassion, create all kinds of skillful expedients whereby you can also subdue all sentient beings.

Dealing with Situations

Old Yellow Face (Buddha) has said, “When the mind does not vainly grasp past things, does not long for things in the future, and does not dwell on anything in the present, then you realize fully that the three times are all empty and still.” You shouldn’t think about past events – whether good or bad; if you think, that obstructs the path. You shouldn’t consider future events; to consider them is crazy confusion. Present events are right in front of you: whether they’re pleasant or unpleasant, don’t fix your mind on them. If you do fix your mind on them, it will disturb your heart. Just take everything in its time, responding according to circumstances, and you will naturally accord with this principle.
Unpleasant situations are easy to handle; pleasant situations are hard to handle. For that which goes against one’s will, it boils down to one word: patience. Settle down and reflect a moment and in a little while it’s gone. It’s pleasant situations that truly give you no way to escape: like pairing magnet and iron, unconsciously this and that come together in one place.
Ta Hui is facing something very fundamental as far as the intellect and intelligence of man is concerned. This is of great importance: to have a clear conception that intellect is not intelligence.
Intellect is of the mind: it depends on memory, it functions through borrowed knowledge. All our educational systems in the world are rooted in intellectual development; hence they all depend on memory. The examinations in our schools, colleges, universities, are not of intelligence – they are only testing how good a memory you have. But memory is not an indication of intelligence. Memory is mechanical. A computer can have a better memory than a man of genius, but the computer has no intelligence.
The mind of man is nothing but a bio-computer, evolved over a long, long time. And intelligence is when the memory is silent and the intellect is not functioning, when the whole mind is at rest.
Intelligence is something beyond mind.
In English there is a problem because the same word is used for both – and they are totally different. In Sanskrit, and in all Eastern languages, we have different names for each: intellect is called bodhi, the faculty of knowledge; and intelligence is called pragya, the faculty of knowing, not knowledge.
Knowledge is always dead; it is information. And all our educational systems are doing with students exactly what we are doing with computers – feeding them with more and more information. But no computer can answer a question for which it has not been already prepared. Intellect can only answer that which it already knows; it is stale, it is of yesterday.
Intelligence is a response to a new situation, not out of your past memories but from your present awareness, this very moment. You don’t function as a computer, you don’t search for the answer in your memory storage; rather you simply open your consciousness to the situation and allow the spontaneous response.
In other words, intelligence is spontaneous responsibility.
The word responsibility has also been misunderstood. It has to be broken in two; otherwise, by and by, it loses its original meaning. It has become almost equivalent to duty. The reality is different. Break the word responsibility in two, then it becomes ability to respond or response-ability. Intelligence is response ability – and that is bound to be spontaneous. The response is going to surprise even you, because it is so new – you are not repeating anything from the past.
There has been a perennial conflict between intelligence and intellect. The man of intellect thinks that he is intelligent because he knows so much. He has accumulated a great heritage of knowledge, he is burdened with all kinds of information. The man of intelligence is innocent; he functions moment to moment, his functioning has a freshness and a beauty. But to find intelligence one has to go beyond the mind. Meditation is the way.
The problem with Ta Hui is the problem with all intellectuals of the world. They cannot think – they would not like to think – that there is something higher and superior to intellect.
It is not a coincidence that he calls Gautam Buddha ‘Old Yellow Face’; it is an unconscious, sarcastic remark. And it is not only in this passage; in another place he says something even worse than ‘Old Yellow Face’. He may not be aware…this is utterly disrespectful, but the intellectual is always disrespectful toward the man of intelligence. He feels deep down a certain inferiority complex and he takes revenge in many ways.
The intellectual tries to imitate the man of intelligence, the man of wisdom, the man of enlightenment – and he is capable, he is articulate. He has more capacity as far as language and words are concerned. He may be a better speaker, a better writer, a better orator. He can manage to deceive the world very easily just by repeating whatever the enlightened people have said.
Sometimes it has happened that the imitator can defeat the original. It happened once that a few friends arranged a birthday celebration for an English actor. They made it a nationwide competition: who can imitate the actor the best? In every big city people would be chosen, and then the final test would be in London. The winner was going to have a great prize.
Many actors participated. The actor himself thought that it would be a good joke to enter the competition from a small town. Of course he was certain that he was going to come in first – he is the original, everybody else is imitating him. But to everybody’s surprise – and more to his – he came in second. When it became known that he was the real man, nobody could believe that it had happened – how had all the examiners got misled by an imitator?
But I see deeper into the psychology of it: the imitator prepares, rehearses, does much homework. The original simply stands there in his spontaneity and reality – he has not prepared, he has not rehearsed, he is just as he is. But somebody who is trying to come in first in the great competition may have worked for months. Naturally, he deceived the examiners. And this has happened a thousand and one times – that someone like Ta Hui, who is just an intellectual, has been accepted for one thousand years as a great master of Zen teaching, and he is simply repeating.
I would like you to see that everything can be imitated, except enlightenment. You may say the same words, but they will not have the same fire. Your gestures may be the same, but they will not have the same grace. You may act as if you are enlightened, but that ‘as if’ is a big gap, almost unbridgeable. This becomes so clear in Ta Hui’s case.
He says,
Haven’t you seen the saying of the man of old: “Even if there were something surpassing nirvana, I would say that it too is like a dream, an illusion.”
It is true that the people who have achieved the ultimate realization – you can call it nirvana, liberation, self-realization – those who have achieved it are fully able to say that that too is made of the same stuff as dreams are made of. It is the most beautiful dream, the most perfect dream – but nothing more than that.
The reason for the enlightened man to call his enlightenment only a dream is a very fundamental one. He is trying to say: “This too is an experience, and I am separate from my every experience – whether the experience is of misery, of suffering, of anguish, or of blissfulness or enlightenment, it makes no difference. They belong to the same category of experiences.
“I am not the experience, I am the experiencer. I am always transcendental to any experience that happens to me. I am only a witness, a sakshin. Just as I have seen black clouds, I am seeing white clouds. Just as I have seen clouds, I am seeing a cloudless sky – but I am separate.
“My consciousness is not an experience. All experiences pass in front of my consciousness, but I am always a witness. So whether the experience is of misery, agony, or of ecstasy, it makes no difference.”
But this can be said only by a man who has attained to that beatitude, that benediction – that this too is a dream, a beautiful dream, the most beautiful dream, but one has not to get identified with it. Hence the saying that when one becomes the buddha he forgets all about buddhahood; he becomes again an ordinary human being. Then the circle is complete. He had started from being an ordinary human being, but that was a state of unconsciousness, like a sleepwalker, a somnambulist. Now he has come back to the same state, with only one difference: now he is no longer asleep, he is awake.
A buddha is fully awake but, compared to anyone else, he is not special. He is not holier than you and he is not higher than you. You are asleep and he is awake – this makes no qualitative difference. In fact, the person who is asleep is showing that he has the capacity to be awake. If you were not capable of being asleep, you would not be capable of being awake either; both capacities belong to the same realm. And unless an enlightened man again becomes an ordinary man, he has been fulfilling only his ego. Then his enlightenment is not authentic; his enlightenment is only an intellectual understanding, not an experience.
Ta Hui is quoting some ancient seer:
“Even if there were something surpassing nirvana” – something surpassing enlightenment – “I would say that it too is like a dream, an illusion.”
A tremendously pregnant statement…
If in the midst of dreamlike illusion, you are able to witness it as it really is, to understand it as it really is, to work on it as it really is, and to act on it as it really is, then you can use the method of ‘according with reality’ to subdue yourself.
Now here he goes wrong. As long as he was quoting the ancient seer he was perfectly right, because those were not his words, he was only repeating. They were the words of someone who has known the experience. Now he starts his own understanding, his own intellectual grasp – and everything goes wrong.
He says, “If you can be a witness of this dreamlike illusion, then you can use the method of ‘according with reality’ to subdue yourself.” A man who has come to the point of knowing that even enlightenment is an illusion cannot have the idea of self anymore – he cannot have the idea that “I am.”
The witness has no idea of any ego.
The witness is but there is no idea of “I am.”
The witness is simply like a mirror; it reflects. Whatever comes in front of it, it reflects – without any reaction, without any attachment, without any identity. A beautiful face or an ugly one, all are just reflections, without any difference. When the beautiful face goes away, the mirror does not try to prevent it, to cling to it. And when an ugly face comes before it, it does not want to get rid of it, it does not close its eyes. It has no evaluation, no judgment; it remains simply a witness of whatsoever is the case.
A man of enlightenment has no problem as far as the self is concerned – the self was lost long before. You cannot attain to enlightenment before you have lost your self. That is a necessary step to attain to enlightenment.
Let me say it this way:
You cannot be enlightened.
When you are not, enlightenment is.
You have to give way for enlightenment to descend, for that great awakening to fill your whole sky, to fill your whole consciousness.
If you are there, then whatsoever happens is only mental gymnastics. You can manage to create an illusion of everything except enlightenment. You can see Jesus Christ, you can create the illusion; your mind has every capacity. You may just have to make the right arrangement – a three week fast and isolation, and the continuous repetition of the name of Jesus Christ – and you will start seeing Jesus Christ with you in the cave. You will start talking with Jesus Christ – and not only will you be talking, he will be answering you too! And nobody is there except you.
All the religions of the world have insisted on fasting. The reason is that when you are fasting your capacity to judge between the real and the unreal is lost after three weeks. Your mind needs the continuous nourishment of certain proteins; just a three week fast, and those proteins are finished. The mind keeps a certain emergency reserve and that emergency reserve is finished in three weeks – and that is if you are a non-vegetarian. If you are a vegetarian, then within a week all your proteins are gone, because vegetarian food is not sufficient food as far as the mind is concerned.
It is no coincidence that not a single vegetarian has received the Nobel Prize! It is strange; it should be otherwise. Vegetarians think that since they are eating the purest food, they must have the purest minds, but even the three persons from India who have received the Nobel Prize – all were non-vegetarians.
Being a vegetarian and fasting and isolation are all strategies to bring your mind to a position where you cannot distinguish whether what you are seeing is real or unreal. It happens to small children. At an early age, when they wake up they start crying for something they had in their dream. They ask, “Where has it gone? It was just now here with me.” It takes a little time for children to grow to understand that what they see in sleep is a dream and what they see when they are awake is not a dream.
The distinction between dream and reality needs a certain development of the mind. And what happens in this development? Those proteins which make your intellect…
All religions are agreed on the principle that fasting is something spiritual, but the reason is psychological, not spiritual: fasting is a beautiful way to create illusions. Have you ever thought about it…that a Christian never comes to see Krishna? When he is meditating in isolation, fasting in his monastery, Krishna never comes to him, Buddha never comes to him. And to a Buddhist, Jesus never comes. It seems these people also discriminate between Christians, Buddhists, Hindus…First they inquire whether this man is a Buddhist – should I go or not?
It is your conditioning. Nobody comes, there is nobody to come! These people have disappeared into the universal consciousness. They don’t have any body, any vehicle anymore – even if they want to come, they cannot come. But you can create the illusion, and these are the devices: fasting, isolation…
When you are with people, it is one thing; when you are alone it is another thing. Have you watched the difference? – when you are in your bathroom you are a different person than when you are in a marketplace. In the bathroom, even though you may be seventy years old, you can start making faces before the mirror. And if you become aware that just a small child is looking through the keyhole, you will change immediately into a serious, mature, experienced, seventy-year-old person! Just the eyes of that five-year-old boy in the keyhole can make such a great change.
Albert Einstein’s life was full of surprises. His greatest surprise was when he became aware that if you are observing the behavior of electrons, they behave differently from when nobody is observing them. Strange! We used to think that electrons were like dead people – just matter – but they seem to be very much alive, and very sensitive.
They don’t belong to our society, they don’t belong to our culture, they don’t need to be worried about what we think about them, but something happens…when they are alone they behave in one way and when they feel that somebody is watching, then they immediately become gentlemen! Albert Einstein was so shocked, because it meant that electrons have awareness of some kind. They are not just electric particles; they have their own consciousness.
Perhaps you are not aware that when you pass by the side of a tree it changes its behavior. It stands more erect, more beautiful, it releases more fragrance from the flowers. Somebody is coming by; it has to show itself as beautiful as possible.

I was teaching in a university, and by the side of my department there was a long row of a certain beautiful flower – gulmohar. That flower is not found in cold countries; it is a flower of very hot countries. And when it comes to blossom, then all the leaves disappear and only red flowers…it seems as if the whole tree has become aflame, afire. It is a very beautiful thing to see. The whole department was surrounded by gulmohar trees.
I used to park my car under one gulmohar tree, and it had become known to almost everybody that that gulmohar tree had to be left for my car, because I had been parking my car there for years. Even when I didn’t go to the university, I used to send my car! The car was parked – everybody was satisfied that I was in the university. I had told my driver, “Just enjoy the garden” – the university has a beautiful garden – “and after two, three hours, you take the car back, but first let the vice-chancellor see it.” The vice-chancellor’s office was just beside the tree and he could see from his window that my car was standing there.
It was he who brought to my notice…I had not been looking closely at the other trees, and one day just as I was parking my car he came out of his office, and stopped me saying, “It is a miracle! All the other gulmohar trees” – and there were nearly fifty trees – “have died for no reason at all; perhaps some kind of epidemic has attacked those trees. Only your tree is still alive, is still green, still blossoms. It must have something to do with you!”
I said, “It is strange…I had never thought about it.”
Seeing that other trees had died, I had inquired of the gardener, “What is the matter? Why have all the trees died?”
He told me, “I cannot figure it out. Every care has been taken, but they simply go on dying.”
The trees were just standing naked, without leaves, without flowers. The vice-chancellor jokingly said to me, “You must be doing something; only your tree is alive.”
Two years after I left the university I went there again, and the first thing I did was to look at my tree – but it was gone! I was going to speak, so the vice-chancellor had come to receive me. He said, “Look! I told you that you were doing something to that tree. It remained alive for seven years when all the other trees were dying, but the day you left the university your tree started dying. Within two months it was gone. We tried everything, but we could not save it. And I used to love that tree,” he said, “because it was just in front of my window.”
It is possible that the tree had become in some way intimate to me and just for friendship’s sake it remained alive for all those seven years.

Now, scientists are finding out that trees are very sensitive. When a woodcutter comes to cut the tree it trembles, and its trembling can be read on a graph, just like a cardiogram. A little instrument has to be attached to the tree, and it goes on showing how the tree is feeling – whether it is feeling happy, wholesome… The moment the tree sees the woodcutter coming…the woodcutter has not started cutting the tree but if he has in his mind the idea to cut the tree, the graph goes suddenly crazy, it loses all harmony. Just a moment before, everything was harmonious on the graph, and now the graph is going up and down. The tree must be trembling; its heart must be worried.
Strange – it was sensitive to the thought of the man. He has not done anything as far as cutting is concerned, only the idea was there. Perhaps the tree is more sensitive than we are. And if the woodcutter passes by without the idea, the graph remains the same.
Not only does the tree that he is going to cut become worried, concerned, other trees surrounding it also start feeling worried and concerned – because one of them is going to be harmed. It seems subtle vibrations from the mind of the man who is going to cut or not cut are being caught by the trees.
This whole existence is immensely sensitive.
Everything is made of consciousness.
Once you experience this universal consciousness, you are not there – you are left far behind. Hence the question of ‘subduing yourself’ and ‘arousing an attitude of great compassion’…. These statements by Ta Hui are absolute nonsense.
He is saying,
…and, arousing an attitude of great compassion.
The man of enlightenment does not have to arouse the attitude of compassion; he finds that it is already there. It comes with enlightenment as a by-product.
We have to practice it. If you want to be compassionate you have to discipline yourself, you have to practice…you have to practice against yourself, because you are basically violent and cruel. Deep down you are carrying all the animals that you have passed in the evolution.
But a man of enlightenment does not practice compassion. He has not even to think about compassion, he simply finds it. As his ego disappears and as he realizes the ultimate universal life force as his own – it is not that he is only a part of it… That is something very difficult to understand.
P.D. Ouspensky, in his great work about George Gurdjieff’s teachings, In Search Of The Miraculous, has a statement. There is a mathematics that we know – and Ouspensky was a mathematician by profession – where the part is never equal to the whole. That is simple mathematics. How can the part be equal to the whole? The part is always less than the whole.
But living with Gurdjieff, meditating with him, he states that there comes a moment when a higher mathematics becomes real, where the part can be equal to the whole and sometimes the part can be bigger than the whole. Looked at logically it is absurd, but looked at from a different perspective than logic, from the perspective of no-mind, I support it absolutely. There is a higher mathematics, which belongs to no-mind, where the part is the whole.
So when one disappears in the whole, it is not that he is only a part; he is one with the whole. He is the whole cosmos. The question of being compassionate to anybody does not arise – because there is nobody else left outside him! The trees are within him, the animals are within him, the oceans are within him, the stars are within him; everything that is is within him. To whom is he going to be compassionate? But he feels a tremendous compassion.
It is as if you are sitting in your room and nobody is there. If you are a man of love, although there is nobody in the room you will still be radiating love, you will still be radiating compassion; although there is nobody in the room, if you are a man of truth you will still be radiating truth.
So two things are to be remembered: the man of enlightenment finds that with enlightenment many things have come as by-products – and compassion is one of the most important. But there is nobody left toward whom he can be compassionate.
It is a strange, mysterious existence. When there are millions of people to be compassionate toward, it is so difficult for you; you have to practice it, you have to go through austerities, you have to discipline yourself, you have to torture yourself. And when the compassion comes to you on its own accord, there is nobody left to whom you can be compassionate!
These small things show whether the man is enlightened himself or is simply repeating words from other enlightened people. Ta Hui is saying, “subdue yourself” after enlightenment. It as if somebody comes and says to you when you have brought the light in, “Now throw out the darkness.” It is exactly that kind of statement. If the light is there… The darkness was only an absence of light; you cannot find it.

When God created the world, one day Darkness appeared before God, very grumpy and angry, and said to God, “You have to do something! Your Sun, from the morning till the evening, harasses me unnecessarily. Wherever I go, sooner or later he reaches and I have to run away. I cannot find rest, I cannot relax, I have to be continuously on guard. The Sun may come any moment.
“I have not done any harm to the Sun; in fact we have not even been introduced to one another. There is no question of enmity, we are not even friends! You just tell your Sun that this misbehavior – and that, too, with a lady – is very ungentlemanly! This primitive behavior has to be stopped.”
God was absolutely convinced that this should not be so. He said, “You should have informed me before,” and he immediately sent messengers to bring the sun into his court. The Sun was simply amazed to hear that some lady called Darkness has complained against him: “I don’t know any such lady – I have never come across her, I have never seen her! What harm can I do without seeing her?”
God was very angry, but the Sun said, “Before you become so angry and start shouting at me, please give me a chance to say something also. I don’t know any lady who is being harassed by me. The best course will be for you to bring that lady in front of me. At least I can see who the person is who is complaining against me.” And since then God has been trying… But he can get only one, either the Sun or the lady, but never both together in the court. So the case remains in the file.

You should not condemn the bureaucracies that exist in this world, where files move with such slow speed. Albert Einstein used to say that light has the greatest speed, and I say to you that files have the slowest speed. I don’t think that God will ever be able to produce both parties together in the court. The case cannot be solved.
It is exactly the same thing: when enlightenment comes, the ego has already gone out. When enlightenment comes, just as a shadow to it compassion comes in, truth comes in, beauty comes in, grace comes in, blissfulness comes in. All that you have been searching for and were never able to manage is just showered on you.
One of the disciples of Gautam Buddha – the first of his disciples to become enlightened – was Manjushree. The story is beautiful…one day he had been meditating in the early morning, and as the sun was rising in the cool breeze of the morning, he became enlightened. And the story says that the whole existence started showering flowers on him. What flowers? They cannot be just the flowers that we know; they are the flowers of compassion, of love, of beauty, of grace, of truth, of authenticity.
These flowers shower on you on their own accord. It is the whole existence rejoicing in your enlightenment, because your enlightenment is not only yours; it raises the consciousness of the whole existence higher. With each person becoming enlightened, the whole existence becomes more enlightened. The whole existence rejoices and celebrates.
Ta Hui has no idea of enlightenment and what happens as a by-product.
…subdue yourself, create the attitude of…compassion, create…skillful expedients whereby you can also subdue all sentient beings…
This too is very significant to understand.
Gautam Buddha has related many stories of his past lives, and they have such beauty and significance. In one of his past lives he heard about a man who had become enlightened; his name was Deepankar Buddha. The word deepankar means one who can light the candle of your being; the word lamplighter is the exact meaning of deepankar. Deep means lamp, and deepankar means lamplighter. Gautam Buddha was not enlightened in that life. Thousands of people were going to see Deepankar Buddha, and just out of curiosity he also went.
When he saw Deepankar Buddha – he had no intention… He had come there only out of curiosity, but the moment he saw the man and the beauty of the man – those deep eyes reminding him of the depth of oceans – and the field of a certain energy vibrating around the man…not knowing what he was doing, with tears rolling down from his eyes, he touched the feet of Deepankar Buddha.
He himself could not believe what he was doing, and why…? He had not come to touch his feet, and why were these tears coming and why was he feeling so immensely happy? Nothing visible had happened, but something invisible had touched his heart, the bells in his heart had started ringing. A subtle music had touched him.
And at that very moment, as he stood in front of Deepankar Buddha, Deepankar Buddha bowed down and touched the feet of Gautam Buddha – who was not enlightened in that life. He could not believe what was happening. He asked, “What are you doing? If I touch your feet it is perfectly right, I am ignorant. But you have attained to the ultimate consciousness – you are not supposed to touch my feet.”
And Deepankar Buddha said something that Gautam Buddha remembered when he became a buddha. The first thing that he remembered then was the statement of Deepankar Buddha of many lives before: “Don’t be worried. Yesterday I was also ignorant, today I am enlightened; today you are ignorant, tomorrow you will be enlightened. There is not much difference – it is only a question of time. When you become enlightened, remember.”
The moment somebody becomes enlightened, to him the whole existence becomes enlightened – at least potentially. He can’t see himself in a special position. And that’s what Ta Hui is trying to say – that you should create devices and methods whereby all other sentient beings can also become enlightened.
The really awakened man does nothing to enlighten anybody. His very presence certainly does miracles, his very being is magical, but as far as he is concerned, he himself is no more. Who is there to do anything?
On the last day of his life, Gautam Buddha said – when his disciples were paying tributes to him because then he was leaving his body – “Don’t feel grateful to me, because I have not done anything. In fact, since the day enlightenment happened I have not been in existence. Things have been happening around me – that’s another thing. But I am not the doer; the doer is dead, the doer has gone long before enlightenment entered.”
Things certainly happened, hundreds of people became enlightened around Gautam Buddha, but he was not doing anything to make them enlightened. He was just available, like a well. If you are thirsty you carry the water from the well and drink, but the well is not doing anything.
Ta Hui’s statements show very clearly that he has not tasted the experience itself – he has only heard about it. And then he says,
Old Yellow Face (Buddha) has said, “When the mind does not vainly grasp past things, does not long for things in the future, and does not dwell on anything in the present, then you realize fully that the three times are all empty and still.”
The statement of Buddha is right, but this sarcastic reference to Buddha as ‘Old Yellow Face’ is so ugly that it shows the mind of Ta Hui. Although Ta Hui is quoting Gautam Buddha, there seems to be no reverence. Intellectuals are very clever in criticizing, but are absolutely impotent as far as showing reverence is concerned. Criticism is very easy because it is very ego-fulfilling. Reverence is very difficult because it means you have to put your ego aside.
Ta Hui wants to pretend that he himself is an enlightened man, but still he cannot show reverence to Gautam Buddha. To call Gautam Buddha ‘Old Yellow Face’ is just unimaginable. But his ego is feeling hurt somewhere. In a very subtle way, from the back door, it is taking revenge.
The quotation of Gautam Buddha is beautiful:
“When the mind does not vainly grasp past things, does not long for things in the future, and does not dwell on anything in the present, then you realize fully that the three times are all empty and still.”
It is a very significant statement, particularly to us, because for the first time, on a scientific basis, time is no longer the same as it used to be. Since Albert Einstein, time has become the fourth dimension of space.
Time is still, just as space is still. It neither goes anywhere nor comes from anywhere. It is just our language that goes on saying that time is passing. In fact, we are passing, time stands still.
Time has no movement. There are not only scientific but logical difficulties. If time moves, for example just like a river…if time moves, then there must be something on both sides of the river, unmoving. The river moves only in contrast to two unmoving banks. If there are not two banks which are still, how can the river move?
Once in a while you may have been sitting in a train, with another train standing on the next track, and suddenly you feel that your train has started moving. Then you look at the platform, and you realize that your train is not moving because the platform is still there. The other train is moving. But if the platform was not there… Just think, if there was nothing on the other side – only empty space – how would you manage to know whether your train is moving or the other train is moving?
The example can be taken even further. If two trains in space, or two planes in space, are moving parallel in one direction, nobody will feel that there is any movement – because to feel the movement you need something static in contrast. If you say time is moving, you have to show against what.
Time is still; only the mind is moving.
These tenses – past, present and future – are not the tenses of time; they are tenses of the mind. That which is no longer before the mind becomes the past. That which is before the mind is the present. And that which is going to be before the mind is the future.
Past is that which is no longer before you.
Future is that which is not yet before you.
And present is that which is before you and is slipping out of your sight. Soon it will be past.
Buddha is saying: If you don’t cling to the past…because clinging to the past is absolute stupidity. It is no longer there, so you are crying for spilled milk. What is gone is gone! And don’t cling to the present because that is also going and soon it will be past. Don’t cling to the future – hopes, imaginations, plans for tomorrow – because tomorrow will become today, will become yesterday. Everything is going to become yesterday.
Everything is going to go out of your hands.
Clinging will simply create misery.
You will have to let go.
You cannot manage to prevent the process of things moving out of your sight, so it is better just to watch, just to witness, and let things be wherever they want – in the past, in the present, in the future. Don’t you be disturbed, because everything is going to fall into the past.
Only one thing is going to remain with you: that is your witnessing, that is your watchfulness. This watchfulness is meditation.
Mind is a clinger – it clings, it hoards, it possesses. In the name of memory it collects all the past. In the name of planning for the future it clings to hopes, desires, ambitions – and it suffers. Mind is continuously in tension, is continuously in anguish – always in a turmoil.
Buddha is saying: If you can just remain silent and a witness, every misery, every worry, every tension will disappear. And there will be a silence and a clarity that you had never even thought about. This clarity will bring you the awakening; it is witnessing that, as it matures, finally becomes the awakening.
Witnessing can be called the seed and enlightenment can be called the flowers. But begin from witnessing, and then it starts growing. Go on nourishing it, go on caring for it, go on watering it, strengthen it in every possible way – and one day it is going to blossom. That day will be the greatest day of your life.
You should not think about past events – whether good or bad.
This is commentary by Ta Hui on Buddha’s statement – and you can see the difference. You should not think about past events… Buddha is not saying anything about thinking; he is simply saying, don’t cling!…whether good or bad – Buddha is not saying anything about good or bad.
If you think, that obstructs the path.
Buddha is not talking about any obstruction to the path. His statement is very simple. He is saying if you don’t cling to past, present and future, then all is empty and still. There is nothing else to say. To add anything else would be superfluous.
You should not consider future events.
Now does Ta Hui think he is enriching Buddha’s statement
To consider them is crazy confusion.
He himself is in crazy confusion; Buddha’s statement was complete – impeccably complete. There is nothing to be added to it.
Present events are right in front of you: whether they are pleasant or unpleasant…
He is simply bringing in his own mind about good and bad, about pleasant and unpleasant.
…don’t fix your mind on them. If you do fix your mind on them, it will disturb your heart.
Now he is really in crazy confusion!
The witness is neither the mind nor the heart.
Mind is a division which thinks, and heart is another division of the same mind which feels. Feeling and thinking, thoughts and emotions…but witnessing is separate from both. Whether you are thinking, the watcher watches…a thought is passing by, or you are feeling angry – the witness still watches. An emotion is passing by, just like clouds pass and you see them.
You are neither the good nor the bad.
You are neither the pleasant nor the unpleasant.
You are neither the thought nor the emotions.
You are neither the mind nor the heart.
But Ta Hui says,
If you do fix your mind on them, it will disturb your heart. Just take everything in its time, responding according to circumstances, and you will naturally accord with this principle.
What principle? What principle is he talking about? Buddha has not given any principle. He has simply explained a simple thing: if you cling, you suffer; if you don’t cling, you attain to peace and silence.
Buddha is not a moralist or a puritan. He is not interested in what is good and what is bad. His whole interest is very simple, and that is: you should not be asleep. Spiritually, you should be awake and then everything else will be settled. You don’t have to do anything else.
Unpleasant situations are easy to handle…
Now this crazy fellow goes on….
Unpleasant situations are easy to handle; pleasant situations are hard to handle. For that which goes against one’s will, it boils down to one word: patience. Settle down and reflect a moment and in a little while it is gone. It is pleasant situations that truly give you no way to escape: like pairing magnet and iron, unconsciously this and that come together in one place.
It is good to reflect on the statements of those who have arrived home, but your reflections should make them in some way more rich. If you drag what they have said into a lower state, you are being very unjust. It is better not to say anything if you don’t know. But this is the problem with intellectuals: they have to say something. Whatever Ta Hui is saying is so ordinary, so meaningless, that it does not help you in any way to enter into the space of enlightenment. On the contrary, he starts bringing in things which will certainly confuse you.
It has to be very clearly understood that morality is not religion, although religion is morality. A moral person need not be religious, but the religious person is of necessity moral; he cannot be otherwise. A moral person need not even be concerned with religion: he may be an atheist, he may be an agnostic – still he can be moral. But the religious person has no possibility of being immoral. His very consciousness is enough to give him the right direction. He has not to depend on the precepts given by great religious founders or by religious scriptures; he has his guide in his own awareness.
And because he lives according to his own light, there is a joy in his living. His morality is not a burden. His morality is not something imposed on him. His morality is something like overflowing joy, overabundant rejoicing. He loves because he has so much love. He cannot hate because hate has disappeared from his being.

I am reminded of one very great woman – Rabiya al-Adabiya, a Sufi woman. A great Sufi mystic, Hassan, was staying with Rabiya. In the morning he wanted the holy Koran. He had not brought his own copy, thinking that Rabiya must have a holy Koran and that will do.
Rabiya gave him her copy. He opened it and he was shocked, because Rabiya had made many corrections in the holy Koran! To any fanatic religious person, to any fundamentalist, nothing can be more sacrilegious. A Mohammedan cannot think that you can correct God’s only messenger, and the last messenger. Now God is not going to send another improved edition of his holy scripture. The last one he sent was the holy Koran. Mohammedans say there is only one God; one prophet, Mohammed, and one holy scripture, the Koran. And this old woman, Rabiya, is making corrections – she has cut out a few lines completely!
Hassan said, “Rabiya, it seems somebody has spoiled your book.”
Rabiya said, “Nobody has spoiled my book. I have simply corrected it.”
Hassan said, “I cannot understand. I always thought that you were a great religious woman. I cannot conceive that you would do such a thing.”
She said, “I had to do it. Just look at what I have crossed out!” The sentence in the Koran was: “When you see the devil, hate him.” And she has crossed it out.
Rabiya said, “Since I have experienced my innermost being, I don’t have any hate left. Even if the devil stands before me, I have nothing to offer but love. I have to correct the Koran. It is my book; it has to be according to my experience! Mohammed has no monopoly. I will not tolerate anything in my book which is against my experience.”

A man of enlightenment is so full of love, so full of joy, that he shares it. Sharing comes to him without any effort – it is not an effort, it is not an action. That’s why people like Lao Tzu say “actionless action,” and “effortless effort.”
But people like Ta Hui cannot understand that. To them, “effortless effort” and “actionless action” will look like illogical, absurd statements. How can there be an actionless action? How can there be effort without any effort? But I know that once you are awakened, you don’t do anything – everything starts happening. It is just a spontaneous outpouring, just as roses come on rosebushes, without any effort.
Love and compassion, good and beauty, grace and blessings, simply go on and on coming out of the overfullness. Just as a raincloud showers without any effort, an awakened man showers also without any effort. And the beauty of no-effort – and yet tremendous happenings – is so majestic. It is the ultimate splendor in existence.
Gautam Buddha has said… For forty-two years continuously he was speaking, and at the end he says, “I have not spoken a single word.” And he is right, because he has not made any effort to speak. It was just a raincloud showering, it was a rosebush bringing roses with no effort, with no action. Buddha had to speak because he was so overfull. All that poetry, all that music, all that came out of him was simply spontaneous.
A moralist makes efforts; he tries to do good, he avoids doing bad. His whole life is continuously “Do this,” or “Don’t do that.” He is always split, and he is always worried about whether what he is doing is right…is it really right? Or, who knows? – it may not be right. The moralist acts out of confusion. He depends on others who themselves may have been confused.
The last words of Gautam Buddha on the earth were, “Be a light unto yourself. Don’t be bothered about what others say, don’t be bothered about traditions, orthodoxies, religions, moralities. Just be a light unto yourself.”
Just a small light is enough, and you can go on with that small light for ten thousand miles without any difficulty. Your light may be falling only four feet ahead of you – just go on moving. As you move, the light will be moving ahead, and if you can see four feet ahead, that’s enough. You can go as far as you want. You can go on an eternal pilgrimage with just a small light of your own.
Don’t live on borrowed light.
Don’t live on borrowed eyes.
Don’t live on borrowed concepts.
Live according to your own light, and your life will be, each and every moment, a greater joy, a greater blissfulness, a greater ecstasy.