---
title: The Last Testament Vol 3 01
series: The Last Testament Vol 3 01-30
talk_number: 1
url: https://oshoworld.com/the-last-testament-vol-3-01
language: English
duration: 01:39:13
author: INTERVIEW WITH THE WORLD PRESS
scraped_at: 2026-01-03T09:29:48.521339+00:00
---
Ma Yoga Pratima,
Rajneeshpuram, Oregon

Osho,
You have said that you are the new man that the world needs, and that this commune is a preparation for the arrival of the new man. Do you see that other people here are going to become, like you, the new man, or are you talking about a preparation for future generations?

I am never concerned about the future, neither about the past. My whole concern is the present. And when I say the New Man, I don’t mean a certain model, type, an ideal. By the New Man I mean a man without ideals, a man with his own individuality, not imitative, not a carbon copy of somebody else. So the New Man will not be like me or like anybody else. Everybody will be authentically himself.
One of the most fundamental psychological things has to be understood: equality is an illusion. Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels, Lenin, and other communist thinkers of the world have created almost a conviction in millions of people’s minds - not only those who are communist but also those who are not communist - that equality should be the goal. Only machines can be equal; man cannot be. If you want man to be equal, then you will have to destroy his humanity and make him a robot.
It is very simple: just as two faces are not the same, in the whole world even two fingerprints are not the same - and you want two beings to be the same? You don’t value the being more than the fingerprint even? A very absurd idea of equality has become widespread.
Why it became so influential can be understood very easily. Everybody feels inferior to somebody, either intellectually, financially or physically. In some way everybody carries deep down an inferiority complex, because he is continuously comparing himself with others. Naturally, somebody has more intelligence, somebody has more physical strength, somebody can run faster than you, somebody can swim better. It is impossible for anybody not to feel inferior if he starts comparing.
Even a man like Napoleon.you would not think that he would ever feel inferior. For what? He was one of the greatest conquerors, one of the greatest fighters and warriors in the world. But on one point he was very touchy. His height was only five feet, five inches - even his bodyguards were taller - and that hurt. That gave him pain, and he could not even say it to anybody.
One day he was trying to fix a picture on his wall, and the nail was a little high up, beyond his hand’s reach. His bodyguard said, “Sir, I can do it. I am higher than you.” Napoleon became so angry. He said, “Take your words back, otherwise I will kill you right now, here.” But he said, “What have I said?” Napoleon said, “You are taller than me but not higher than me. I can tolerate taller; but higher? - I cannot tolerate anybody.” He had touched his wound.
Even the people who have immense power in some way or other feel inferior when they start comparing. That leaves almost the whole of humanity feeling an inferiority complex. And this is the root cause why communism is so influential. It has nothing to do with economics, nothing to do with capitalism. It simply fulfills a deep desire in every man that everybody be equal. He feels gratified even to think that everybody is equal. Then there will be no wound, no hurt feeling, there will be no question of comparison.
Nobody has looked at communism from a psychological viewpoint. People have been studying communism only as an economic theory. It is not. Basically it is a psychological consolation to all those who are feeling inferior in any way. Hence more than half of humanity is already communist. Communism is the biggest religion right now and is growing fast, and will take over the world if we cannot create a New Man who has no inferiority complex.
The New Man will not be a communist, because he does not want to be equal to others. The New Man wants to be unique in himself, and wants everybody else also to be unique. A society of unique people - everybody unique in his own way - will be the richest society that has existed in the world.
Somebody is a painter, somebody is a poet, somebody is a scientist, somebody is a sculptor. They all have their own uniqueness. It does not matter what you do, all that matters is that everything you do has your fingerprint on it, and you have become a creator. There is no reason to compare. A painter is a painter and a poet is a poet. It is stupid that both start comparing. Then the painter becomes inferior because he is not a poet, and the poet becomes inferior because he is not a painter. And we have been living under this inferiority complex for thousands of years. So everybody is suffering - “Existence has not been compassionate towards me.”
Start looking at the uniqueness and drop the idea of equality, which is in every way impossible. Unless man is produced in a factory on an assembly line, there is no possibility of equality. And a man produced on an assembly line will not be a man; he will be just a machine.
The New Man will not be like me in the sense that he will not be my carbon copy. But in a way, in a very different way, he will be like me. I am independent; he will be independent. I am my own self; he will be his own self. I have never accepted anything just as a belief unless I have experienced it. Then there is no question of belief - I know it. So either I know something or I don’t know, there is nothing in between.
The believer is in between. He does not know, yet he pretends to know. You will find all these hypocrites assembled in churches, synagogues, temples, mosques, all over the world. They don’t know God and they are praying to him. They don’t know that any prayer has ever been heard, and still they are praying. They don’t know that any prayer has ever been answered, but still they are praying.
The New Man will be a seeker, not a believer. He will trust in inquiry, in doubt - and doubt is the only method that can lead you to the truth. Belief is a barrier, not a bridge. No believer has ever known the truth. His belief never allowed him to inquire. So in a very different sense, he will be like me.
I have doubted everything. I have never accepted anything because it is written in the holy scriptures, because the great founders of religions have said it, because great saints verify it. I have insisted my whole life that nothing else can prove it to me except my own experience. And when it comes as your own experience, it brings tremendous rejoicing, great blessings, flowering. Your being finds its home. The wandering is finished, you have arrived.
Now my wandering and your wandering will be different. The point where I started and the point where you will start will be different. I will arrive to my own innermost core; you will arrive to your innermost core. The ultimate experience of blossoming will be the same, but the path will be totally different. Everybody has to search and seek in his own way.
The way to truth is just like the sky. The bird flies but leaves no footprints. You cannot follow. There are no footprints. The inner sky is exactly the same, and everybody has to find his own way. It will be better to say the New Man makes his way. He does not move on a ready-made way. Hinduism, Christianity, Judaism, are ready-made ways, superhighways, comfortable - you need not bother - but they go nowhere. They go round and round the earth. You can go on moving on them for millions of lives and you will never reach to your own being, because that way is not connected to you. It is not yours.
The real seeker steps out from all these ready-made ways. He moves into the unknown. It is great excitement, great ecstasy. And every step that brings you closer to home also brings you peace that you have not known before, brings you love and compassion that are absolutely unknown to you. Closer and closer.and you start feeling a new music, a new poetry, a new song arising out of your own heart. Your every heartbeat becomes music.
These are the signs that home is coming closer. Your whole being becomes harmonious. You can feel in yourself a new coolness, freshness, aliveness - indications that the source of life is not far away. And when you are just coming, maybe a few more steps, suddenly your walk is no more a walk, it becomes a dance. Nobody has reached into his being in any other way except dancing. It is not up to you. Your feet start feeling the dance. The whole milieu around you makes you thrive, thrilled.
Yes, I am the New Man and I am preparing the way for you to become the New Man. That’s why I go on insisting that you keep yourself intelligent, meditative, silent. Keep yourself alert, aware. Change every stone on the path into a stepping-stone. Don’t think, “Now the stone is blocking the way.” No stone blocks the way. You just have to know that every stone can be turned into a stepping-stone.
Just now you have passed through a fascist, poisonous time. Those who can make it a stepping-stone will be grateful for it. There is no need to be afraid, to be worried, to be frustrated that it happened. Rather than wasting time over why it happened, use the energy to make it a stepping-stone to go higher. As I see it, the commune looks purer. It looks fresh. People look unburdened. These are good signs. A few people look angry that they have been deceived; that is stupidity. Now, what has happened has happened. Anger is wasting your energy; that is hitting your head against the stone. That is not going to help. A few people look as if they are lost, because they had become dependent on a fascist kind of order. They needed the order, they needed moms, and they look like helpless children whose moms are lost.
This is a good opportunity. The moms have escaped. It is time that you become independent. Drop this childish helplessness. Take responsibility and prove that independently you can do better than under a repressive regime, that you can be more creative if you are not being humiliated, dragged, forced to do something. But a few people are feeling helpless because unless somebody is on their neck, continuously nagging them, they cannot work. They have become addicted to nagging just as people become addicted to smoking.
I know people whose wives are nothing but a pain in the neck. They know, and they have been telling horrible stories to me about their wives, and when their wives go for a few days to their parents’ house, just within two or three days that man completely forgets all the horribleness of the woman’s nagging and everything, and he starts hankering that she should come back. I was puzzled. I have seen many friends in the same position, in the same vicious circle, and I have asked them, “What happens to you? You are left free, now enjoy! Before you were saying you could not enjoy because the wife was so horrible, it was impossible to enjoy. Now why are you looking sad?” And they will say, “We feel very much alone. Something is missing. Without the wife, the house seems to be horrible.”
I said, “This is great! With the wife it was horrible; without the wife it is horrible. Then what do you want?”
They have become dependent. The wife was not only nagging them, she was taking care of them also. They don’t know where their shoes are, they don’t know. I know people who don’t know how to put on their necktie. Only the wife knows, because she has been doing it. Everything is in a mess. They have completely forgotten what pain she was giving them, and now they remember only the best part.
So there are people who have forgotten that they were not happy under a strict system where there was no question of independence, total surrender was asked. They were unwilling to do it, but they were doing it. Now you are free, and you don’t know what to do. You will have to learn that you can work out of your own love, that there is no need for surrender. You need not become a slave; you can remain a master. But certainly remember that the quality of the work of a master must be higher than the quality of the work of a slave. That’s the only criterion to prove whether you are a slave or a master.
The New Man will live out of his own love, creativity and joy, without depending on any father figure. He will not need a God. God is a projection of the sick minds of people who want a permanent father. These human fathers are not reliable; today they are alive, tomorrow they may die. You cannot trust them. They need a father who is eternal. They need a father who is all-powerful. They need a father who knows everything, past, present, future. That gives them great consolation.
Now a few people are angry at me. Why did I not stop it?.But I am not omniscient; I didn’t know what was happening. I don’t know even what is happening in the other room. I can just hear the noise; what is cooking, I don’t know. Something must be cooking. But I don’t pretend to be an omniscient father; neither am I a peeping tom, that I should go on looking into everybody’s bathroom keyhole watching what is happening, who is doing what. I never go out of my own room.
They are angry. The reason is that they must have been unconsciously projecting the father figure on me. Please, don’t make me a curtain to project anything you want. I am nobody’s curtain. I am not a screen, that you can project any idea on me and then feel angry because I am not behaving according to you. When had I said to you that I will behave according to you? I don’t expect you to behave according to me, neither do I want you to expect me to behave according to you. Here we are agreed only on one point, and that is the independence of everybody; there is no other agreement.
The New Man will have communes, but the agreement will be freedom. You can look into my eyes and you can see my silence, my depth. You can feel my presence, my joy, my song. But you are not to repeat anything. I am simply indicating to you that what has happened to me can happen to you. There will be differences, there will be uniquenesses. I may be just a marigold flower and you may be a lotus - so don’t imitate me. You may be a rose and I am just a marigold, a very poor flower who has nothing. But whoever named it marigold must have had great insight; it is the poorest flower, but there is great merriness, great joy in it - and it is pure gold, twenty-four carat.
One never knows what is hidden in you. Something certainly is hidden - everybody is carrying a being - you have to search and bring it into light and let your fragrance take its wings into the air.
I am the New Man. You have to be the New Man. I am not ordering you, I am simply saying so loudly so you can hear. And we have to create more opportunities for the New Man for more people around the world.
The New Man will not be a politician. The New Man will have no desire for power. The New Man will not create people like Adolf Hitler or Joseph Stalin or Mao Zedong. The New Man will not create heroes as in the past, because everybody will be a hero. With the New Man, history is finished. You cannot write history with a New Man. Otherwise it will be such a big job, because every man will be a unique man and he has to have as much space as anybody else.
In the old world, history was possible. You will be surprised to know that before India became a slave country there was no such thing in India as history. Mohammedans started writing history about Mohammedan kings, then Britishers started writing history about the British rule, but before India was independent there was no history. A country so ancient that they had discovered mathematics, astronomy. They had discovered the most scientific language in the world. They had written the best literature, the best poetry. They had created the best architecture - temples, palaces, memorials, statues which have no comparison anywhere, so alive that it seems the stone statue is just going to breathe again, or perhaps is deceiving you by stopping its breath. So alive!
But they had no history, and nobody has bothered why. My own understanding is that there were so many unique people that to write about all of them would have been an impossible task. So they found a different way of writing history which was called Puranas, the ancient tales. They don’t write about twenty-four tirthankaras of the Jainas, they only write about Mahavira. But in Mahavira’s life everything essential about all the twenty-four tirthankaras is represented. Nothing is missing, so what is the point of writing about twenty-four people? Because Adinatha must have been ten thousand years ago, they write about Mahavira, the best, the last, whom they knew more than any of the others.
If you go into a Jaina temple you will see twenty-four statues of twenty-four tirthankaras, but you will be puzzled: they are all alike, exactly the same. It is impossible, twenty-four persons exactly the same - the same size of nose, the same eyes, the same long earlobes - because a Jaina tirthankara’s lobes should touch the shoulders - the same height, the same type of athletic body. Strange. Even Jaina scholars cannot see any difference, so they have made small symbols underneath every statue. Those symbols indicate whose statue it is. For example, under Mahavira is the symbol of the lion. So any statue with the symbol of the lion is Mahavira’s. You just change the symbol, and no scholar.
In my neighborhood, in the same university where I was teaching, lived the best Jaina scholar of India, Doctor Hiralal Jain. I took him a statue of Mahavira which was presented to me, but I erased the symbol. He was an old man, and really wise, knowledgeable. I asked Doctor Hiralal, “Whose statue is this?” He said, “But where is the symbol?” I said, “I have erased the symbol. I want to know from you, is there any way to find out whose statue this is?” He said, “You are strange. There is no way. Scholarship cannot help at all in this matter, because all twenty-four statues are really exactly the same.” I asked him why they are the same. He said, “That, too, is beyond me, because no Jaina scriptures give the answer why they are the same. Do you have any idea?”
I said, “I always have some idea. My idea is that these statues don’t represent real people, they represent qualities. And all the twenty-four tirthankaras are bound to have similar qualities. For example, this earlobe. Everybody who is not a Jaina laughs - why such a long earlobe? It is never seen anywhere.”
In my whole life I have come across only one man, but even his were not perfect. They were not touching his shoulders, just almost. I said, “You just massage your earlobe. Try, so it starts touching your shoulders.” He said, “Why? Already people call me donkey, and you want me to make my earlobes longer!” I said, “If you can manage to make your earlobe touch your shoulder, then I can declare you the twenty-fifth tirthankara of the Jainas. You will be immensely respected.” He said, “I don’t want to get into any trouble. Your suggestions always lead to trouble. You just forgive me and don’t tell anybody.” Otherwise I have not seen anything like that. But why do all Jaina tirthankaras have such long ears? “To me,” I told Doctor Hiralal, “they are symbolic. It is symbolic art. These long ears show that the man was capable of listening. People are dead they don’t listen. And these people must have listened to the ultimate music of life. How to represent it in marble?
“This is a beautiful symbol. The eyes are closed. That means these people are not seeing anything, that all thoughts have disappeared, that there is nothing to see. The closed eyes are symbolic that there is nothing to see. The long ears are symbolic that they have started hearing the ultimate music of existence.”
He said, “Your explanation looks plausible and I cannot argue with you, but you don’t have any support from the scriptures.” I said, “I don’t need it. What I am saying is self-explanatory, it needs no support from scriptures. And what I am saying is not a scholarly statement; what I am saying is my own experience. With closed eyes I have been in a state when you don’t see anything, but in that moment you hear for the first time a very celestial music surrounding the whole existence. So I am saying it on my own authority.”
Jainas never wrote the history of the twenty-four tirthankaras, but only about one. And they cannot call it history because in Mahavira’s life they have included all twenty-four tirthankaras’ lives too. All that was essential in twenty-four lives, all that was meaningful, they have combined. Mahavira is just a representative, a symbol. Just the way the statues are symbolic, Mahavira’s life is symbolic. So they don’t call it history, they call it ancient tales, old stories. But they are not fiction, they relate to reality.
The New Man will be the end of the world of heroes. Alexander the Great will not be possible any more. Even if he comes riding on his horse, people will be simply entertained. He will look just like Don Quixote. Nobody is going to bother about Alexander the Great.
History ends with the old man. Heroes end with the old man. The New Man will write symbolically. He will write about the New Man and his qualities in a symbolic way - not about separate persons, which brings comparison, which makes someone big, high, holy, someone a sinner, inferior, a nobody. The old man was living vertically, in a hierarchy. The New Man will live horizontally, with no hierarchy. Everybody is doing his best and doing what he wants to do, and doing it not just as work but as worship.

You have said that you love to disturb people because only by disturbing them can you make them think. To what extremes would you go to disturb people?

It depends on the people, not on me. For example, I will not have to go far to disturb Avirbhava. It is easy. She tries, but again and again she gets disturbed. So it depends on the people.
There are people with very thick skins: they really need Zen hits; perhaps then they may open their eyes and see what is going on. But I can go to any length. If the person is stubborn and has decided not to be disturbed, then I can go to any length. Until he is disturbed, I don’t stop. I don’t have any limitation, and I am disturbing him only so that he can wake up. And I know, once he wakes up he will be grateful. In his sleep he may be angry.
I am reminded of Immanuel Kant, one of the great philosophers of Germany. He was very particular about his routine. People used to fix their clocks just seeing him, because at an exact time he would go for a morning walk, up to the exact mile, and he would come back every day at the same time. At the same time he would take his food, at the same time he would go to the university, at the same time go back home, at the same time he would go to bed. And people knew - it was a small place - that Kant is going to the university, so what should be the time? And immediately everybody would set his clock right. Your clocks can be wrong, but Kant cannot be.
Once it happened that it had just rained, and there was too much mud outside. One of his shoes got caught by the mud when he was going to his classroom. He did not wait to take his shoe out. He entered his class with one shoe on and one foot naked. The students were puzzled because he was walking as if he were lame or had got his leg fractured. Everybody gathered and they asked, “What has happened? We don’t see any fracture or anything, just one of your shoes is missing.” He said, “I know. It got stuck in the mud, but I did not want to be late. If I had taken the shoe out, I would have been a few seconds late. And this I cannot allow. I will take the shoe while going back.”
This man Immanuel Kant had a servant. No other servant remained with him because he was such a difficult man. If his tea was even one second late, he would make so much fuss. Every night at ten o’clock he would go to bed. Even if he was talking to somebody, he would not say goodnight to him; he would just jump into the bed and pull the blanket over him. And the visitor could not believe what was happening. The servant would come and say, “The master has gone to sleep. You can go now. It is the exact time. He cannot even say goodnight, that will make him late; so you can just go.” He gave strict orders for his servant to wake him early in the morning, at four o’clock. And it was cold.
He was a hard worker, working the whole day writing treatises - one of Germany’s most significant thinkers. The orders were, “You have to wake me, and pull me out of the bed. I may shout, I may scream, I may beat you. You can beat me, but don’t leave me. You have to wake me up, because at that time I want to sleep. So I am making you aware beforehand: at that time I will make every effort to go to sleep, and you have to make every effort to wake me up.”
Only one servant remained with him for many years. He was really a strong man. Kant used to hit him, but he was also good at hitting. He would hit even better. And every morning this wrestling would happen. But till Kant said, “Enough!” the servant would say, “No, you go into the bathroom, and I will take up your blanket and your mattress, so you cannot go back to sleep again while I’m working outside in the kitchen.” And after the bath he would come to his senses and come to the servant and thank him, and would be very grateful. “You are the only man. So many servants.just one day and they are finished.”
They would say “This is not the kind of job that we want to do. You yourself say ‘Wake me,’ and then you start beating us. And it does not look right to beat the master - we are just servants - and when we allow you to sleep, you wake up later on and start shouting and screaming and making the whole neighborhood gather, asking, ‘What is the matter?’ And Kant would say, ‘The matter is that this man deceived me. For what am I paying him?’“
The situation is the same whatever you do. I am going to wake you up. You yourself have asked me; it is not my own decision to wake you up. I never interfere in anybody’s life. You became sannyasins; that was an agreement that you are going to be with me and I am going to wake you up whatsoever happens. So just keep on remembering the agreement. And I can go to any length, there is no limit for my efforts. It all depends on you.
For example, I told Avirbhava that she will wake up very soon. It won’t take much time. But there are people who think they are already awake; then it is very difficult to wake them up, then it is going to be a hard struggle. But I will create every device. Howsoever hard I may look, whatever I am doing is just out of my love for you. It is not out of hardness but out of my softness.

When asked if Sheela was heir apparent to your spiritual kingdom, you replied that there is no power and no kingdom. How can a community run with no power and no kingdom?

Power is the word which has to be dropped by the New Man and replaced by love. Love has its own power, but it is not the power a politician has. It is not the power a rich man has. It is not the power of nuclear weapons. But still it is power, and more powerful than any weapons in the world, nuclear or not nuclear.
The New Man will live according to the laws of love. Kingdom is an old word with ugly associations. It reminds one of kings and kingdoms; it is the same political game. No, the New Man will have a paradise but not a kingdom; a commune, but not a society; a loving power.
If five thousand people in this commune can just be a little courageous and be loving to each other, without any conditions, you will see here what I mean. A new kind of power arises and a new kind of paradise where nobody is higher, ruling over others, where everybody is a king.
When everybody is a king you cannot call it a kingdom. It is a commune of kings and queens, but with no hierarchy. Of course, functionally somebody may be working as your president, somebody working as your plumber, but both are necessary and both are serving the same commune with the same love.

When asked how ordinary a man you are, your reply once was, “Extraordinarily!” what does extraordinarily ordinary mean?

Exactly that.

In a recent interview, you said that if the hell’s angels came here, you would welcome them. They’re known as one of the most violent motorcycle gangs in America. If we would welcome them, why do we have all this security?

Our security will welcome them. Do you think I am going to welcome them? I will not welcome even Ronald Reagan if he comes here. Our security will welcome them, and will welcome them the way they need to be welcomed, the way they deserve to be welcomed. Everybody according to his need.
If somebody comes with love, we will welcome him with flowers, and if somebody comes with hate, we will welcome him with bullets - because we are fair people, we cannot be unfair to anybody. So when I say that we will welcome anybody who comes here, that does not mean that our welcome will be the same. It will depend who comes and what is the purpose, what is the intention of the person who comes here.
We are not a suicidal group. This is not Jonestown. If somebody wants to destroy the commune, he has to understand that the commune cannot be destroyed so easily. We will fight for every inch, for every sannyasin’s life. And it will be great excitement, something new! One gets bored doing the same routine thing, so something new once in a while brings excitement. But our motto is tit for tat.

============================================================

George Paravanani, Freelance German TV, ZDF TV, Germany; Richard Wagner, CBS Nightwatch, National TV; Scott Miller, NBC, channel 8, Portland, Oregon

Glad to meet you.

Osho,
I consider it a great privilege to be sitting once again opposite to you. I have made a commitment to Isabel that from the moment I start the first question I have exactly one hour, so I would like to be very precise and go to the point.
Let me start this off with a quotation from Eternal India by Indira Gandhi, in which she said, “The rishis conceived of a glow that was brighter than a thousand suns. They sang of the circle of birth and death, of creation and destruction, of the many ends which culminated in new +beginnings.”
Now, the events of the last week starting Friday, September 13th - funny, Friday, September 13th! - have led to a lot of attention here, but what interests me personally is not so much the scandal but your teachings and what the future is going to be.
First of all, I would like to ask you to tell me as precisely and concisely as possible the essence of your teachings; and secondly, if it has changed from 1970 - when I sat opposite you, and at the first interview ever for Western television - until today.

The first thing, you have to remember is to be precise if you want me to be precise. This is unfair.

I beg your pardon, it is not my intention at all to be unfair. I.

No. Then it will not be my intention, too.

I forgot to say one thing.

So just remember it.

Okay.

Never again be imprecise.

Okay.

Just be precise and to the point.

Okay. I apologize. And I was made a little nervous because of all this [inaudible].

I understand.

I apologize.

A nervousness when one starts speaking, that I understand.

I also want to say - I also want to say that I have come here not so much first as a journalist but as a countryman, as an admirer, as a well-wisher.

I know.

.who has read a lot of your books.

I know, and I can see love, immense respect in your eyes.
One thing: everything has changed since your first interview. To me life is a permanent change; only change is unchanging, everything else changes. If you are alive you change, if you are dead, of course you cannot change. The moment you stop changing you have died. Many people die nearabout thirty years of age; then they may live fifty years more, but that is a posthumous life. I will live to the very last breath. I will go on changing, I will go on growing. There is no limit to it. There may be a limit to the sky, but there is no limit to the consciousness.
Secondly, you want [to know] what is my teaching. It is very simple. The essential core of my teaching is: no belief, no dogma, no creed, no religion, nothing borrowed. But only that which you have experienced has to be trusted; everything else has to be doubted. Just as other religions have their foundation in belief, I have my foundation in doubt. My foundation is exactly the foundation science has: doubt until you find something indubitable.
Science moves outwards; I move inwards. This inward movement I call meditation. You have to take three simple steps for this inward movement, and the fourth happens on its own accord.
The first step is observing all your activities; that is your body and its acts - walking, chopping wood, drawing water from the well. Remain a witness. Don’t do it like a robot.

May I interrupt?

No. No interruption.
Second, when you have become capable of watching and witnessing your body and its activities, then you can take the second step: watch the activities of your mind - thoughts, dreams, imagination. Just remain a witness, as if you are standing by the side of the road and a procession of thoughts is passing on the road. You are not part of it. You are just a mirror reflecting, without any judgment - because the mirror has no judgment. A beautiful face.the mirror does not say, “Great!” An ugly face.the mirror does not say, “My God!” The mirror simply reflects whatsoever comes before it. Exactly one has to become a pure witness, without any judgment, evaluation, good, bad. Then a strange experience happens: as your witnessing grows, thoughts start lessening. In the same proportion, if you have ten percent witnessing, then there are ninety percent thoughts; if you have ninety percent consciousness, awareness, then there are only ten percent thoughts. A hundred percent witness, then there is just pure nothingness. This is the state of no-mind, this is the door to the third and the last step.
Now watch subtle emotions, moods. Thoughts are not so subtle. Moods - a certain shadow of sadness, a certain joy.
One is concerned with the body, the second with the mind, the third with the heart. And when you become capable of watching the third too, the fourth happens on its own accord. Suddenly a quantum leap and you are standing exactly at the very center of your being, where there is nothing to be aware of. Awareness is aware of itself, consciousness is conscious of itself. And this is the moment of ultimate ecstasy, samadhi, enlightenment, or whatever name one prefers to give it; but this is the ultimate, there is nothing above it. There is no way to go beyond it, because wherever you go beyond it you will still be a witness. If you start witnessing the witness, you have not gone above it; you are still a witness. So the witness is the very end of the inner journey, you have come home.
And this is my whole teaching. It is absolutely scientific; it needs no belief, it needs only experimentation. And I don’t ask anybody to trust me. I ask only to experiment and experience.
I know that it will happen to you because it has happened to me, and I am just as ordinary a human being as you are. I don’t claim to be a prophet or a savior or an incarnation of God. I don’t claim any speciality. I am just exactly like you. The only difference is you are still asleep, and I am awake. It is only a question.sooner or later you will be awake too.
So there is no need to worship me, there is no need to adore me. If you really love me, that’s enough for you to move into the experiment. I will stand as a guarantee that it happens. I will be your encouragement, but I will not be your savior. I will not take the responsibility, but I will do my best to shake you and wake you up.

Can I ask something?

Yes, now you can do.

Okay. Thank you very much. That, in essence, gives your teaching and it has already taken away some of my questions.
In one of your lectures you had already said - and I quote: “The only consistency in me is my inconsistency. I always contradict myself.” So a person has a right to change.”
I want to let you know that ever since 1969 or ‘70 when you were with fifteen followers in a little apartment in Peddar Road in Bombay.a friend of mine called Deracharya[sic] came and begged me four or five times - I was on a different assignment, and after four or five times, on some instinct I came, I did the interview with you, and after the interview you took me in your arms and said, “Come on, join me and go to the West and let my teachings be known.” And already since then there has been a love affair between you and me, and it has always been there. But I go with Victor Hugo in saying that you have the right to say what you feel, and I must have the right to say what I feel - even when we have mutual love.

That’s perfectly true.

I’ll defend that right to my death. Yes.
I love a lot of your teachings, and one of the things - and I had come back to Pune again, and lived fourteen days there and interviewed Laxmi. And I made a film called Ecstasy in Orange - I gave you a copy, I’m sure you never got to see it.

Mm, mmm.

I would suggest that - I left it last time when I was here. And I also want to congratulate you basically on what has happened in September, because when I came here in November 1984 I was here two days, I was happy to get out alive. As soon as my cameraman and I left, I said, “My God, thank God, never again am I going to this place, not for a million dollars.”
And I’ve come because I wanted to find one answer. I have studied your teachings. I’m also enlightened. Many of these people don’t know the meaning of enlightenment, and you finally cleared them up. They asked that if you were enlightened then you should have known all about Sheela. Enlightenment obviously doesn’t mean omni - omnipotent and knowing everything, being able to know the complete future. That already I know. So I have been enlightened a little bit in [inaudible] and I have to thank you a lot for many things.
But I would like to come to one point.

Before you come to that, I will have to interrupt you again.

Yes sir.

Again you are not being precise, and you have made so many points which need answers and I will not have time to answer them. And you wanted me to be precise.
And this has been my experience with almost every journalist, that they go on saying things and want precise answers, but don’t have any precise questions. It is so stupid. A question has to be very precise. Now, what you are saying is so absurd. Either you are enlightened or you are not enlightened; you cannot be a bit enlightened; that is not possible, that has never happened and can never happen. What do you mean by a bit enlightened? That means a bit unenlightened, too.

Yes.

Both cannot exist together.

I only meant to say I was starting on the journey.

That is a totally different thing; that is not a bit of enlightenment.

Okay; agreed.

And I can see you are not even a bit enlightened. And you are just thinking to start the journey, you have not started yet.
So just be clear, honest and sincere.

Okay. That was my total intention. Okay, now I put precise questions.
First question is: On Friday, September 13th, Sheela prepared and she left. And according to - now I’m quoting.

Mm, mmmm.

.The Oregonian: “The future of this community” - this utopia that you have started here is one of the greatest achievements that any human being has done. And there’s a quotation which says, “Everybody leaves footprints in the sand.” You have left your footprints in the sand. This is something incredible that has happened. Now everybody is asking the question - this interests not only me: What is Osho going to do? because obviously there is a suspense. I see them that - there’s a relief. I feel much happier here than last time. There’s a relief. People are happy. But there is doubt, there is an air of - a vibration of suspense. You hold the cards in your hand, if I may quote these people. What - if I may be allowed to ask - are your future plans? What is going to happen?

I never think of the future. The present is enough for me. Sheela’s going is an immense relief to the commune. It is a great freedom to my people. Naturally freedom brings its own problems. Slavery is less complex; somebody else is always responsible, you are not. You are ordered to do something, you do it - whether it is right or wrong, that is not your responsibility. Freedom means you are responsible for its being right; if it is not right then you will be responsible. You cannot throw the responsibility on somebody else.
So freedom is always a risk. That’s why most of the countries have chosen dictatorship of some kind or other. Even if they call themselves democracies it is only in name; the basic structure is dictatorial for the simple reason that they are afraid that the people cannot take the great responsibility of freedom.
But this will settle, there is no problem in it. These people are all intelligent people. They’re all graduates, most of them have master’s degrees, a few are PhDs, a few are DLitts; many are psychologists, many are doctors, all are well-qualified. Professionally they have been successful in life; just out of love for me they have dropped their success, their professions, and have come into this desert to create a utopia, an oasis.
Sheela was a hindrance. She was creating what every power-lusty person creates: hostility amongst the neighbors. Adolf Hitler writes in his autobiography that unless you create hostility amongst your neighbor nations, you can never become strong; keep people always afraid that the enemy is going soon to attack, soon you will be destroyed. That fear will keep them strong and ready to order and surrender and trust and believe anything the leader says.
I was silent for three-and-a-half years and in isolation. That gave her an opportunity. These people love me; they have nothing to do with Sheela, Sheela means nothing to them. She was just a waitress in a hotel, but I saw in her a few very important things: she was very practical, very pragmatic, very clever - and that was needed to create this commune. It was absolutely essential in the beginning. And she has contributed wholeheartedly. But only in the beginning she was useful. As the commune started growing, taking roots, she became dangerous - and this is one very important thing to understand, that a person may be useful to a certain limit, and beyond that he can become harmful, he can be dangerous. She was useful up to a point. She made the commune strong, she made the commune self-sufficient. She made the commune feel protected, unafraid. But then, by and by, she started the unconscious human urge, lust for power.
And she was doing everything in my name. These people were doing everything because of me. I was not available, she was representing me. So whatsoever she wanted to do, just she had to say that “Osho wants it,” and my people did it.
And whatever she wanted to report to me, she reported; whatever she never wanted to report to me, she never reported. And she was the only communication.
When things became too much, she became afraid of three other persons who were also able to approach me - my physician, my dentist, my caretaker. She became afraid that these people might start informing me that “Sheela is doing something not according to Your wish, that the meditation commune is turning into a concentration camp.” At that point she started to think how to kill these three people. She poisoned two of them, and when she poisoned them then it became clear for me that now I have to come out of my isolation and start speaking again.
And the moment I started speaking again, Sheela started wandering to other communes in Europe, in Australia, in Japan, in Singapore, and she was rarely here. She did not want to face me. Even when she would come here, she would pretend she was sick and she was afraid she would infect me, so she would not come to see me.
Even the last time she came, she pretended that she had a cold, so that she would wait three, four days, and when her cold is gone she will come to see me. But she wrote a note to me, that, “Now I don’t feel excited coming here. I feel more excitement in Europe, more excitement in Australia, but I don’t feel any excitement here.”
I told the person who had brought the message, her secretary, that, “Give Sheela my message that, ‘Watch and find out the reason. The reason is simply that because now I’m speaking myself, your function as a representative is finished. Your face will disappear from the television; your voice will not be heard on the radio. And in these three-and-a-half years you have got a very swollen head. That’s why you don’t feel excited here. And if you want, for an experiment, I can come to Europe and you will not feel excited there too - I can come to Australia or anywhere. Because there you are receiving respect because you represent me, so if I myself come to Germany, then who is going to bother about you?’”
That she understood clearly, and rather than staying three days and face me, she escaped the next day and took away twenty of her intimate colleagues who were conspirators against the commune in many crimes. And as she left, people started opening their mouths. Before they were afraid.

Okay. Here I would like to ask two questions with your kind permission.
According to the reports in The Osho Times and in the papers, she was sent off at the airport with a song. Obviously they knew that she was leaving. Why didn’t you stop her? You obviously had the authority to stop her.

I had no idea that she was leaving. She left at a time when I always go for a ride. She left at four o’clock.

In a plane?

In a plane.

In your plane?

Yes, in my plane. And the people had no idea that she had resigned.

Well, they were helping packing up her clothes and.

Yes, because they had no idea. She had not informed anybody.

.that she was leaving?

That she was leaving, that she was leaving forever.

Well, she said, “Osho is only interested now in jewelry and not in the thing; I’m leaving.”

That she said only to those twenty people who were leaving with her.
But the commune was absolutely unaware that she was leaving forever. And then, too, only forty people were there out of five thousand people.

And some of these forty people are still here.

Yes; there is no problem in it. It is understandable. She has been working here for three-and-a-half years with all these people, and she had done immense work. She may have committed many crimes, but she has done much good too. It is not that everything she did was wrong, and the people who had worked with her, many may have started respecting her, loving her, but out of five thousand people, only forty people were there. So that means only twenty people were there to give her a send-off; twenty were going with her.

When did you know that she had left?

I knew when I came back from my ride. Every day I go at two o’clock for a ride in the forest, in the mountains. When I came back then I came to know that she had left, and I was informed that she has left forever. And it was told to me by her second, and she wanted that her second should be made the president of the commune. I said, “I will have to think over it.”.Because if she could deceive and she could commit all these crimes, to put her second person. “You have been with her for three-and-a-half years, and you never informed me about anything going wrong. I will have to think about it.”
The next day in the morning she left.

When did you discover the tape recorders, the hidden passage? How did all that happen? I mean, it’s almost like a, you know, Shakespearean novel or a suspense crime story, a Sherlock Holmes thing.

It is a crime story, but there is no suspense in it. It is very simple. While she was in power she had put in every power post - we have many corporations, it is a big phenomenon. We have put two hundred million dollars into the commune to develop it. We have seven or nine corporations. So she has put presidents, secretaries of her own, in each corporation. In three and a-half years, slowly slowly she managed all those people who were of independent mind, who were more intelligent than her, who were more capable than her.to harass them in some way or other so that they had to leave.
The vice-chancellor of the university left, the chancellor of the university left. The woman who had collected thirty-three million dollars - the initial money that started the commune - she had to leave. Sheela forced her to leave when she took all power from her hands. It was so insulting that she had to leave.
Slowly slowly she has dropped all the people who could be suspected of going against her. So naturally the people who had left were simple, innocent people who had come here just to live with me in peace and not to get into any power politics.
So when she left, and all the gang of twenty people - who were all criminals. I will tell you what crimes they had committed. When they all left, people started coming on their own.

This is where your critics outside are going to ask you the following question.

Yes.

You’re one of the most courageous men that I know, and for the simple reason: You have dared - even in India, in those days, when you were not that powerful and that not well-known - to go against Christianity, Judaism, Jainism, every religion. You showed a remarkable amount of courage, and yet - things I would never have the guts. Okay.
But, now they’re going to ask you either - these three people were close to you: your doctor, your dentist, and your caretaker; they have been with you since India?

Mm, mmm.

And if you had educated them and brought them up to a sense of responsibility, then they should have - if they were your servants and if they loved you - overcome this fear and informed you of what was happening here. And indirectly, are you willing to take part responsibility for the phenomenon Sheela and what happened?

No responsibility. And the reason why my people could not inform me was that they were also as much uninformed as I myself.
Sheela cut my whole house and the people who lived in the house off from the commune. Even the guards on my house were not allowed to talk to the people of the house.

Your dentist, or your daily - your - or what is the lady’s name who is your nurse? She saw you daily.

Yes. They are living with me in the same house. And Sheela managed that she. She was clever. She managed that my doctor should not be part of the medical center.

But he was poisoned. He felt that he was poisoned.

That’s when I started speaking, when he was poisoned. He was poisoned in a meeting. First he was poisoned at Sheela’s house.

How many months ago? How many weeks ago?

Just a few weeks ago.

So then why didn’t he tell you immediately?

It was impossible, even for him. He felt something strange. He had taken just a cup of coffee - and you don’t immediately suspect that somebody will poison you. And in a commune where you are completely devoted to the welfare of all, he could not even imagine that he would be poisoned.
My caretaker was also poisoned the same way, a cup of tea. Even she could not think.

Even you got an injection or a needle or a pin or something, is that right?

No, my physician got that. But my milk was poisoned, and they were poisoning it so slowly, with such minute doses, that its effects would come only after years so that my death seems to be natural.

I would like to quote one of.

Just first.because your question is not answered and it will remain in your mind. These people could not inform me for the simple reason. Sheela stopped the dentist from going to the dentistry because he works on my teeth, so it is better that he should do editing in the house and just take care of my teeth.

So he’s with you all the time?

He’s with me all the time.

Then he had an opportunity to tell you, “Listen, Master”.

No, no; but he never goes anywhere. They are cut off. You don’t understand the thing. He’s not going to the dentistry. He’s not going anywhere.
And people - Sheela’s people - have tried in every way that these people get no information of any kind.

So these three people were as unaware and as cut off from the rest of the community?

Yes.

Okay.

Completely cut off.

So they’d never been to the canteen and spoke to the people?

They were eating there, but everybody in the canteen was not aware what was happening, it was only a small group of these twenty people who really knew what was happening.
For example, taping. Only two electricians knew about it. Now, even they bugged my sitting room - in front of me!

Are you scared?

No, there is no question because I have nothing to lose.

But did she threaten to blackmail you? I don’t know what she has tape recorded. Supposedly there was a tape recorder in your bedroom. I mean, each one has his own private life. Are you scared that she might blackmail you?

I’m not afraid of anything, because there is nothing to blackmail me.

Because she was a little crazed - that I knew a long time ago.

Nothing to be worried about that. But she was in a paranoia. The bugging was so that if somebody - my caretaker or my dentist or my doctor - says something, then she knows.

But not to hold the power over you?

For me there is no question, because when I am alone I have not been speaking to the microphone.

It’s possible that one might speak in one’s dream or something.

But the question is, even she bugged my room. I don’t know about electricity, what wires are for bugging. Everybody in my house knew that she’s putting some new wires, and she told me that this is an emergency buzzer. “If you press it, then the guards will immediately come into the house.” So I said, “Okay, if you want. There is no emergency, but if you want to put it you can put it.” And I have never touched it. The people saw it being done, but nobody is an electrician, nobody knows what they are doing. So in the buzzer, inside, she placed a microphone. Even the people from the government, FBI people, when they saw all the bugging that they had done, they could not believe it. They said, “These people have far more sophisticated ways of bugging than Nixon had.”

But I think you will agree with me. Obviously you know Sheela since a long time. When I was here last time I interviewed her and saw her many times on television. This is definitely not the Sheela you knew in the beginning. Something happened to her.

No. It is the same Sheela. What happened was just whatever she was carrying in her unconscious - she may not have been aware of it. When she got the opportunity. She was just a waitress, and now she got millions of dollars in her hands. Yesterday her old secretary’s letter has come saying that she had opened a private account in Switzerland in her own name. The money that was to come here she was accumulating slowly there, small parts of it; now it is forty-three million dollars.
So when she got the opportunity.just human mind.

It’s very.

It is nothing special. I feel it, anybody else in her place would have done the same, more or less.

More or less. In German there is a nice saying - if I may quote - Gelegenheit macht Diebe. It means when a man gets a chance to do a thing like that, he does that. And you said in your quotation too - and I’ve heard it before, “Power corrupts, and absolute power corrupts absolutely.”

Right.

But I have to unfortunately come back to a question that might annoy you, but I have to put it.

No, nothing annoys me. You put it.

Thank you, sir. I feel that this - you have built a community of - I remember in Pune, I was so happy when I spent fourteen days there. And my crew didn’t want to leave, they wanted to take sannyas. I said, “Nothing doing; come on. We’ve got to go to work.” And - but these people - you have created a miracle out of the earth. I mean, your name is going to go down in history, no doubt about it.
But what I want to know is, if this - all this meditation.that they should have had a sense of responsibility. Among these five thousand people - doctors, lawyers, psychologists, they’re all asking: What is it in Rajneesh that brings all these educated, well-to-do people? One of them should have had the guts to somehow get the message to you, through your dentist or through this. There’s something funny happening here.

No; but even they were not aware. You don’t understand a thing.

.fear.

No, no, they were not aware - not fear. Otherwise they would have approached me. There were thousands of ways to approach me. They could have phoned to my caretaker, they could have phoned to my physician, if the guards were not allowing them in. They could have managed any way.
The real thing is that what kinds of crimes she committed were such that in the community, except the people that were committing them, nobody was in any way able to know.
For example, they burned a county court house, an office in Wasco County. Now, only one person knows who burned it, and that person is with them.

This is what I don’t understand.

Now, this is very simple. Nobody who has a little understanding will make it.that fifty persons know that you are burning an office. One person knows. And if he behaves in any disgusting way or goes against you, he can be killed - and he knows that, because these people are doing just that. He’s part of the gang.
They killed one person.

Yes, one of those street.

They killed one of the street persons and simply threw the corpse out of Rancho Rajneesh.

You obviously know that the attorneys and the FBI.you will have to prove all these charges. That’s not my concern. But what I would like to come to know a little more about, about the fact that you have taught these people - you have been telling them for years again and again, “Take responsibility for your life in your own hands. Your life is yours. Life is a joke.” And that surprises me that they knew, not the crimes - they knew there was something funny happening. There was fear here. One could see. When I came here last time, it was as if I were in an imminent Jonestown. I mean, I could feel it, an outsider; my cameraman could feel it. I mean, I know how - if they’re honest with them, they would have felt - they may not have known the crimes, but why didn’t somebody have the courage to indirectly let you know that something is not right here, this is not paradise, this is not utopia?

I don’t agree. First, the fear that you felt here was a paranoia created by Sheela and her gang, that the whole of Oregon is out to destroy you, that everybody is against you. If everybody is against you, naturally you have to have your security force, you have to have your own guns. And she was not absolutely wrong. This is how human psychology works. Wasco County people were purchasing guns suddenly. Even the Wasco County shopkeepers who sell guns reported to the police that “There has never been such a great sale.” Suddenly, at the time of election, when these people were going to vote in Wasco County, people were purchasing guns. I had finally. Even though I was in silence, Sheela brought the news to me, asking that “What we have to do?” I said, “Simply boycott the election. We are not politicians and we are not interested in American politics. Our work is here and our work is meditation. There is no need.”
But she created the fear in the people, and people could see it - that “They are moving on the county road with guns.” Then naturally these people started getting ready, learning shooting, becoming alert - just the way it goes everywhere around the world. If Russians go on piling up nuclear weapons - they are afraid of America - America goes on piling nuclear weapons afraid of Russia, and it seems there is no end to it.
And that’s what was happening. She created hostility through her statements. Those people created hostility through their statements. And it became a very tense situation.
So if you had felt it, it was not that the commune was going to harm anybody; the commune was simply trying to defend itself. But whether you are trying to defend yourself or harm anybody, there is an atmosphere which any sensitive person can feel. But even I would not prevent it, seeing that if they are having guns, and if I stop my people having guns.

Yes.

Then tomorrow these people can be killed and I will be responsible.

But you and I know very well that guns never solved any problems. But I would like.

They never solved any problem, but no-guns have also never solved any problem.

I would like to.

No, just.

Yes.

Remember it: have no-guns solved any problem?

It depends how one looks at it.

No, never; not a single problem has been solved by guns, not a single problem has been solved by no-guns. In fact, no problem has been solved.

I agree with you. But I personally see a golden opportunity - okay, I will ask a last question. I have to leave. Let me ask you the last question: One of your disciples right here said, “By the time it was over I was boiling with tears and anger. He should have known. He should have seen what a monster she was. He should have protected us.” I also feel that Sheela could not have been Sheela without [inaudible]. She was a reflection of you, she got a power from you that I don’t know how you would be able to explain.
And, secondly, my last question, please give me an answer possibly if you can - this is very important to me.

But this is not a question.

Yes, yes. The question is: I would like to know who is Osho Rajneesh? Please answer this question only.

I am.

Okay.because some people have called you - your critics have called you, “He’s a cosmic Santa Claus”, “He’s a charlatan”, “He’s an intelligent man”, “He’s well-read”, “He’s a psychologist”. People say - you have critics, you have lovers, well-wishers, like me well-wishers who are not sannyasins, not critics. But I was trying to find an answer to who is ‘Osho’? Is he - what is he, what is he? Is he for real, what is he? I was trying to find.

Yes.

.out. Probably there’s no answer.

I am exactly what I am - Osho.

Thank you so much.

Okay. Okay. Come back whenever you feel like.

I would love to come here.

Good.

I hope you will look at this one film that I did; it’s called “You Are a Rainbow.”

Mm, mmm.

And I think - it’s all about Esalen and the human potential movement, and I would like to write a letter to you. I hope you will read it.

Okay.

Thank you very much.

[new interviewer]

Come here.

Good evening, Osho.

Glad to meet you. Come here.

Isabel: This is Richard Wagner from CBS Nightwatch.

Good.

Not quite so many people tonight as there were.

No, no problem.

.last Monday night. And I am sure that I have no questions that you have not been asked before, because all journalists tend to ask the same questions.

You don’t worry, but I will not answer the same!

I will be your straight man.

Good.

I will feed you good laugh lines. While they’re getting ready, just - I’m curious on a personal basis. Um, do you enjoy the attention of all of us, all we reporters who come here, or would you rather we didn’t come and ask you things?

No, I love it.

Good. Cause I’ve only been here a couple of times, but it’s always interesting to come and speak to the people here; I enjoy it.

Great.

Are we ready, gentlemen? [Yes] Just about. Okay.

Okay. So you just. Okay?

I appreciate your patience. I believe we are ready. Do I believe correctly?

[Answer from team: Yes.]

After how many minutes do they have to change their tape?

Twenty minutes.

That’s okay.

Okay. We’re ready. Osho, I’m sure that you’ve answered this question now many times in this past week, but.

You don’t be worried, you just ask.

Okay. What is the situation here now? Sheela and the gang are gone - what is the mood? What is the feeling at Rajneeshpuram now?

Of great rejoicing, as if they have come out of a concentration camp. They are feeling free, unburdened. And for the first time it seems that the commune is a place of absolute freedom, love and joy.

Which it is meant to be, right?

Which it is meant to be; which Sheela and her gang had destroyed.

Osho, how were they able to do that? How could they distort the aim of the commune?

Because I was silent. I came to America in silence, and I remained for three-and-a-half years silent, and I wanted no information from the outside world - no newspaper, no radio, no television.
And I have told Sheela to bring only absolutely essential things to me. That gave her a great opportunity on three grounds: one, she was a poor hotel waitress before, and suddenly she saw millions of dollars in her hands. Two hundred million dollars we have put into developing this oasis in the desert. It is just human. I don’t condemn her that she started saving little bits in Switzerland, money that was coming from Europe, so she started accumulating her own account there. Her old secretary’s letter yesterday informed me that she has accumulated forty-three million dollars.

Forty-three million dollars she has?

Yes.

Of money that belongs to the commune?

That belongs to the commune, that should have come here.

What can you do?

We will see what we can do.
Secondly, I was silent, and the people who have come here have come out of love for me, they are ready to do anything for me, and she became my representative to them. She became my symbol. Otherwise, she was just as any other sannyasin. In India she was nobody special. Because she was the only communication line between the commune and me.

But you gave her that power because you chose not to speak?

Because I was in silence, I did not want to be disturbed.

If I may ask, how did you discover what she was about after this time?

I will tell you.

Okay.

So this gave her immense power. In my name she could say anything to my people and they would follow, knowing that it is coming from me. Even if sometimes they would suspect that “This cannot be from Osho because it is against his teaching”.
I have never taught them to believe anything. Be reasonable, be rational, and doubt everything unless you come to an inevitable reality. I am not teaching them to be part of a faith. I am trying to give them a science of the inner world, which begins in doubt and ends in the experience of truth, of their own reality.
So sometimes they suspected, because Sheela was asking for surrender - to trust everything: whatever comes, comes from Osho and you have to do it.
So those people who had any suspicion, she simply threw them out of the commune. The chancellor of the university she threw out, the vice-chancellor - all the intelligent people who could see that she was getting into a power trip. The best psychologists she threw out. The people who have been devotedly in love with me for fifteen years, she harassed them in such a way, misbehaved with them, that finally they decided to leave, it was such a humiliation.

These people couldn’t communicate with you and tell you what was happening?

Because I was not available, that was the.

I see.

A:.trouble. I was in isolation, I never came into the commune, I never met anybody.

Understood.

So that gave her an opportunity.
And thirdly, because all those intelligent people left, she replaced them with her own people - who were just puppets, who would follow her whatsoever she said. Even if she was committing crimes they would support her, because their whole position was dependent on her support; otherwise they had no reason to be there. So to keep their position they had to support her crimes. So it became a clique of twenty people conspiring against the whole commune.
They did every kind of crime. They killed one man in the share-a-home program. They were giving all those people some drug to keep them drugged so that they would vote for them, or whatsoever they said those people would do.

This is their packing the polls?

Yes.

Uh huh.

Yes. Keep them like robots.

Uh huh.

But this man they accidentally overdosed, and he died; and they just threw him - so inhuman - out of Rancho Rajneesh. The corpse was found by the police, but they could not figure it out - from where it came, who the man was, who had killed him. And it remained a mystery and died out. Only just now, when people started revealing.when Sheela left and their fear disappeared that they would be punished, they would be thrown out, or perhaps they may even be killed. Because she killed that man and then she tried to kill three other people, and that’s what started the whole thing.

This was your doctor, your dentist.

My doctor, my dentist, and my caretaker.

Uh huh.

She was very much afraid of these three people, because they were the only ones, except her, who could approach me.

Uh huh.

So the only way was that those three should be simply finished.
First she tried to poison one of my sannyasins who has served me for fifteen years as lovingly, as carefully, that I don’t think any other woman is capable of. From the morning ‘til late in the night she is just running and doing everything for me, to make everything convenient. They had asked her, “Why don’t you come once in a while to visit Sheela?” So she went there, and just in a cup of tea they poisoned her. But she could not think of poisoning; it was so unnatural to think of it. She became sick, she vomited the whole night; for three days she had to rest. But still we did not think of poison - for the simple reason that if I come to your home and you give me a cup of tea, there is no reason to believe that you will kill me. For what reason?
But then the same thing happened with my physician. Because he is a physician, he became aware that there was poison in the coffee. So he immediately went to the medical center. Other doctors also suspected that there was possibility of poison, but some kind of a poison which is undetectable.

Oh, they never discovered what kind it was, huh?

No. There are poisons, they discovered, there are poisons which cannot be detected. They can be given to you, but from blood or from any other source you cannot detect them.

And that’s what they were using?

They have been using the book. When Sheela left, in her room a whole literature on poisons, a whole literature on how to murder people so that you cannot be caught, in what doses you have to give the poison - and particularly that poison which the medical people were suspecting, that page was underlined. So it seems they have been using that poison.no way to detect it.

I must ask, though, if they were using it and they understood how to use it, why didn’t they use enough to kill? Why just use enough to make someone sick?

Yes. The reason was that if suddenly you kill somebody who was not sick, then there will be suspicion. You have to give the poison slowly so he becomes weaker.

I see.

And slowly, within three, four months he dies almost like a natural death. That was the reason. And that is given in the book, that depending on when you want the person to die, that much dose you should give.

Is this being investigated now by the authorities?

Yes; the FBI and State Police and other agencies - the county police. They all have an office here and people are going and revealing everything that they know.

You’re cooperating with that?

Absolutely. I am absolutely against crime, and I am all for law.
On a third occasion they injected my doctor, and that was in a meeting. I started speaking after the second poisoning. It was still not certain, but the suspicion was enough. And when I asked Sheela, I could see on her face a little hesitation. And I told her, “From tomorrow I am going to speak, and I am going to meet my people. Now you need not be my representative. I will represent myself.” In the meeting, while I was speaking and ten thousand sannyasins were listening, they injected my doctor, just in the crowd.

In the crowd?

In the crowd. But it is such an injection that it can be done from outside the robe. He felt it immediately, he pulled up his robe, he showed people. He knew who had done it, and people saw blood and the mark of the injection. And one person has come as a witness, saying that, “Whatever the doctor says, that is the person who has done it, and I have seen her doing with my own eyes.”

They saw the person who did it?

Yes. And that girl also has disappeared with Sheela’s group.
After that, I made it clear to people that this group must have done more crimes. And if anybody has any information, then now it is your responsibility to expose them.

Are people coming forward now?

People are coming forward, and with so many stories that it seems just unbelievable. They have even bugged my room.

That sounds so hard to believe.

And they have bugged the whole hotel. They have bugged every house where they suspected there are people who may one day not be with them.

Was the reason for this to steal money? Is that at the base of it? Did they want to take money and run?

No, not only that, because money was already there and nobody knows. This letter has come yesterday. They have to change? Okay.

I’m sorry, I didn’t know we ran out of tape. You were so quiet.
Osho, let me, if I may, ask - re-ask that question. I must ask the last question again because we didn’t have the tape in.
Essentially the question is: Sheela and her gang, were they betraying the commune simply for.to get rich? Were they just trying to get money and flee?

No. The money they had already got there in their own name, and here they were doing all these crimes to keep the whole commune under their control. And because I started speaking, two things happened. One, Sheela lost her big ego that she had accumulated in three-and-a-half years; she lost her face on the television screen, her voice on the radio, her picture in the magazines, because when I’m speaking myself, who is going to take interest in her interviews? She was representing me.
So since I started speaking, she went on touring Europe, Australia, Singapore, where my other communes are. There she was received with the same grandeur that she had become accustomed to - television people coming, all the media lined up, interviews. She has become a celebrity, and that is a very poisoning thing.

Have you spoken with her by telephone since she left?

I told. No, I never have used a telephone in my whole life.

Would you speak with her in any way if you could?

No. Only if she comes in front of me.

Would you speak to her if she came and asked to be forgiven?

There is every possibility. The future is always unpredictable.
Last time she came here, she wrote a letter to me saying that, “I don’t feel excitement coming here,” because the whole commune does not go to receive her at the airport. There are no photographers; nobody is taking any note when she comes and when she goes. To become special and then to become again ordinary is difficult. I have every compassion for that. And if she had asked me, I would have arranged everything. I could have told my people that “There is no problem, you can go. Have photographers gather around her airplane, put as many garlands as she wants. Why unnecessarily make her unhappy? But she never told me. She simply told that “I feel no excitement coming here. But in Europe I feel very happy, in Australia I feel very happy.”
The person who has brought the note, the second person, the one who was always bringing notes when Sheela was absent, I told her, “Tell her it is nothing but ego, and if she wants to see it, I can come to Europe and stay just three months there, and all her happiness will disappear. Or if she wants Australia, it is perfectly good; I can come to Australia and prove to her what is really the reason. The reason is that ‘You are now no more getting nourishment for your ego.’”

Did she and her gang steal so much money from the commune that the commune could be in financial difficulty?

No, the commune can never be in financial difficulty. We have one million sannyasins around the world. And my sannyasins are all rich, all intelligent, all professional people. There is no problem: just a word from me and we can have one hundred millions immediately available. That’s not a problem. So she was just foolish; that does not make any difference to us.

But you must be hurt?

But she will be caught, and she will soon be in trouble. And I am certain of it because the next person to her has said to me the last day that “We have certainly an account, and the rumor is not wrong, but we were keeping the account for your safety. If in any case you have to leave America, then we should keep some money there.”
But I said, “If it was for my sake, at least I should be made aware of it. And how much money is there? I should be made aware of it. What is the number of your bank account? What bank is it? I don’t know anything; you have never told me. She said, “Tomorrow I will be bringing every detail.” And ‘tomorrow’ she too disappeared.

What is your status vis-a-vis staying in the United States? Are you here legally? Can you stay with no problem, or do you have a difficulty with Immigration and Naturalization?

No, there is no difficulty. They are having difficulties. I have been here for four years, and I will be here. And in four years they have not been able to find anything about which they can say no to me. I want them to decide this way or that. If they say yes, okay; if they say no, then I move to the courts.
They have six grounds [for immigration] and I have applied on five grounds, and I will fight on each ground separately. One ground will take twenty years to reach to the Supreme Court. Five grounds will take a hundred years, so what is the problem? So many judges will die, so many INS people will die; I myself will be dead. Perhaps they will give the green card to my grave. That will be their tribute.

Assuming - and I do assume - that you will be here as long as you please, how are you getting along now with your neighbors in this part of Oregon? Are you friends with them?

From our side there is no hostility towards anybody. Sheela and her company has created hostility. That is a necessary part of any fascist mind, to create hostility with the neighbors. That creates fear, paranoia; then your own commune becomes more in your hands, more surrendered. And they know that they cannot stand alone, they can only stand with the commune. So even against their will they have to follow your orders. So the more hostility you create, the more your small minority becomes stronger. So that’s what she was doing. But now they are gone. I don’t have any hostility towards anybody. In fact, in America everybody is a foreigner except Red Indians. So what is the problem? In fact we are legally here and you are illegally here.

What about.?

The Americans, the forefathers, have invaded this country.

I say no argument; you’re absolutely right.

Right. We have not invaded the country; we have purchased the land, and purchased also in a right way. We have paid seven million dollars for this land. Your forefathers paid thirty dollars for the whole area of New York. So this land is three times bigger than New York; that means ninety dollars at the most. And remember that you may have come one hundred years before, somebody may have come two hundred years before, somebody three hundred years before - no visa, no green card. And we are asking you on every legal ground. And foreigners are trying to prevent other foreigners - strange - and illegal foreigners are preventing legal foreigners!

Let me - we could go on and on about that one.
What about Sheela and her group bringing the homeless people from around the country here at election time? Was that one of her plots?

Yes, it was a plot. They wanted to take over the county. But that, too, only just now people have started telling me. I was silent. I had no idea. Sheela has simply informed me only one thing: that they have surplus money out of the annual festival, so they want to do some humanitarian job, that’s why she is bringing these people. I said, “If it is a humanitarian job, perfectly good, do it.”
Now, as I have started speaking, people have revealed to me that it was not humanitarian, it was just the opposite, very inhuman. Those people were drugged completely every day. Gallons of drugs were imported from outside, so they cannot be detected here - that they have purchased them in America.
They killed one man, and then finally they wasted three million dollars on it and created so much hostility and a negative kind of publicity.
They were going to do something like that again; if I was not speaking, they would have done that too. They had made in City of Rajneesh one housing complex for five hundred people, a beautiful housing complex with separate bathrooms, and they wanted it to make an AIDS home just to create more trouble for Oregonians.

How can you make up to the local people? How can you get the confidence of the people who live around the commune?

It will come by itself, because now there will be nobody who will be creating any hostility. It will take a little time to heal.
But I stopped it immediately, that this cannot be done; this is making a dangerous spot for Oregon and also for your own people. Five hundred AIDS patients will be dangerous for everybody, and we will be the closest to them, so this is simply idiotic. So I had to stop it. So now the whole housing complex is just lying there and unnecessarily we have to keep it clean and keep it in order, and there is.
But I had made the gesture. I had told the press that we are ready to vacate the City of Rajneesh, change its name back to Antelope, because there is no need, Antelope was perfectly good. And we have got our own city, there is no need.
And our people unnecessarily were being forced to live there. Every day they work here the whole day; in the night they have to go to Antelope just to show that a hundred sannyasins are living there, an unnecessary trouble. And those people don’t want to go; after working the whole day they would like to meet their friends who are here, they would like to go to the disco, dance, sing, go to the restaurant, drink; but they had to be packed into buses and sent to Antelope. I don’t want that. So I had told to the press that we would like to take all our people back, but then it is the responsibility of the Antelope people that they should take their properties back.

Buy them back?

If they want them, yes, they should buy them back; and we are ready to give them back at the same price. We have improved their property, we have made almost renovated houses, and prices have already gone higher in four years, but we are ready to give them at the same price as they had sold us. The price is almost double now, so they are not going to be at any loss. We have made the city beautiful.
But the ex-mayor’s news, I saw.she says, “We are not going to purchase.”

Why would she say that?

“.because our city is already destroyed by these people.”
Strange people. If you don’t want to purchase, then we are ready to purchase. You sell your houses and be finished, be clean. And they are in a minority; only twelve people are there. So only one-third of the property is now in the hands of Antelope people. If they want to sell it at a reasonable, market price, we will purchase it; but we will want them all to vacate. We don’t want any more trouble. Either they should purchase our properties, or we are ready to purchase their properties.
But if they think that we should vacate and just let them have their properties free, they are wrong; this is stupid.

I think it’s about time; are we going to change our tape? Do one more. [inaudible conversation]
Osho,
While they’re doing what they have to do, I’ll ask you a long rambling question.

Okay.

I haven’t been here except two times, and I’m curious to know why - why the security? The people here clearly wish you no harm. Why is it necessary to maintain such rigid security in this commune?

I was thinking that as Sheela has gone and the hostility between Oregonians and this commune disappears, we will slowly withdraw security. But there was reason for it, even in Sheela’s time.
Before we had no security, just the police - which is part of the Oregon, city police, but we had to create the security because Christian fanatics started coming and creating a nuisance in the city. And then Hell’s Angels started coming on their bikes. Now, that we cannot tolerate.
And we don’t want our people to be harassed by these fanatics.

Perfectly understandable.

So unless the government gives the guarantee that our people will not be harassed, the security will remain. If they give the guarantee, the security will disappear tomorrow. There is no problem, because we don’t want it. In fact, one hundred people are unnecessarily involved in security. They are creative people - somebody is a doctor, somebody is a plastic surgeon and he is just carrying a gun. This is - that gun is meant for retarded people, not for intelligent people who can do better things. We don’t want it. And those guns look so ugly. We want the whole place to be full of roses, not full of guns. But, the problem is that if we remove those guns.
Just one day we experimented - yesterday. In the morning discourse, two security people stand by the podium where I speak. We removed them. It doesn’t look right. I’m talking about love, and you have to keep two people with guns on both the sides. We removed them, and a madman jumped on the podium. He would have harmed me.
We know that there are people who belong to Sheela’s gang; they are hostile. We know that there are people who have been posted by INS in the commune to give them all information. Now, with all this. And we are giving all the information, everything, without keeping anything back, to the FBI.
Still the FBI said to one of our people that, “We would like at least 500 people from the commune to be locked in prison.” Now, this means they are not interested really in Sheela, her gang, her crimes; they are more interested in destroying the commune.

Why would they want to destroy the commune?

Ask the Attorney General. Why should they declare a legal city illegal? For two years it was legal; it was incorporated by the state government, by the Wasco County, it was accepted by the federal government. We were receiving support from the federal government, the state government, the county, from everybody. And then suddenly the city became illegal.

The Supreme Court of Oregon said that the land use was not proper, is that correct?

Yes, they have said it. But the Attorney General has found another way. Now he says that state and religion are mixed, so on that ground the city is illegal. We have won that case, that on land use laws city cannot be declared illegal, so they have now found another way.
And you can see the intention of the person. We said, “That’s perfectly okay. We are ready to fight, but the case should be decided in a federal court.” Because if the case is state versus city, it cannot be decided by any state court.

So you’ll appeal to the highest courts - the federal courts?

That’s what we are trying, but they are insisting that the case should be decided by a state court, which is absolutely illogical. Those state courts are under state pressure, they are part of the state; naturally we cannot win in those courts. And why they should be afraid of federal court or Supreme Court? If we are not afraid, why should they be afraid? We know perfectly well we are legal, the city is legal; we have not committed any illegality in its incorporation. There is no question of mixing any religion with the state. I don’t see - because we don’t believe in God, we don’t have any heaven and hell, we don’t have any prayer, we don’t have any catechism. The city’s work is making the roads, taking care of the public park, the public dam; I don’t know how we can mix religion with the roads.

What is the purpose of the commune? What is the goal of the commune?

The goal of the commune is that people should realize their reality, their self, their center. They should become fully conscious. There should not be a corner in their being which is dark. That is the goal, the eternal goal of all humanity, to achieve self-realization; and that is our goal.
Now, how can we mix that goal with the municipality of the city? I don’t understand. I don’t see that there is any way to mix.
They are mixing everywhere. In every court you are keeping the Bible for taking the oath; this is mixing religion with justice. Why is the Bible being kept there? And knowing perfectly well that there is no other book so pornographic as your Holy Bible. Now, I cannot take oath on a Bible; I would rather prefer a Playboy magazine, which is at least colorful and glossy.
There are a few people, a group of atheists, who are publishing all the passages from the Bible which are pornographic, and what they have come to is a five-hundred-page collection. And they say this five-hundred-page collection is the most pornographic; no other scripture is comparable to it. But why you are keeping it in the court? The court can keep the Constitution of America; that one understands, and that has some value, that has some democratic respect for freedom, respect for expression. And that is made by far more intelligent people than the Old Testament. I can accept the Constitution, but I cannot accept the Bible - when you have such a beautiful Constitution - the best in the whole world.

What do you think of historic figures in religion like Jesus and Mohammed and Buddha? What is your opinion of them? Are they historical personages, historical figures, what?

They are mixed. For example, Jesus: everything that is important is fictitious, and everything that is real is not important. Now, walking on water is fictitious, the virgin birth is fictitious. That he is the only begotten son of God, that is nonsense. That he revived people from death, it is all fiction. These are not histories. Then what remains is just a poor carpenter’s son, that I don’t think any would bother to worship.
About all these people, miracles have been created by the followers to make them as high, holy, unique as possible, and as far away from ordinary human beings so that you have to fall down on your knees and pray to them. Only then they can be your saviors, prophets, messengers of God.
There is no God, hence there is no question of messengers.
And if Moses saw God, that simply means that the heat of the desert, forty years wandering in the desert, just got the man crazy, drove him crazy, nothing else.

What is the purpose of life?

There is no purpose beyond life itself. The purpose is intrinsic. Life itself is so beautiful, so ecstatic, such a dance; but we don’t know it, we don’t live it. We go on postponing. We are always thinking tomorrow we will live; today we are occupied so much in other things, living can be postponed. And we go on postponing. We realize only when death comes that, “My God, now there is no tomorrow.”
Change?

Do you want to change?
[Cameraman: No, we’re okay.]
I only had one last question.

Okay.

And I think you’ve answered it, but let me ask it anyway. Is it possible for your views, your outlook on life, your beliefs, to be allowed just to exist in the world we live in, or will people always try to stop you - the people who believe in organized religion, the politicians? Will you always have enemies?

I will always have enemies, and because that is the very nature of things, it is not a disappointment. I accept it joyously. Whatever is the way of life is perfectly good, and I am happy with it.

You’ll take as it comes, huh? Okay. I thank you. It’s always a pleasure to speak with you.

Always come back whenever you can.

We shall be, we shall return, I’m sure. I think what he [the cameraman] would like to do is just take some more pictures of you. The talking part is essentially complete, but inescapably they need more video.
Do you think you will be seeing the press daily, or.?

I have been seeing the press for the last whole month. And I will be going.seeing the press every day because I’m not going to travel around the world. My health does not permit it. So I have to take your help.

Do you think we treat you fairly? The things you read and see on television, do you think you get a fair treatment from the press?

Quite fairly.

Is there anything you don’t like to read about yourself or see about yourself? No?

No. I like everything.

Do you think you may ever travel to your other communes around the country - around the world again?

My health is not good. My problem is my allergy. Any perfume, any dust creates asthma attacks. For four years I had not a single attack. In the last twenty years I have never been so healthy and happy. So I am not going anywhere. In fact, I’m always puzzled why I was not born in Oregon.

I told a friend last night that I was coming over here today to speak with you, and he said, “You must ask him why Oregon?” Why did you choose Oregon?

Because of my allergies. It has a dry climate and cool; humidity is disturbing to me, so humidity I don’t like. Hot I don’t like. So this desert simply was waiting for me for fifty years - since I was born, this desert was waiting for me!

Well, I’m sure there are people that would say this high desert has never been put to better use.

Yes, it has never been. During my whole fifty-five years on the earth this desert has not been used. It has been reserved for me by existence. Now, no government can prevent me. When existence itself is on my side, then I don’t care about small governments.

May I ask you how you spend your days? Do you - do you meditate, do you - do you - do you - I know you have discourses in the morning.

The morning goes in the discourse. Then I take my lunch and go to sleep. Two o’clock I wake up and I go for a drive into the forest, and near 3:30 or 4:00 I come back, take a bath, swimming. I have a beautiful swimming pool, olympic-size. And I love the change of hot and ice cold showers, so one-and-a-half hours, two hours in the morning, two hours in the evening. And then the press conference.

That’s the rest of your day.

Then in the end, if anything is about the commune needs my attention my secretary brings it, and by 11:00 I go to sleep again.
But whatever I am doing, my meditation continues. It is not something that I have to do separately; it is just an art of witnessing. Speaking to you, I’m also witnessing myself speaking to you. So here are three persons: you are listening, one person is speaking, and there is one behind who is watching, and that is my real me. And to keep constant contact with it is meditation.
So whatever you do does not matter, you just keep contact with your witness. I have reduced religion to its very fundamental essence. Now everything else is just ritual. This much is enough. And this does not need you to become a Christian or a Hindu or a Mohammedan or anybody, and this can be done by an atheist, by a communist, by anybody, because it needs no kind of theology, no kind of belief system. It is simply a scientific method of slowly moving inwards. A point comes when you reach to your innermost core, the very center of the cyclone.

Did you have teachers or have you developed this on your own?

No, I have developed it on my own. I have never had any teacher. I was not as fortunate as my sannyasins are.

Are you a reader? Do you read a great deal, or not very much?

No. For five years I have not read anything - no newspaper, no book, no television, nothing. I’m so happy. And what is there to read?

I envy you.

Mmm? I neither read nor write.

You don’t write?

No.

You never.

All my books are my discourses.

You never put your thoughts on paper?

Never. In my whole life I have never written.

Any particular reason why not?

It is easier to speak the truth than to write it. The written word is dead. The spoken word has some life at least. The eyes, the gestures, the tone, the nuance of the voice, everything which the written letter misses.

We live in the video age. You could make video cassettes.

We are making.

That’s better than the written word. That’s still some life to it.

Yes.

Will they be made available to the general public?

It is available all over the world. I am a very contemporary man.

Well, in a way, then, I mean of course it’s not writing, but it’s communicating; so you are communicating other than just one on one or just to a group?

Yes; this is communication.

Uh huh. But the video cassettes are, in a way, a book - not a written word, but a record.

It is different.

Yes, I agree.

Very different.

I agree. And yet it’s a record, it’s a.

And soon, when it becomes three dimensional, then it will be really beautiful.

I thank you very much.

Okay.

Scott Miller,
Channel 8

I know him.

I feel like I know you as well, although we have never really.

Great.

.met face to face. My pleasure.

Yes. Okay. How are you doing today?

I am doing fine.

How was your swim? I noticed that you.

Great.

I’ve been a big fan of hot and cold showers myself for quite some time.

Some day you can come to my bathroom.

Well, I’ll leave you my business card when I leave. If we could arrange that, I’m sure my news director would be very happy.

[inaudible] Are we.Isabel? Let them be ready.

I’m here just to talk to you very briefly today, and I just wanted to check.in the nature of our business, which sometimes doesn’t make any sense to me either, with the competitive nature of our business I do need to be somewhat.somewhat careful about what I say right now. Isabel, are we clear at this point? Okay.
Competitiveness aside, I guess we’re ready. I’m here also as a representative of NBC news. We’re an affiliate of NBC, and NBC has obtained, I understand, a copy of an interview with Ma Anand Sheela which is purported to be the first one since she left the ranch a week and a half or so ago. And so what I’m going to do, once we do get the cameras rolling and squared away, is just ask you to respond to a couple of the allegations that she’s made in the interview. Of course, doing our best to tell both sides of the story, we can give your side as well.

Good.

I agree. And, Tom, if you just tell me when you’re ready, we’ll do that.
So I understand you feel you’re treated fairly. I’m glad to hear that.

I am.

Do you ever get to see what we say about you, though?

Anything she says, she will get a good reply. You just.

Oh, I’m sure. I’ve heard you speak enough, Osho, to know that I have - I have no fear of that. I have no fear of that. I was - I was just interested in your comments, as my cameraman is getting ready, that you - that you do feel that you are.

Let them get ready.

.that you do feel like you get fair treatment.

Meanwhile you take few grapes.

Well, thank you. They’re good grapes.

They are our own.

They’re grown here?

Yes.

My compliments to your farmers then. Okay? Okay. Allegation number one. First of all, Sheela claims that there has been widespread use of narcotics among your sannyasins, drugs, specifically the drug ecstasy, which I have also heard referred to as MDM. And she goes on to charge that with your knowledge, sannyasins were induced to sign over money and belongings while under the influence of drugs.

I know ecstasy, but that ecstasy can be a drug I am hearing for the first time. I have never even heard the name before. And I was in silence and isolation for three-and-a-half years. I was not coming into the commune, not meeting anybody. So if drugs were used and people were given such a drug, then Sheela must be the one to do it. How I can do it in isolation, in silence? Except Sheela, nobody was coming there. Have I given the drug to Sheela?

Which drug?

The drug that she is mentioning. I have never heard even about the drug.

Have you ever heard of your sannyasins being on any drug?

No. In my commune drugs are absolutely prohibited. We keep a dog to check every car coming in, every luggage coming in, just for drugs. Drugs we don’t allow for the simple reason that every drug is against meditation. No drug can bring you to ecstasy, it can give you only a hallucination.
So I know ecstasy. I am twenty-four hours in ecstasy, but I’m not drugged. And nobody has been drugged by me. And if Sheela says so, she was the whole and sole in-charge for all these years, then she must be responsible for the drug and she must have done it to people.

Do you believe that she’s done it to people?

If she is saying it - that in the commune drugs are being given - then except her nobody can be responsible, because she was the president of the Foundation. And if she thinks people have been drugged in order to take money from them, then it must be she. Because all the money that the commune has received has come from donations far away - from Europe, Asia, Australia. And she has stolen forty-three million dollars out of that money. Perhaps she has been drugging people and taking the money to Switzerland.

The second allegation is a little bit more personal. She says that you threw temper tantrums and would threaten to commit suicide if you were not given more Rolls Royces.

That is sheer cow dung! I have already ninety Rolls Royces, and a simple law of economics is that as you have more and more of a thing, it has less and less value. Now ninety-one Rolls Royces.what meaning they can have to me?

Have you ever asked for a Rolls Royce? Have you ever asked?

Never! There is no need. In fact I wanted to distribute all the Rolls Royces to people, but they don’t belong to me. I cannot distribute - I am not their owner. They belong to a certain trust of the commune, and the president is here. I had declared in a discourse that tomorrow all the Rolls Royces should be distributed, because unnecessarily.I use only one and eighty-nine are just sitting. Let all the sannyasins enjoy them. Make few pools and everybody can take whenever he wants.
John.?
He is the president of the cars’ trust. So I asked him distribute the cars. Now he will answer you what happened.

John: We decided that we didn’t want to do that.

I think we chatted about that.

John: The cars are sacred, and we want them where they are. So we voted, and that’s where they’ll be.

Did you ever throw temper tantrums then?

That is up to them. But this is simply stupid. I never thought Sheela to be so stupid.that I should commit suicide for a Rolls Royce?

Final allegation for right now at any rate. I’m sure you’re expecting more over the weeks to come. Sheela says that she’s afraid for her life right now. She’s afraid for her life because she fears that you will have her killed. And she believes that you’ll have her killed. How would you respond to that?

She must be afraid, because every murderer is always afraid for his life. She has killed one man here; she has attempted to kill three other commune members. She has attempted to kill the whole city of The Dalles. Naturally she must be paranoid that she will be killed. Anybody who commits a crime like murder, dosing people with poison, throwing poison into water systems, is bound to have the fear that she is going to be killed. But we are not to going to do anything to her. Nobody here is a murderer; she is the murderer.

Didn’t she run the affairs here for a long time after you heard such rumors of such hideous acts?

No, nobody. I did not believe that she would do it. I thought it was just a rumor. But now I can say that she must have done it; it cannot be just a rumor. Because what she has done.
When she left, in her room we have found all kinds of books on poison, how to poison people, all books on murdering, how to murder people without getting caught. And we have found an underground tunnel in her room, that she was prepared completely to murder somebody, or in any case if the police come she can escape. So her fear has reason, and the reason is that her own crimes are following her like a shadow. Every murderer is followed by his own guilt.

Thank you very much, Osho. If we could just get one or two wide shots, would that take too much time?

Okay.

I really appreciate it. I know it’s been a long night for you.
I’m interested.when.how long ago did Sheela’s first husband die? I know you’re not good with dates, but.

That [inaudible]

I’ll find that out. But.what specifically, he.I know he had some form of cancer, but was he sick back east or.?

I think.Devaraj is here?.He had something to do with lungs - lung cancer.

Devaraj: Hodgkins.

And at this time was Sheela involved with Jayananda?

No, she was involved with Veetrag.

It gets complicated.

And this reminds me of one thing more. She was involved with Veetrag in India, and she came to America for some work for the Foundation and got involved with Jayananda, got married with Jayananda. Then there was trouble because Veetrag was in a very sad state. Here, because she has done all these crimes and she saw that if she does not escape soon she will be caught, in Switzerland she married Dipo, another sannyasin. She committed bigamy. She is married to the American Jayananda and she has married in Switzerland to remain in Switzerland. Then, seeing that this is bigamy and will become trouble, she rushed to Nepal. Because in a poor country like Nepal you can bribe the magistrate and get a backdated divorce. So she has got a backdated divorce - she has become a professional criminal now.

What happened to Veetrag?

Veetrag is here.

He’s still alive?

Still alive, because he refused her. She had told him. He is our best pilot. She told Veetrag, that “You take the airplane, fill it with bombs, and crash it into the Wasco County office, and jump out in a parachute.” He said, “This is too risky and I may be killed. I don’t want to do it. And this is an absolute crime. It will not only destroy the Wasco County office, it may destroy a few other houses also. It will become a wild fire.

Was Sheela’s first husband hospitalized in India?

Yes.

And she would visit him in the hospital?

No, no. He was in the commune.

In the ashram?

In the ashram. Once in a while he used to be hospitalized, when he was serious; otherwise he was living in the commune.

And he would.he would need oxygen there?

He died in the ashram.

And he.he could get oxygen in the ashram?

Yes, he could get; every arrangement was there. In their room every arrangement was there.

Okay. Osho, thank you very much for staying late for us. I really appreciate it.

Good. Come again.

I will be.I’ll be here.

Good.

Thank you.

============================================================

USA Today

Glad to see you.

Good evening. First of all I’d like to request that you try to keep your answers as brief as possible. I realize I only have so much time, and I do have thirty or forty questions that I’d like to ask - and the style of my paper is abbreviated to begin with, so it would all fit well.

That’s perfectly okay.

Thank you.

Just remember that your questions are surface and short.

I’d like to ask you just a few questions regarding Sheela. I’m sure you’ve heard.

Any question, just start.

Okay. She has surfaced in Europe and has spoken with the West German publication, Stern, and alleges, among other things, that drug use is rampant here in the commune. I’d like to know, is that true?

That is absolutely wrong.

She speaks of a drug in particular, called ecstasy. Have you ever heard of a drug by that name?

No.

She also claims that she was having a physical love affair with you up until the time she left.

That is absolutely wrong.

At any time during.?

Never. She is just disgusting.

She claims as well that the commune is broke, that all the money has been spent on Rolls Royces and diamond watches.

That is absolutely wrong.

What kind of shape is the commune in financially?

Perfectly alright.

She claims that she fears for her life. She thinks that you feel she knows too much and you’re going to try to kill her, obviously not personally, but you’ll send people. Does she have any grounds to make this claim?

She is afraid my people are going to kill her. That’s because she has killed so many people, and attempted to kill many more: almost poisoned the water system of a whole city, The Dalles. She is afraid because of her own murders, her own crimes. She cannot give a single piece of evidence that I have ever killed anybody.
And I was in silence for three and a half years, and in isolation. She was in total control of the commune. And if there was drug use, then she is responsible, because this was my instruction, that no drugs should even enter into the campus of Rancho Rajneesh. I have seen her interview on video; she looks drugged.
And the drug, ecstasy, she is talking about - she must have been taking it. I do not need it: I know the real ecstasy, I am twenty-four hours in it. Any drug can only create a hallucination. She is drugged, she is in a paranoia from her own crimes; otherwise there was no need to escape from here. She had not even the courage to face me. She escaped from here without seeing me.

She claims that you taught her everything she knows, and that you were fully aware of the things that she was doing during her period of leadership here, even during your years of silence.

I was only aware of what she was telling me, not fully aware of what was happening. Now I am becoming aware that she was not telling the whole thing to me.
She was telling me only nice things - what she is doing and what is happening. She was not telling the crimes that she was committing. And she has committed every kind of crime.

Do you still feel as you did a week ago, that if she did want to come back you’d welcome her?

Yes, I will welcome her. And I will tell her to confess all her crimes to the court, and we will ask the court that she is sick, psychologically sick, and her punishment should be to be sent to a psychiatric hospital, not to a jail.

If we could change the subject, I’d like to ask a few questions involving your own personal image and how you appear to the outside world. First I’d like to know, why have you chosen to make the Rolls Royce so much a part of your image?

I have not made anything. If my people offer me something with love, I cannot refuse. Although in a subtle way I have refused, because I don’t own those Rolls Royces, they are owned by a corporation, a trust, so ultimately they belong to the sannyasins, not to me. Nothing belongs to me.

I’m curious to know, what do you do during an average day from the time you get up till the time you go to sleep - say, hour by hour or two-hour intervals?

It is completely busy without business. Six o’clock in the morning I wake up. Two hours in my bathroom and swimming pool, which I have always loved.
Then my breakfast, and I go to the meeting of the commune, my everyday discourse. By eleven I am back. I take my lunch, go to sleep for two hours.
Then for one and a half hours I go driving in the mountains. That is the only time that I have for myself. Back again; two hours to the bathroom and the swimming pool. Then I take my supper.
And straight from the supper table I am here for any interview. Sometimes there is one interview, sometimes two, sometimes three. Now today your interview is one hour; then at 8:30 there is a big press conference that will last at least two hours.
Then one hour for my secretary, for day-to-day problems about the commune. Near about twelve I go to sleep. And the day goes so fast.

What kind of dreams do you have?

I don’t dream, because whatever I want to do, I do it. I have never repressed anything in my life, and there is nothing to dream about. The dream is a necessity only if you repress something.

Do you keep in touch with events going on in the outside world?

No. No, for five years I have not read any newspaper, any magazine, any radio, any television. My sannyasins are my only world.

I’m curious to know what you eat. Do you keep a strict vegetarian diet?

Absolutely vegetarian. And just three thousand calories in the whole day.

How is your health?

My health is better than ever.

I’ve read that between the years of 1947 and 1957, I believe, when you were living in India, you made it a practice to run 16 miles every day. Is that true?

That’s true.

What was your reason for doing this and why did you stop?

I had then very beautiful health and I enjoyed my well-being. And that was my only exercise: running, jogging, swimming. You cannot conceive how healthy I was. I was 190 pounds in 1960, and people used to say that I had a body as if it is made of marble. But then I started traveling around the country spreading my word. And that created slowly deterioration of my health: every day changing food, every day catching trains in the middle of the night, getting down from the trains in the middle of the night.
Everything got disturbed: my routine, my way of life. And that brought.otherwise I was never sick. That started bringing strange things. One was an allergy for dust, perhaps the trains; Indian trains are dirty, dusty. Most of them are still running on coal.
Perfume of any kind started troubling me, and finally all those allergies culminated into asthma attacks. Then humidity started affecting me and I had to stop traveling.
It helped, but not perfectly. I wanted to move to a place which was cool, dry, not humid. And that was the reason for me coming to this desert in Oregon. It has suited me perfectly well.

There’s been some confusion in the press regarding the question of are you or are you not celibate?

I am not celibate, I have never been celibate. Why should there be confusion in the press?

Well, because I think there have been reports that you have been celibate since 21, and then.

No. Nobody can be. It is scientifically impossible. Anybody who is creating that kind of confusion does not know anything about physiology, biology, science. He is simply stupid.
Not only have I never been celibate, there has never been a celibate in the whole history of humanity. There have been pretenders, hypocrites. There have been monks who have been really homosexuals. There have been nuns who have been just lesbians.
That’s why I say all the religions are responsible for this dangerous disease, AIDS. This is their greatest contribution to human growth.
According to me, celibacy should be declared criminal. All monks should be forced do marry the nuns; otherwise, face life imprisonment.
My whole teaching is: be natural, be simple. Don’t go upstream. Just go with the stream, be in a let-go. It is a physical need.

What do you think of all the attention you’ve been getting lately from the press? Have the commune and yourself been portrayed fairly, by and large?

It is almost fair. It cannot be absolutely fair for the simple reason that journalism has not raised itself into an art. It serves the retarded masses, and depends on sensationalism. It is criminal. That’s why I say ‘almost fair’.

How do you feel about the image that most of the outside world has of you as being at best an eccentric and at worst a phony or a fake?

I don’t think about the outside world at all.

As far as the commune then, doesn’t your choice of Sheela as the day-to-day leader, in light of her recent actions, reflect poorly on your capability as a judge of character, and ultimately hurt your credibility with your followers?

No. My choice of Sheela was absolutely correct. In the beginning, to create this commune we needed a very pragmatic, practical, strong person. And she is. She was not a criminal when I had chosen her; neither was Judas a murderer when Jesus has accepted him as his disciple.
Something very basic is implied there. There are two possibilities: one is that the future is determined, so that you can know about it, what is going to happen tomorrow. But then all freedom of humanity disappears. Man becomes only a machine, a robot. The other alternative is that the future is open. One who is a murderer today my become a saint tomorrow, and one who is a saint today may prove to be a rapist tomorrow. The tomorrow is absolutely open, and there is no way to predict it.
And I believe in freedom. I do not believe in God for the same reason, because if there is God, there is no freedom. He created man; man is just a puppet. He can any moment destroy him, there is no way to change the course.
God is whimsical. What has he been doing before he created man? According to Christianity he created man 4004 years before Jesus Christ. So just 6000 years before the world was created - and what was that guy doing for whole eternity? He seems to be crazy, nuts. And suddenly he creates the world in six days! And then he creates such a big world in six days, you know you are going to have a mess. And the seventh day he retired to rest, and since then nothing has been heard about him, he is resting. Now any moment he can wake up and decide to destroy.
I do not believe in any God, because God is against freedom, against human dignity, against democracy, against every value which we have cherished for thousands of years. Only existence without God can be an existence beautiful, free, democratic, loving, growing. But then tomorrow remains unknown. You have to take the risk.
So when I chose Sheela, she was just a simple woman. She was just a waitress in a hotel. But because I went into silence, into isolation, and she was my only communication with the commune, she got the opportunity of becoming a power. And power corrupts.

Why were you silent for three and a half years?

Really I wanted to be silent forever. I had spoken for thirty years. There are at least four hundred books of my discourses. It is enough for a man, and I was tired of speaking. It is out of necessity that I have started speaking again, because when I became aware that my silence is being exploited and Sheela and her gang is trying to create out of a meditation commune, a concentration camp, then I had to come out of silence.
She persuaded me not to speak because that may endanger my health. Again, because it is a question of breathing.speaking again I may start having attacks. But I said that that does not matter. If my whole commune is being destroyed, then I want to be in the commune and stop everything that is wrong.
And it was good that I was alerted in time. I would not have been alerted if Sheela has not tried to kill my own physician. She was trying to kill anybody who was a danger to her power; either he should leave or she would kill him.
Many left; the chancellor of the university left, the vice-chancellor of the university left - who have both been devoted sannyasins. Many psychotherapists left, and I was not even informed.
But this case was such. My physician lives with me in my own house. First he was given poison in a cup of coffee. Because he is a physician - well-educated, has the best qualifications, is a member, the youngest member ever of the Royal Society of Physicians in England, is a genius mind.he immediately suspected some poison has been given to him.
But nobody would listen to him, because why should my physician be poisoned? The very idea was inconceivable. And the poison that was given to him was such that it is undetectable. So he went to the medical center, but they could not detect anything so they thought he was simply hallucinating.
The second time he was injected in the hospital while he was recovering from the first poison, and again he felt that it was poison. But nobody would listen to him, because the poison was undetectable.
The third time he was poisoned in a meeting of ten thousand sannyasins listening to me, and one woman came and inserted the needle. Now there are eye-witnesses. He immediately pulled up his robe and showed people there was blood, there was the mark of the needle. And he refused to go in the medical center here, because that was under one of Sheela’s gang, Puja, who was a well-trained nurse.
He was in Bend Hospital. There also doctors said that he had no disease: “All that we can think of is some kind of poison, but it is undetectable.” Then he started looking into books and found that there are poisons which cannot be detected. And when Sheela left, we have found in her room literature on poisons, a book in which that same poison which is undetectable is underlined. That is the only poison which is underlined in the whole literature.
So when my physician was poisoned, my caretaker was poisoned, then I thought that it is better I should come out of my silence and be available to my people and see what is happening.
As I came out of my silence, Sheela started going to Europe, to Australia, to Japan, and she would not stay here. And stories started coming to me, and she started making arrangements to escape. She was married here to an American. She immediately got married to a sannyasin in Switzerland. Now that is a crime; she committed bigamy.
Then they realized that this is not right, so she went to Nepal, a small kingdom in the Himalayas, where in small villages you can bribe a magistrate just a small money and you can get any kind of certificate you want. So she got a backdated divorce certificate. But she was planning for two months, because she was looking also here for any Swiss sannyasin to marry Puja.
But all these things came to my knowledge as these people left. When they left, then the whole commune felt free of fear; and now there is so much coming up that it seems Watergate was nothing. She had bugged my own room, my caretaker’s room, all possible rooms which she thought may someday be her competitors. She has bugged the room of my old ex-secretary. She has bugged Hasya, who is now the president of the Foundation - her whole house, six rooms, all bugged.
And the FBI people were here - when they were looking in my room, they said to the person who was showing them, “Whoever has done this bugging has done it in a far more sophisticated way than it was done by Nixon.”
And they had made all kinds of things like taping machines for every phone. Every phone was tapped.

In the entire commune?

In the entire commune. Either phones coming from out or phones going out - all were tapped.

If I might interject.women hold approximately 80% of the supervisory roles here in the commune. I’m curious to know why.

For the simple reason because my feeling is that women have been deprived for thousands of years by men. You don’t ask this question when a hundred percent of power is in the hands of men; you take it for granted. But you cannot take it for granted if eighty percent power is in the hands of women. I am simply trying in my own way to compensate for all the crimes that humanity has done against womanhood.
And I’m also trying to prove that woman can do far better in many areas than men. In many areas, man can do better. So it is not a question of who is superior and who is inferior; it is a question of division of labor.
Both are human and both have potentials and they should be given a chance. And they are doing perfectly well.

You’ve said in the past that in your opinion, such people as Mother Teresa - and this is quoting directly from you - “should be hanged for her views on birth control.” Do you still feel that way?

Still I am right; they should be hanged as many times as possible.

What is your policy as far as birth control goes here on the commune?

In this commune, in four years, not a single child has arrived. The earth is already too much overpopulated. In Ethiopia people are dying, in India people are dying, everywhere there is starvation. Even in America thirty million people are undernourished. Now, anybody who teaches against birth control is a criminal.

You’ve also said, quoting again: “The people of Oregon are getting very disturbed and I’m getting great joy out of it” - referring to the hostile history of relations between the commune and the state. Do you still feel that way?

I enjoy everything. Now I am enjoying to withdraw everything that Sheela’s criminal gang has done against Oregonians, of which I was absolutely unaware.
For example, the City of Rajneesh will be again Antelope. I have asked my sannyasins who are the government there to change the name back, “because this is absolutely unnecessary. You have your place; why hurt other people?”
And I have told the press that we are ready to vacate Antelope completely, because we have enough houses and we don’t need those third-rate hundred-year-old rotten houses. I don’t want my sannyasins to live there like rats; they should be given back to the rats!
Just they have simply to pay back the money that they have taken from them. So Antelope will be Antelope again; we are withdrawing our police forces from there. Why should we bother about anybody?
And as they start possessing their land and houses back we will vacate; we don’t want them. It was Sheela’s mind, which became power-oriented, to take over Antelope, and when she succeeded in taking over Antelope then came the desire to overtake the whole of Wasco County, and for which she brought three thousand street people.
And to me she said that she is bringing these street people just as a humanitarian gesture, because we have more money than our needs. So we can spend two, three million very easily without any trouble.
I said, “If it is a humanitarian gesture it is perfectly good.” But I was not aware that it is election time, I was not aware that she is bringing them for election.
She brought those people here and she imported from outside America special drugs, tons of drugs to keep those people drugged, so whatever she says they will do.
And by mistake one man they drugged too much and he died. They simply threw his body out of Rancho Rajneesh. The police found the body but could not find where the man had come from, who the man was and who has killed him. Just now I have been discovering from my people that it was Sheela’s gang that did all those inhuman acts.
So I am withdrawing everything that she has done against Oregon - I am withdrawing. I don’t want any hostility.

Do you have any followers who live in Russia, the Soviet Union?

I have many sannyasins there, but they have to live underground. And I don’t want to live underground.

Can you tell me approximately how many you believe are followers in the Soviet Union?

No, that I cannot say because they are already persecuting twenty people that they have found. So I cannot say the whole number.

Is it true that your followers around the world bow to Oregon each morning?

Certainly! Oregonians should be happy!

Do you believe in reincarnation?

I don’t believe, I know. It is true. It is not a question of belief, and I don’t want anybody to believe in it. I want them to experiment with their own past lives, and there are methods available that you can go into your past lives and experience the truth of it.

Can you describe who you were and what you did in some of your past lives?

That will be simply fiction for you. It does not make any sense to anybody. It only makes me certain that there is rebirth, reincarnation; that life continues beyond death. But anything that I say will be just like a fiction.

Nonetheless I think it would be interesting to know if there were a particular role or position that you do remember.

No, I was never anybody special: Alexander the Great, Napoleon Bonaparte.no.

Do you still believe that the end of the world is near?

No.

So you’ve changed your views on that?

I have not changed my views. The politicians are preparing for the end, the religions have already prepared for the end. But we are trying to prevent it, and I am hoping against all hope that we will succeed.

Thank you very much.

Good, come again.

Thank you.

============================================================

Jim Hyde, Channel 2, KATU TV, Portland; Scott Miller, KGW-TV, Channel 8, Portland (NBC Affiliated); Swami Anand Subhuti, Osho Times; Walden Kirsch, KGW-TV, Channel 8, Portland (NBC Affiliated); Swami Anand Videha, Latin-America Courier, Italy; Ma Viren, Loto-Payo [Leuropayon?], Italy

Isabel: Osho, I have told the press that you will first make a statement and then they could ask questions.

I welcome you all. I had to give you the trouble to come here because there has been FBI people, state police officers, Wasco County police, attorney general’s office people, to investigate the case against Sheela and her fascist gang. I offered them my own interview, four times they gave the appointment, and all the four times they canceled it. There seem to be a certain conspiracy going on. I want to make that conspiracy open and available to the public.
We were cooperating fully. Our police, our sannyasins, were going and revealing facts concerning all kinds of crime that have been committed while I was in isolation and silence. It was really strange that they should not take my interview. They should have taken my interview first. I represent the heart of my whole commune. I live for these people and I will die for these people. Rather than asking me for an interview, they went on postponing and canceling appointments. And the reason was that they were trying to protect the criminals. They were not taking any step against the criminals.
And they were trying to persuade people to betray the commune. They were giving as a bribe that, “We will give you immunity.” We were supported them, we were revealing everything on our own accord. We wanted the criminals to be punished. But behind the screen was attorney general and he was trying a totally different thing. I have known dirty politicians, but not so dirty as this man.
All kinds of crimes have been committed, murder, attempts to murder many other people, efforts to poison the water system of The Dalles, the whole city of innocent people who have done no wrong to you.
Sheela was persuading one of the pilot, that he should take bombs in the airplane and crash it on the Wasco County office and before it crashes, jump out in a parachute to save himself. Because he refused it, as a punishment and as a safety measure that he does not reveal it to anybody else, he was sent to Germany in a very small commune where he was useless, because there is no airport and the commune has no airplanes. What can they do of a pilot? And he was our best pilot. As he heard the news that Sheela and her gang has escaped, he immediately phoned. He has come back and he revealed his story that, “This is what I was asked to do. Because I refused. It was not only a question of my life. It would have destroyed the Wasco County office and it may have destroyed many other houses surrounding it.” The quantity of bombs was so much.
We were trying to help FBI and all these other agencies. Why they were afraid to take my interview? The reason was, they wanted to find few people who can protect the criminals and can indicate false names, innocent people, that these are the real criminals, so that the community can by destroyed. One of the FBI person was being heard by sannyasins, he was saying that, “We are going at least to imprison five hundred sannyasins.” All those sannyasins who are very essential for the life of the commune, to cripple it. They were not interested at all about the crimes.
One of the street people was murdered by Sheela because she has imported special drugs in tons for all those street people, to keep them drugged till the election day. So whatsoever she says to them, they will do it like a robot, almost in a hallucinatory state. This man by accident was drugged twice. He died on the spot. They simply threw his body out of Rancho Rajneesh without any compassion, humanity, without any feeling what they are doing. The police had found the body, but they could not find even the man’s address. He may have come from New York or from anywhere in America. And street people don’t have address. They could not figure out what is his name, they could not figure out how he has died, whether he has been murdered or drugged himself too much.
Just now people are coming, because the fear, the terror of Sheela and her gang is finished, they know now they can say the truth. I wanted to cooperate with the government, with the law, but the government has its own designs. Its design is to use the excuse of Sheela’s crime who has already gone out of country with twenty co-conspirators. A good chance for them in the name of those twenty people who are out of country - just blame innocent people and force them into jail.
Not taking my interview was essential to do this, because I was going to reveal everything. First they said, “You cannot record it.” I insisted that, “It has to be recorded, because in the court you may change.” It was a strange situation, as if I was the interrogator and they were the criminals. “You cannot take a video tape of it.” I insisted.
I said, “We will not release it to the public, we can give you the guarantee, written, but the video will be taken, because we know that you are not worthy of any trust. This video will be a proof that things are totally different and you are presenting before the court different people.”
Sheela and her group has bugged my room, my caretaker’s room, the new president Hasya’s whole house, six rooms, my ex-secretary Laxmi’s room, the whole hotel, all the rooms. Even the FBI experts said, that Nixon is left far behind. They have done such a sophisticated job. He said that, “For one bugging, five years of jail.” And this woman has bugged so many places that even one thousand years will be not enough! You have solid proofs in your hands.
They have found machines in Sheela’s room that all telephones from the commune, going outside or coming in were taped, which is very criminal. It is interference into the freedom of the individual and his privacy. Now what solid proofs they need? We have tapes which we have presented to them, we have the mechanism which was being used, we have people who are ready to confess that they were part in it and who others were part in it. But it seemed as if they were not interested in it. Their interest was somewhere else.
One woman came up and said that, “She does not know exactly, but she suspects that the house belonging to the planning office in Wasco County was burnt by Sheela.” Because Sheela told her that at a particular place late in the night you stand there with a car, two sannyasins not in sannyasin clothes will come to you. You need not ask anything, simply take them in and bring them back to Rajneeshpuram. She was a little worried and concerned that what is the matter, what is going on, what is the secret in it? Why they should not be wearing red clothes and why such secrecy? And next day she came to know that the planning office of the Wasco County has been burnt. Now it is very simple. She can indicate those two persons who have escaped with the twenty in Sheela’s gang. Sheela has taken her also in her gang so that no proof is left behind. But she felt so guilty that from Seattle she turned back. She said, “I am not going. I am going back to the commune.” And she has come back to the commune.
All these things. In Sheela’s house literature has been found: How to Murder, How to Kill. Literature on all kinds of poisons. Three persons have been poisoned. My own milk was being poisoned slowly every day. And only now the poor sannyasin who looks after the cows has opened his mouth that, “Every night Puja used to come to mix something. I was not aware that this is poison. I thought it is something herbal, must be for your health.” Certainly it was for my health!
Seeing all these things I became aware of one thing that has happened in India. And now I am absolutely certain that Sheela murdered her own first husband. He was sick. He had cancer of lungs and the doctors had said that he cannot live more than two years. When he came to me he was really in despair, death was so close. I said to him that, “Death comes to everybody. You are fortunate that you know when it is coming. You have some uniqueness about your death. You can use these two years in such a way that only your body will die and you will live forever.”
And he started meditating, and a strange phenomenon happened. Two years passed, four years passed, six years passed. He came back to America. He was American Jew. He went to the doctors, they could not believe. They thought that he must be dead by now, long ago. They said, “It is something miraculous. You are not supposed to live! What have you been doing.”
He said, “I have been meditating and I am feeling healthier and I am getting better.”
But once in a while he used to have attacks and when he had the attack, oxygen has to be given to him. Sheela was continuously harassing him. All this I have come to know now. People who had lived in the same house in India have revealed to me that Sheela was harassing him continuously. And because he was sick she was having a love affair with another man. And that was really disgusting. Her husband was dying in the same room and she will bring the other man to make love in the same room in front the husband and naturally he will throw a tantrum. And one day it became so much that she stopped the oxygen. She took out the tube. The poor man died in immense suffering and torture, suffocating.
I did hear the rumor, even in India, that something in mysterious about the death. But there was no solid proof. The man was already burnt. There was no witness. But now seeing Sheela’s all these acts here I feel certain that she has killed her husband too.
When I left India Sheela had burnt two bare houses just to show that all my literature has been burned by somebody. Nobody would have told this if Sheela was here. People were afraid that they will be killed or thrown out of the commune. Many have been thrown out of the commune. Whoever was a rebel was condemned as negative and he has to leave. And because I was in isolation and in silence and I had no connection except Sheela, so even if people wanted to inform me about something it was impossible. They could not phone. Every phone was taped.
All the guards on my house have just revealed that they were told not to have any contact with the people who lived with me, my physician, my dentist, my seamstress, my cleaners. Almost twenty people lived in the house. My kitchen people, my gardeners. The guards were instructed that, “You have not to talk to anybody, you have not even to smile at anybody, you have not to see eye to eye to anybody. Even if they wave you are not to answer.” And that’s how it has been going on. And it seems she had put those guards saying to them that they are for my safety.
But just today all the keys of my house have been found in Sheela’s room. Now what those keys were doing in her room? She has made a lock into my sitting room which connects the bedroom. I sleep alone there and she wanted to have the key from the outside. The lock is from the outside and she wanted to have the key. It was only because of my caretaker. Her insistence that the key cannot be given to anybody because things that have come to light, if she can poison my milk, if she can bug my room, if she can try to kill my physician three times, she could have tried to kill me. And the best way would have been any night. Guards were hers, I don’t know even their names, I don’t know even their faces, because they are on the roof, I cannot see them. She could have entered into my room any moment, given me an injection. It was so easy. She wanted to keep that thing available.
One should be wondering why she would like to kill me. Because three and half years being in full power she became a power maniac. Now her only fear was, if I start speaking again, then her face from the television screen will disappear. Then she will not be a celebrity. Then from radios her voice will disappear, from newspapers her name will disappear and it is really difficult for someone whose ego has become blown big, then suddenly to become nobody.
She was nobody. She was just a waitress in a hotel in America before she came to me. Here she saw power in her hands, millions of dollars in her hands. We have put two hundred million dollars to create the commune. She has stolen money out of it. Her old secretary is dying with cancer in California. Death sometimes makes people reveal truth. She has written me a letter yesterday, that Sheela has stolen forty-three million dollars from European communes which were bound to reach here, but they never came here. They went into a account in Switzerland. When you get so much money, so much power, and my people love me and she was using my name for everything.
Even very intelligent people proved very gullible for the simple reason, she found their weakness, their love for me. She will simply say it is for Osho’s sake, it is for Osho’s security, it is how Osho wants it. And people were ready to do it. She exploited the whole situation and committed all kinds of crime.
They were trying to culture AIDS virus. One wonders for what. Two persons from the commune who have been found by Sheela’s assistant, Puja, who is a medical person, as positive confirmed AIDS patients. When Sheela left, we let them tested again outside. Both are negative. Strange, where the virus has disappeared? It has disappeared with those twenty people? It seems their blood before sending for test was mixed with AIDS virus. And the reason seems to be that those two persons were just experimental the way scientists use guinea pigs, rats, they were using human beings. Perhaps there was a desire that if they cannot rule the commune, then they will destroy it.
Just the other day in Patanjali Lake, five hundred big fishes, beautiful fish, suddenly died. It seems poison has been dumped there. Otherwise there seems to be no reason for those fish to die simultaneously.
I wanted to say all these things to FBI and all other state government agencies and wanted them to ask me, interrogate me, so I can go into details. But they are not interested in the criminals. Their interest is that somehow the criminals has escaped, it is good. Now find people who have done small things, for example, this girl who has driven two people who burned the planning office, now give her immunity and make her say that who were those two people, any two people they choose.
That’s what they are trying to do with K.D. K.D. has not gone with Sheela’s group, he is hiding in California and trying to make a deal. He is a politician. He is trying to make a deal with the attorney general that, “If you give me immunity, then whatever you say, I will say.”
I would like the press to support this small minority against the whole dirty political regime. Help so that real criminals can be caught and should not be protected and make it sure that no innocent people are harassed.
That is the desire of the attorney general. That’s why they never wanted to interview me. I wanted them first to interview me before the press so the whole public knows. What is the fear? I should be afraid. Why you should be afraid? They refused that, they refused video, they refused taking a tape and finally, they refused that they don’t want to take my interview at all. And all this time they were continuously inquiring the attorney general on the phone, for everything. To cancel the interview or not, to let them have it on the video or not.
It is your duty and responsibility to expose this dirty state of affairs. We are ready to support the law and the Constitution and we are ready to help them catch all those twenty people, because we are keeping an eye on them, we know where they are. We have sannyasins all over the world. When they were in Zurich, Zurich sannyasins were looking after them. When they went into Germany, German sannyasins were looking after them, watching. Now they are in France. Wherever they will go, my people are there. But FBI does not seem to be interested even to inform the Interpol that these people have committed crimes, they should be brought to America.
Perhaps if Sheela comes back. Or perhaps FBI people are already making deals with those criminals there, that they are not criminals. They are capable of making deals and can give them immunity and then any innocent person can be imprisoned, for ten years, for twenty years, for his whole life.
I have called the press just to make it clear to the people that it should not be allowed to happen. And when we are helping and cooperating, they don’t want our cooperation. Just now I have heard that because I have called the press conference and I am exposing them, they are packing their suitcases and they will escape. Strange, you belong to the federal intelligence department, you belong to the state police, you belong to the county police, such cowards. You cannot face a press conference. Rather than packing their suits they should have been here, because they have been here for seven days. And we have been their hosts and we have been helping them in every way. We gave them our hospitality and they are giving us their criminality.
It is somehow a psychological fact that the criminals and the people who belong to the police are not very different kind of people. Just criminals employed by the government become FBI, KGB, and criminals who are unemployed, those poor people serve in jails or electrocuted or given death sentences, but I think both belong to the same category of mind.
If you have any questions, you can ask.

Jim Hyde

How would you convince the people who will see and hear this videotape that you are telling the truth and Sheela is lying?

Simple. Why she has escaped? If she is not a criminal, she should have been here and faced me. She did not even come to say goodbye to me. People who don’t commit crime don’t escape like that. And all the twenty people are involved in all these cases. So tell her, if she is innocent and I am criminal, then face me, just stand before me. She thinks she is brave, so tell her to be brave and come back. Why you are escaping here and there, hiding in Black Forest in Germany. What is that is going to do? How long you can hide? And if the police is not going to take the action, then my people will take the action! We can wait for few days and see what these idiots do. Otherwise we are capable enough to bring all those twenty back here.

Would you rather the investigators, who’ve been invited, go away now? Have you given up on the system?

First they have to take my interview before the press. Now that is an absolute condition on which there will be no compromise. Before I was ready to give the interview in privacy and keep the video private till the case is over. But now, no.

Scott Miller

The person who is being investigated is not usually allowed to record or videotape those interviews and certainly, these investigations never occur in front of the press. Why should you be different?

This is not an ordinary crime. It is a series of criminal acts and it has been committed in my name! So I have every authority to force the investigators, because my name has been used, misused. Advantage has been taken of my name. And when I am willing, what they are going to lose? Unless there is some conspiracy that they will not be able to manage if my statements become public. But it does not matter, if they don’t make it public, I will make them public. I am making them public. Who can prevent me?

Are you saying that you have the authority to tell the investigators how to investigate? Or to tell the investigators who to arrest?

Certainly. The government is the servant of the people! They are not our masters.

You said that you won’t talk under certain conditions, Are you still recommending that your sannyasins cooperate with the law enforcement agencies?

They are cooperating.

Do you want them to keep cooperating?

This is cooperation.

Tomorrow, do you want your sannyasins to keep talking to the investigators?

I will not. It is finished. Cooperation is finished! And if they don’t pack now, we will pack them out.

Swami Anand Subhuti

Sorry. Do you think the FBI could have been waiting for a series of counter-allegations from Sheela?

They should bring Sheela here. Why they are waiting for? Because there is every possibility she may be killed by the other nineteen criminals. I am afraid of that, because I have seen today the interview she has given. She looks absolutely drugged. I am afraid that she may be killed. Because all the remaining ones will be free if she is finished. Then the main criminal is gone. The main source is finished. And these people are taking so long time which is not needed at all. She should be caught immediately with all those people. And to my sannyasins I would like to say, now no cooperation. Nobody goes to report anything unless my interview is taken with my condition, our cooperation is finished. Now they can go to hell! And as far as Sheela and her nineteen colleagues are concerned, we will make our own arrangements.

Walden Kirsch

Good evening. We have been meeting like this for a week.

You are behaving like FBI! [laughing]

Each time the stories that we hear become more and more extravagant. Right now as we speak, there are a certain number of sannyasins here in this room, who don’t believe what you’re saying.

What do you want to believe them? Who are the people?

They’re out there, sir.

I will show. Raise the hands who believe in me and say three times, Yes!

[Audience: Yes! Yes! Yes!]

Now you ask your people to raise their hands and say no!

I’ll let you do that.

Just come here. Is anybody there who can stand for this man? Have pity on him! Just look behind.

You say in various ways that you ask your sannyasins not to believe you. You ask them to trust in you but not to believe you.

That’s right!

Why should they believe the facts which you’ve been laying out for the past week?

Because they know it as a fact.

Why should they believe you now?

They are not believing me. They know the facticity of what I am saying.

Why should they believe your version and not the other version when you tell your followers not to believe the words you say?

They are not believing me! They are believing the facticity of what I am saying. If it is a fact, you said that there are few people, you cannot make them stand. You cannot stand yourself rightly.

Have you told any lies the past week? Have you told any lies at all?

Never! Why should I say a lie? I have been trying to say the truth for thirty years and yet I have not been able to say it.

It sounds as though a showdown is inevitable between you and the criminal investigators here. At this point you are telling your followers not to speak to anybody unless they speak with you first. Is that correct?

I am simply saying that those people are trying a conspiracy to destroy the commune. And I will not allow anybody to destroy the commune.

You said a moment ago that none of your sannyasins should grant any interviews to any investigators unless those investigators have taken your interview first.

Certainly!

And until your interview happens you’re ordering your sannyasins to speak to none of these investigators.

Just let me repeat clearly to you.
They have been investigating up to today and we have been cooperating with them in every possible way. And they have been trying to exploit our cooperation. Rather than being thankful and grateful that we are cooperating, otherwise they have no way of finding the criminals and the crimes. It is only by our cooperation they can find the criminals and the crimes. They should be grateful.
They are not grateful, but they are being tricky. They have been trying behind the doors to bribe few people who have committed some small crime that, “We will give you immunity.” And you just tell what we want. This cannot be done. This is not cooperation. This is exploitation. And their desire is not against the criminals at all. Otherwise the first step, because we have given them all evidence, they have found all the bugging, they have taken all the wires, all the bugging, photographs, everything, we have delivered all machines. Now we think perhaps it was not a right step because these people perhaps may destroy all those evidences. If they want to protect the criminals and destroy the commune, from today there will be no cooperation. Now they will have to understand it that no conspiracy can be tolerated.
They have to take my interview before the national press, and only after that my sannyasins will cooperate. Otherwise not.

Swami Anand Videha

We had a Watergate one week ago, now we have a double Watergate. Who do you suspect is behind the attorney general? Any guess?

Attorney general is my guess. He is behind this Watergate. He is trying to protect the criminals and punishing the innocent. The idea of putting five hundred sannyasins behind the jail, into the jail, is out of a very criminal mind. And when we are supporting in every way, when we are withdrawing every hostility that Sheela and her group has created between our commune and Oregon.
For example, we are changing city of Rajneesh back to the old name, Antelope. We are removing our police forces from there and we are ready to sell all the properties that belonged to the foundation to the people of Antelope, or anybody who wants to purchase, at the same price as we purchased them. We have improved them, renovated them, we have put money into them, they are already double of the cost and we will be giving them half of the price. And we want to move out of Antelope because we don’t want to have anything to do with politics. It was Sheela’s trip, it is finished with her going from here.
We want to be left alone here, we don’t want any hostility, any antagonism with anybody. And we will give the proof of it by changing the name to Antelope, be removing our police force from there and we will remove our people as the properties are sold. Now, it is the time for all the Oregonians who were showing so much love for Antelope to purchase those properties. Now they will know who is their friend. It is one thing to talk and make great slogans that it is better to be dead than red, now it is time to show it, that you really intend. So they should purchase all the properties. We can vacate in a single day. Just they should purchase all the properties the way we have purchased from them.
Our people don’t want to live there. Who wants to live in that third-rate one hundred year old houses? We have enough houses, fully air-conditioned, with all modern facilities. Our sannyasins want to come back home. Sheela was forcing them to go there. It was done all without my knowledge. Otherwise it would not have happened at all because I am absolutely apolitical.
I am not even against politics. Because to be against politics becomes politics. I am apolitical, neither for nor against, I simply want that the politics does not exist at all. That all the politicians are dead.

You say that Sheela stolen forty-three million dollars. There is any real proof that has happen and why the European commune did not take direct action with Interpol in this case?

Just now when I was coming here I have heard Sheela’s husband is in the prison.

You mean the last husband?

And that too you have to understand. Sheela’s first husband she killed. Sheela’s second husband Jayananda is an American, before divorcing him she married a third husband who is Swiss just to be in Switzerland because from escaping from here where she was to go? So she married Deepo and then she became aware that this is a crime, she is committing bigamy. So she had to rush to a Himalayan small kingdom, Nepal, because in Nepal, it is so poor, in small villages you can bribe any magistrate and get any certificate, any divorce certificate or anything you want. So she has brought from Nepal a divorce certificate back dated to avoid bigamy.
But the third husband is in the jail. He is in the jail because he also tried on Sheela’s instructions to take the money out of the bank. It is not those forty-three million, it is another account of the Zurich commune. The money belongs to the Zurich commune. Deepo was one of the trustees and he has taken the money for his personal use, the whole money, and closed the account. I don’t know exactly right now how much money he has taken, but from all over the world news is reaching.
One woman from Geneva who had been my sannyasin long. Sheela came into my contact. She has informed that Sheela’s whole business was selling drugs, particular heroin. And while she was going to Europe the excuse was visiting the communes, but the reality was heroin. She has been doing the business in selling gold also. I have called that sannyasins to come here, because she will be an eye witness, because Sheela and she were both very close friends. She knows every detail, that how much money she has got out of drugs, how much money out of gold, how much money she has taken out of the communes.
We will wait and see how capable American government, FBI and its other agencies are capable. If they cannot manage such a small thing, then forget about Soviet Union.

But till now there is no direct action towards Sheela for the forty-three million dollars stolen in Europe with Interpol there?

I have called the secretary of Sheela who is dying of cancer in California to come here and expose the whole thing clearly. That from where she has got those forty-three million dollars, in which bank they are, what is the account number. I am certain there is money. For one reason because Sheela has told me many times that, “I have a surprise for you.”
And I always asked, “What surprise and when.”
Then one day she said that, “Now I cannot contain it any more, we have opened a bank account in Switzerland, in Sheela and Savita’s name, but it is for me. In case you have to leave America, we will make a beautiful place and a small commune in Switzerland.”
I asked her that, “If the bank account is for me, at least I am entitled to know how much money is there, what is the number of the bank account, and what is the name.” That was never told to me. I have asked it almost half a dozen time.
Even the last day Savita left, I had told Hasya that, “Ask Savita about the bank account number.” In front of me she promised that she will give the bank account number and every detail to Hasya, but she never gave, and escaped. So there is certainly a bank account, how much it is we will figure it out. They cannot cheat my sannyasins, they will repent badly.
But we will wait for this FBI capacity and if we see that these people are impotent, then we will do things on our own. We can catch hold of those people right now! We know everybody, where he is. And we wanted to inform these people but they don’t want to have my interview.

You say your name has been used to do all these criminal acts. You think you can file, or you will file Sheela directly for using your name for this?

Certainly. She has misused her power. She had my power of attorney. She was my secretary and I had given her all power and she has misused it for doing all kinds of crime. She will have to come back and she will have to ask apology to each of the sannyasin of the commune, because she has misbehaved with each of the sannyasins. She has harassed these people.
You will not believe that even the mayor of Rajneeshpuram was punished by Sheela and the punishment was that, “For few days you simply go on digging ditches. This is the punishment from Osho.” I would like K.D. to come back, there is no need to hide in California. Just come back here and expose everything that you know and ask forgiveness from these people and we will fight for you. You expose to the government, to the court, about the whole gang and we will make every effort to get immunity for you. In fact the American Constitution is in every way favorable, there is no problem in it. He will get immunity, he has not done any crime himself, he has been only in the group. His only crime is that he did not expose the group, but for which immunity is not difficult. So if he sees somewhere on the television screen, he should come back immediately without any fear. Nobody is going to punish him and he will never be told to dig ditches.
But that was one of the methods of the fascist group to punish people, to humiliate them, to force them to do things, otherwise they are not surrendering, they are not trusting, and all in my name. In fact, I can go to the court that my name has been misused and under my name’s cover all these crimes have been committed. And I will protect my innocent sannyasins who have not done anything. Okay?

Ma Viren

You said few days ago that the government maybe wants this part of Oregon, this desert, for nuclear experiments. Would this enough reason for they to conspire against the commune?

Any reason may be there, but this commune is going to remain here. Their reason for nuclear experiments is against man, against life, against everything that is valuable. It is not worth anything. If it was worth anything, we would have vacated this place immediately.

But this is true in absolute, it is not true as far as power is concerned. I mean they always win!

It is not so easy! Just because we are five thousand sannyasins here does not mean that we don’t have power. Do you think only nuclear weapons have power? In fact, nuclear weapons have no power at all anymore. What power they have? Their power is that they can create another Hiroshima here? But that will destroy the whole America’s image. Their democracy, their Constitution, their values, and they will prove just hypocrites.
They cannot do any harm to this commune because my people are around the earth and everywhere there will be protest against it if any harm is being done. I know also how to deal with these idiots, if worse comes to worse! Then no American agency in any country can function. I have enough sannyasins everywhere. So don’t be worried about power. No need to be worried.

============================================================

George Lurie, USA Today; Jeannie Senior, The Oregonian, Portland; Bill Graves, The Bend Bulletin, Bend, Oregon

I’d appreciate brief answers, and I’ll try to keep my questions precise. Last night you spoke of hijackings and other extreme measures. Could a mass action like the one that occurred in Jonestown could ever occur here at Rajneeshpuram.

Never. Hiroshima can occur here but not Jonestown. If anything happens here, the responsibility will be of President Ronald Reagan. And the whole America will be condemned for it. And it will be a betrayal of American constitution and its great values.

I’d like to know how the AIDS epidemic has caused you to reevaluate your attitude towards sex between your followers.

There is no problem, just people have to be a little more cautious. They have to take precautions.
Six thousand sannyasins have been tested. They are free of AIDS. These people have been given all the instructions to use condoms and gloves, stop kissing, start new ways of loving: for example, rubbing each other’s noses, pressing each other’s earlobes. But kissing is absolutely prohibited.

I’d like to know what your current immigration status is.

The same as it was four years before, the first day I had entered America. And I think it will remain the same the day I leave my body.
I have never seen such an idiotic bureaucracy anywhere. Four years and they have not been able to decide anything this way or that. And the reason is: yes they cannot say because of the politicians and their pressure, and if they say no then I am going to the courts, because their no will be against the constitution.
So they are in a dilemma. So let them be in a dilemma. I am not starving without their green card. I am not going to eat it. And they are unnecessarily harassing themselves. I am not harassed. I have simply forgotten all about it.
I have been four-year-old American already. And a fresh American is far better than the rotten old corpses.

You’ve said in the past that you’d prefer assassination to a natural death. Do you anticipate assassination?

Every day there are phone calls, letters, threats to assassinate. I don’t care a bit about them. And attempts to assassinate me have already been made in India. Twice I have been poisoned. Once a knife has been thrown at me.
And I was just joking when I said that I would prefer assassination better. Ninety-nine percent people die on their beds. That’s a very common and ordinary way of dying. In fact, everyone should be afraid to go to sleep on the bed. That is the place where ninety-nine percent of humanity has died. You should pull your mattress on the floor, that is better.

Since the commune appears to function both spiritually and financially around you, after you’re gone what will become of Rajneeshpuram and your followers?

They are intelligent people. They will find ways to function. I am no one to decide their future. I will leave it open for their intelligence to function.
Even now I don’t decide anything. I simply explain my position, my attitude. Then it is up to them to do whatsoever they want.
The ultimate decision is their own. They cannot throw the responsibility on me.

I’d like to know where you envision yourself and this commune ten years from now.

I never think of the future. Ten year is too long. I don’t think even for ten minutes afterwards, what is going to happen.
Future is simply nonexistent. This moment is enough for me. And I am enjoying it to its fullest.

Do you travel much outside the commune aside from your drives?

No. Even my drives are within the Rancho Rajneesh, our own land. I don’t go out.

Between your collection - the commune’s collection - of Rolls Royces and its quite extensive bus system, your elegant clothes and the sannyasins’ simple red clothes, even your differing statements to your followers and the press from day to day, there seem to be so many stark contrasts here. I get the feeling that it’s intentional. Is that the case?

I believe in the uniqueness of every individual. I am not a communist. I don’t possess anything. These robes are also possessed by the commune. It is their generosity, hospitality, that they provide me whatever they can do for a guest. I am not a member of the commune, I am not a sannyasin. They love me. And love knows no boundaries.
But I don’t take anything into my possession. I am as unpossessed as I was born, just naked. Everything that I am using - my shoes, my hat, my watch - they all belong to the commune. And you should also know, they are all created by my own sannyasins.. Even my watch is created by my own sannyasins.
And all the Rolls Royces.I use only one Rolls Royce for one and a half hour per day.
They love me, they want to do something to me, and they know that my whole philosophy is not of poverty but of abundance. So they go on pouring as much as they can.
Just today a new Rolls Royce limousine has come, and in the coming week five more will be coming. But they all belong to the commune. And whatever they want to do with them they can do.
In fact, I had told to the press that I would like them to be distributed among sannyasins, but the trust that holds Rolls Royces is not willing to do that for two reasons. First, the commune has enough cars, more than needed.
I always believe in abundance in everything. The commune has more buses, more than needed. It has more airplanes than it ever uses. So there is no point, according to the trustees, to give Rolls Royces to the commune. It will be heavy unnecessarily on the commune.
Secondly, they think that because I have used them they have become sacred, and they don’t want those cars to be used by anyone else. They will remain as a memorial.

Will you have anything to do with appointing or choosing someone to succeed you?

No. Nobody succeeds me, because enlightenment is not something that you can somebody. It is not a post.
The commune will choose their president, the commune will choose their vice-president. That is up to the commune. But I hold no post. I don’t have any power except my love and my trust in my people.
Even if somebody misuses, takes advantage of my love, it does not matter to me. My love remains the same.
There is no way to find another person to succeed me. Once they have lost me, they have lost me forever.

When I was here last week I recall you saying during one of your addresses to the commune members that you purposefully chose Sheela and willingly allowed her to continue what you called her reign of terror in order to give your followers what you referred to as a taste of fascism. Were you serious or was this a joke?

Serious.

Does that mean, then, that generally you did know of some of the things that Sheela must be doing?

No. I did not know anything that she was doing. One thing I knew, that she will do something which will give a taste to the commune of fascism. And it is good to have a taste of fascism so that you don’t get into the trap again.
And it is better to give that experience while I am here.
I stopped it before it could have become too much. And now my people will remain aware, and they will know how it happens, how it grows and how it destroys everybody’s freedom, individuality, integrity.
I was absolutely serious when I said it.

And yet you say you stopped it. My impression is that Sheela left without you knowing and on her own accord.

I stopped it without her knowing. The moment I started speaking she was finished. Being here was of no more of any nourishment to her ego. Except leaving like a coward, she could not do anything else.
I never said her to leave. In my whole life I have never said anybody to leave. I just create the situation that you have to leave.
I started speaking and that was enough. She was finished. Her whole power was that I was silent, and in my name she could exploit my people, could manage anything she wanted them to do. Once I started speaking, no representative was needed, no mediator was needed. I was face to face with my people. She was absolutely useless.
Unless she was able to become again the same old sannyasin as everybody else, this was the only way: to escape like a coward.
And she will suffer. And she will repent.

Whether you knew specifically or not, when you answered my original question that you did appoint her in order to give your followers a taste of fascism, had she succeeded in poisoning the water system of The Dalles as you allege she wanted to, or having killed more than the single individual that you allege she killed, would not part of that responsibility be on your shoulders?

No, it is her responsibility because I have never told her to do these things. She could have been a fascist without doing these things. These are not necessary to be a fascist.
And I have never given any details for her. She never asked me.
It was a very general statement. A taste of fascism is good exercise for all those who are going to live longer than me. Once I am gone, if then somebody starts becoming fascist, it will be impossible for them to stop it. But now I have destroyed that possibility completely.

Jeannie Senior,
The Oregonian

You said was that you hadn’t been invited to talk to the police yet and you advised your sannyasins not to talk to the police until you had talked to the police. And you set some conditions under which you wanted to talk to the police. You said you wanted to have the press present and have a video crew there and an audio crew there.
Are you going to maintain that stand? The police don’t traditionally do this when they’re interviewing a witness. Are you asking for special treatment?

First I had asked for no special treatment, just for an interview so that I can give them an overview what the situation is and they can work better to find out who is the criminal. They made the appointment and then at the last moment they canceled it.
Then this went on happening second time again. It was only third time that I made it that, “There seems to be something fishy and you canceled the appointment only after asking somebody higher up. Then I would like it to be videotaped so that you don’t do any mischief, because now I cannot trust you. The videotape will not be released to the public. That we will give you in a written contract that the videotape will remain sealed till the case is over. But it will be a guarantee that you don’t misuse anything or change anything which I say.”
I don’t think it was anything against law.
And when they accepted that, that means certainly they were not thinking it as an special obligation. And then they canceled that too.
Third time they canceled it. And then I told them that, “I will give you one time more, and if fourth time it is canceled then I am going to call a press conference and give the interview to the press conference.”

So that’s what you did last night, you mean? You gave the interview to the press conference?

So it is very simple. I am not asking them anything. In the press conference I said to them that now the things. They have deceived four times. It is enough one can take. There is a limit. Now I will give the interview only before the full press present.

So you had an agreement with them that you would meet with them? You could have your crew videotape the interview?

Yes. And that they had agreed.

Things are at rather an impasse as far as your interview?

Yes.

The mass media have been full of allegations between you and Sheela. At present you’re embarked on a real war of words, you and Sheela. Who you think’s going to win.

Only truth wins. It is never a question between me or anybody else. Only truth wins.
If she has courage enough, she should come here. We can call the whole national media and she can discuss before the media with me. And that will expose the whole thing, where the truth is.

Similarly, you seem to be involved in a war of words with the attorney general of Oregon. I wonder who you think’s going to win that one.

The constitution of America is going to win. And it is in our favor. Attorney generals come and go. The constitution remains.

One of the things that’s being said in the press is that this entire thing that’s happened since last Saturday night is a carefully orchestrated scheme that’s going to culminate in you also leaving Oregon. Do you want to comment on that?

No, I am never going to leave unless they give me the green card.

And then you’re going to Germany, right?

Perhaps I may go for a world travel to meet my other sannyasins who are being corrupted by Sheela and meet the world media in different countries to make things put right. But I cannot leave without the green card.
If America wants me to leave America, green card first.

The Oregonian received information today that the police investigators who’ve been working here at the ranch for the last few days have been victims of bugging and wiretapping. Are you aware of that?

Then that must be the immigration department who has been bugging and taping everything, every phone from Rajneeshpuram going out or coming in. But my people - we have shown them every place.
Every wire has been taken out. Every bugging device has been given to them. Every machine which was taping phones has been delivered into their hands, and if they feel still it is going on, then they should look into it.
It must be INS or perhaps attorney general.
Perhaps they are worried that what is going on between the FBI and the police and between my commune.
Because their intention is clear. The intention is to use this situation to destroy the commune.
And Sheela is giving all those things in Europe without any foundation and without any evidence, and she is talking to the press again and again that, “I have immense information.” That means she is indicating to the attorney general and to the FBI that she is willing to be purchased, that she would like to be given immunity, then she can give all kind of information against the community.
And that is a possibility because they are not concerned about the crimes that she has committed. Their concern is more how they can destroy this commune from Oregon. So if she can give them information - and certainly she can give them information because she has done everything so she knows everything. And if you give her immunity she can indicate to any innocent sannyasin who knows nothing about it. And if you are intend to destroy the commune, this is the simplest way.
And politicians are so dirty-minded that they can do anything.
For example, in second world war Adolf Hitler and Josef Stalin were enemies, but they became friends. They made a peace treaty which was amazing to everybody in the whole world, that Adolf Hitler and Josef Stalin becoming friends is a miracle. And then even a greater miracle was to happen: when Adolf Hitler attacked Soviet Union, Josef Stalin became friends to America and Britain, to Roosevelt and Churchill.
America and Soviet Union has been enemies for decades: the only two permanent enemies in the whole world. But they became friends. Then the question of communism or capitalism did not matter. Only thing mattered was how to destroy Adolf Hitler.
So Sheela’s continuous emphasis in every interview that she has so much information to give but she cannot give it is an indication to the politicians here in Oregon, to FBI, that, “If you give us immunity, I can deliver you all the information.”
And certainly she can deliver all the information, because everything she has done or she has ordered to be done. And if she is immune then there is no problem. She can impose crimes upon innocent people without any difficulty.
And who cares that one man died or three persons were being poisoned or Dalles system was poisoned? Who cares about these small things? The big thing is how to destroy this commune, which has become a pain in the neck of all the politicians.
But it is not so easy.
I challenge Sheela if she has any guts, then come here and face me.

How would you characterize Sheela and the corporate leaders of Rajneeshpuram who left, and how would you characterize Hasya and the new corporate leaders at Rajneeshpuram? One word for each.

Sheela and the people who have left is a criminal gang. And the people who have taken their place are very loving, compassionate human beings. And they are going to change the whole quality of the commune. Okay?

Bill Graves,
The Bend Bulletin

Are you beginning to regret having invited the police in for this investigation?

I had invited them. We have been cooperating with them. We have been giving them every information that was available to us, to any sannyasin. But they have been taking advantage of it.
Rather than trying to find the criminals, they were trying to find few people in the commune who have committed crimes and to give them immunity and tell them that how many people they have to name for certain crimes.
It was overheard by a sannyasin that FBI people were discussing that at least five hundred sannyasins need to be imprisoned. Now this is strange. We are cooperating, we are giving you information, we are going you.taking you to every spot which has been bugged, but they are not interested in the criminals who have escaped.
The first step would have been to inform the German police, the Swiss police and the Interpol to prevent those twenty people from escaping, and bring them back here. They had enough solid proof.
Just the bugging was so much that one of the FBI persons said to the sannyasin who was showing them around that, “I cannot believe. These people have surpassed Nixon. Their bugging is far more sophisticated.” And he said that for one bugging there is five years jail. And anybody who has done this work will need at least one thousand years jail.
But rather than preventing those criminals, they were trying to do something else. Their strategy has been to take the cooperation to find the crimes and to find few people who had done little bits - according to the gang, according to their orders - and make them immune and force them to take names of innocent people, particularly of those without whom the commune will be completely crippled.
If you take five hundred important people - doctors, engineers, electricians, drivers, the restaurant people - if you take five hundred people who are essential for the life of the commune, you will cripple it. You will destroy it.

So how are you recommending your disciples respond to this?

Now we are not going to support. I had asked them - in fact, they should have asked me first. They should have taken my interview first. They did not ask. That is strange, because I was the one to invite them here and they would not ask for my interview.
Then I asked them that, “I want to give my interview.” Four times they gave the appointment, and four times they canceled it.
Then yesterday I had to call a press conference. I told them that, “This is the last time.” Yesterday two o’clock was their appointment, and I said, “If you cancel it again, that means something is cooking, that you want to avoid me. Perhaps you are waiting for somebody who can indicate that I am the criminal. So I am going to call a press conference tonight.”
And I called the press conference. I have explained to them all the crimes that Sheela and her group has committed here. And I have told them that, “Now onwards we will not be supportive. We will not cooperate. We will not be your hosts any more. You can pack your luggage and get out of this place.”

What is your response to governor Vic Atiyeh’s criticism of your not cooperating today?

I have not heard.

He said that his patience was growing thin with your refusal to cooperate.

His patience! He knows what patience means? For four days we have been cooperating and for four days they have been canceling my interview. My patience is ruined or his patience is ruined?
He does not know the meaning of patience. Just by being a governor does not mean that he is understanding enough of psychology language.
We have invited him for many times. He goes on speaking against us without coming here. Is he a coward or what?
When we invite you and we want you to be acquainted with the commune, and then say whatever you want to say, we have no objection about it. If it is wrong we can confute it. But without coming here, saying things based on gossips will prove you simply an idiot.
That’s what has happened in the case of attorney general. We had made few tents. They were not ordinary tents, they were winterized tents so we can use them in all the seasons. But they were not permanent structures. Permanent structures need permission. Tents don’t need.
And because they were different from ordinary tents - as if there cannot be different kind of tents - he simply without coming here. We asked him to come and see. If he feels they are permanent structures, then it is up to his decision whatever he wants to do.
He imposed a fine of $1.4 million. We went to the court, and I told my people that, “Take a tent there in the court. Put up the tent in the court. Within ten minutes the tent is ready. Ask the judge to see, and then within ten minutes unfold it. Put it in a bag. And ask the judge, ‘Can a permanent structure be constructed in ten minutes and folded back in ten minutes?”‘
I told them that there is no need for any argument. Simply show it.
And the judge laughed. And he simply said, “There is no case. These are tents.”
And the attorney general is absolutely wrong in giving that kind of punishment. And that man seems to have no shame. Otherwise he would have jumped into the ocean and gone forever.
The same is the situation of the governor. He should come here and he should know what patience is.
For four years they have not given a single reason why my green card has not been given. Does it take four years to decide?

Is there a danger that these statements that Sheela’s been making in the Stern magazine will cause any damage to your image within the Rajneeshee movement around the world?

No, because I don’t care about my image. Never cared. I am not a politician who cares about his image, because my image does not depend on anybody’s voting.
I don’t care at all about any image. My image is within me. Nobody can distort it.

Sheela said that she was draining community resources to keep you supplied with jeweled watches and Rolls Royces. Did you ever tell Sheela that you would die if you did not get a $2.5 million diamond watch or that you would commit suicide if you did not get another Rolls Royce?

She is simply going insane. In the first place, what do you think of this watch? How many million dollars it will be? This is the cheapest watch you can find anywhere in the world. It is made by my own sannyasins, and these are not diamonds. These are pure stones, authentic sincere stones. And it costs nothing.
But it is invaluable. Even for one billion dollars I will not sell it. It is made with such love that it cannot be sold.
And I am using mostly the watches that are made by my own sannyasins with stones, not diamonds. But what can I do if people don’t have the understanding and the eye to make the distinction between stones and diamonds? That is their fault. That is not my fault, that is not the fault of the stones. People should learn a little more about stones and about diamonds.
And ask Sheela that: for four years I was silent, I was not going even out of my room. I was living in isolation. Why she continued to bring those million-dollar watches she is talking about? For four years continuously it was right. And when I started speaking it became wrong. Was it a kind of bribe that I should remain silent and should not speak?
Who was bringing those watches? She was the one who was bringing those watches. And I don’t know how much they cost, and I don’t know from whose donation they have been purchased. I don’t possess them either. They are possessed by a trust. They are only given to me for use.
I don’t use the watch more than five hours - two and half hours in the morning in the lecture, two and half hours in the evening in the interview.
And do you think a certain simple law of diminishing returns.? If you get one Rolls Royce, you are immensely happy. I have ninety. What difference does it make to me that in the garage there are ninety-one? The number of that one will come in three months time only for one day for ninety minutes. What does it matter to me? For that I will commit suicide?
I have never gone to the garage. I have never looked into the garage, how many cars are there, what kind of cars are there. And that too belongs to a trust.
I had declared that all those cars should be given to the commune. They are basically commune property. I don’t own anything. For thirty years I have not owned a single cent. I have not touched even money for twenty years. I have been four years in America; I have not seen even how a dollar bill looks like. And I don’t have any hope of seeing it in this life. There is no reason.
I had told the president of the trust that, “Distribute all those cars and distribute all those watches. I don’t need.” But they don’t want. And they are not my possessions. They say they are sacred because I have used them, and they will keep them as sacred memorial. They are not willing to give them.
And they say already commune has more than enough cars, so what is the need? One hundred buses, four airplanes and five hundred cars - and nowhere to go.
So neither they want to give the cars nor the commune is ready to receive them. They say, “Unnecessary burden. Why we should be burdened? Because Rolls Royces are just white elephants. Ninety white elephants, why they should be put? You take care, Your trust should take care. It is the trouble You have created.”
So neither the commune is ready to take them nor they are ready to give it to them. And I am nobody. I am not even commune’s member nor I am the owner of the Rolls Royces. And do you think I would commit suicide for a car of which I am not going even a owner? And that too after ninety cars are there waiting for me. Ninety-one will not make any difference. Economics has the law.the law of diminishing returns. The more you have, the less meaning.
It was Sheela, and there is her statement in many television shows in which she has told that, “We want three hundred sixty-five Rolls Royces for Osho.” So now she is simply swallowing her own saliva that she has spit.
Tell her to be a little sane.

You have said that what happens in this commune is really none of no concern to you, that you’re not a Rajneeshee. But in the last week and a half, you seem to have expressed a lot of concern about what’s going on here. I’m just wondering if you’re thinking about taking a more active role in this community or becoming a Rajneeshee.

No. No. What I have said is, I have never been a Rajneeshee but in these three and half years when I was silent Sheela created this idea of sannyasins being Rajneeshee. So I have taken it back. I have told that not only I am not a Rajneeshee, nobody is a Rajneeshee, because that is again going into the same stupidity as Christianity, Judaism, Hinduism, Buddhism, communism.
While I was in silence she has written a book: Rajneeshism. Now I don’t read. For five years I have not read anything. But I was going to tell my publisher that, “Look into that book and withdraw it from publication, because there is no Rajneeshism. This is all absurd.” That was her creation.

About a month ago you said of Sheela, “I have been sharpening her like a sword. I told her to go out and cut as many heads as possible.” You were defending her then, and the abrasive way that she represented this movement to the outside world. Have you changed your position? And were you using her.?

No, I have not changed anything. At that time, whatever she was doing was right. As far as the outside world was concerned she needed to be more assertive, and I was putting more and more emphasis that she should not be defensive in any way.
A small commune cannot live, cannot survive, if it takes a defensive attitude. And truth is never defensive, it is always assertive.
So it is not a question of defending Sheela. The same I will say to Hasya, that, “Be assertive.”
You become defensive only when you are afraid and you are not certain whether what you are saying is right or wrong. When you are clear, then you are a sword. And the sword has to be so fine that it can cut as many heads as possible - I mean metaphorically. I don’t mean that you have to go and cut people’s heads. But intellectually you have to do it.
I had been doing my whole life. I am not a defensive person. I never take the position of defense. That is only for cowards. My position is always of assertion, because I am absolutely certain of what I am saying. My whole being is in it.

I’ve heard that you have called yourself a great con man. How Sheela was able to con you without your knowing.

She has not conned me. She has conned herself. She has missed an opportunity that she may not get for many lives.
What she was when she has come to me? Just a waitress in a hotel. I made her almost a queen, a celebrity. But it was my work. I will destroy it immediately.
If I can make, I can unmake too. And you will see that within few months there will be no Sheela. She will be again in a hotel, a waitress. That’s all she is capable of.

Did the Share-A -Home program and Sheela’s growing addiction to power have anything to do with your ending your period of silence? Was there any relationship between Sheela’s growing power and celebrity and your coming out of silence and beginning to speak again?

No, it has nothing to do with that. My silence started in India. I came America in silence. And the Share-Home program was long before when I started speaking again.
I started speaking again because my physician was poisoned twice, thrice. My caretaker was poisoned once. And then it became necessary for me that something inhuman is going on.
It was my physician’s attempt of Sheela to kill him with a slow poisoning so that death appears almost like natural. But the third time she poisoned him was so clear that there is a witness who saw the woman, because it was in a meeting, in a discourse, morning discourse. Ten thousand sannyasins were there. And a woman sitting behind my physician simply pushed the needle into his body.
There are eyewitnesses.
He simply took over his robe and showed to many people, blood coming out and the point where the needle has been pushed in.
He was taken to the hospital. The doctors said that this is certainly poison, but it is a poison which is not detectable.
So we started looking. I asked our doctors to look into the poisonous literature: are there poisons which are not detectable? And they found that there is a category of poisons which are not detectable.
And when Sheela left, in her room we have found literature on poisons. And the same poison that our doctors were suspecting was underlined. In the whole literature, that was the only place they were.that was underlined.
And there were literature how to kill people, how to make bombs. Now what this literature has to do with Sheela? Poison, bombs, killing. And then we started looking into everything, and we found she had bugged the whole hotel. She has bugged my own room. She has bugged Hasya’s whole house - six rooms. She has bugged my caretaker’s room. She has bugged every place she was suspecting that perhaps someday somebody may say something against her.
FBI people accepted themselves that the bugging devices that were used are immensely sophisticated in comparison to what Nixon had done.

Was there an internal power struggle going on here prior to the day Sheela left?

No, there was no struggle at all.

Do you know anything about a faction that press reports have called the Beverly Hills money crowd here in the commune? They say that Hasya and John and David and Kavisha and Anuradha - the president of the commune - are part of a close-knit group that ran a mansion in Hollywood for the movement for a while. Is this a close-knit group that’s taken power?

There is no struggle. There was no struggle before. But she was afraid of these people. She was afraid of all intelligent people. She got rid of all intelligent people before. The vice chancellor of the university left. The chancellor of the university left. Many therapists left. Anybody who had some intelligence better than hers was dangerous.
That is the political working of the mind: never allow anybody who is more intelligent than you.
I am reminded of Machiavelli. He has written the best treatise for politicians. And all the princes of Europe were his disciples. When they became kings, he asked everybody to make him their prime minister. But nobody was ready. He was surprised. He said, “You are my disciples.”
They said, “That’s why we are refusing. You are too cunning. You are too intelligent. We cannot have you as our prime minister, because if you are prime minister we are gone. It won’t take much time for you to take over the kingdom.”
So every politician tries. So she has finished. Many sannyasins had to go away. Now I am receiving telegrams, telephones, that, “We are coming back. We had left because of Sheela. Now she has left; we are coming back.”
This group - Hasya and her group from Beverly Hills - just came few months before. And they had come here to make a film. Hasya and her husband had made one of the best films in AmericGodfather. She wanted to make a film on me and the movement and the ideology. So I said, “That’s perfectly good.”
So she came with her group to write the script, to prepare the background. And because I allowed them, Sheela was afraid. The whole group was more intelligent than her. The whole group was more creative than her, more educated than her.
She is not educated. She has no university degree.
So she became very much afraid of the group. But there was no power struggle from the side of Hasya. They were simply working on the film.

But their house was bugged and they were given every kind of harassment, humiliation, by all Sheela’s group. Whatever they could do. They wanted somehow that they should leave.
It had happened before, too. Another group of my sannyasins who make films in Hollywood - both husband and wife are my sannyasins - they had come three years before. And I said, “It is perfectly okay. You make the film.”
They prepared the script, they worked hard for months, and then Sheela came to me that, “This film will become a worldwide success, so we cannot just give them like that. They have to pay ten million dollars to the Foundation.”
I said, “This is outrageous. Those two sannyasins are not rich. They certainly make films. They are comfortably rich, but they cannot pay ten millions in advance. You can ask, ‘Five percent in your profit will be Foundation’s.’ That is reasonable, in the profit. But before the film is made you ask ten millions. It is irrational.”
But in spite of that she wrote to them that, “You will have to give ten million dollars in advance, otherwise you cannot make the film.” So those poor people had to drop the idea. They wrote a very sad letter to me that, “We were so excited in making it, but from where we can give ten million dollars in advance?”
This time I told her that, “Don’t talk of advance at all. These people are our sannyasins and whatever profit will be out of the film will belong to the Foundation. So you don’t bother.”
Because I favored them and made it clear in front of them, she became more afraid that now a group has come who can replace her any moment.
There was no idea in anybody’s mind, but sometimes it happens what you fear of, just because of fear you manage to happen it.
She escaped. Naturally, that was the best group to replace her. And they replaced her.

How has power been diffused with this change? How are you going to assure that this doesn’t ever happen again?

It cannot happen. For thirty years I have been speaking, there has been a commune. If I am there, available to people, nobody can exploit them.
The situation was simple. Because I was not available and she was my sole representative. And she was using my name in everything, that, “This is from Osho.” And there was no way for sannyasins to know whether it is from me or not, because any information has to come through her and any information they get they will get from her.
And she was not bringing all the information. Now I am becoming aware. So many things were happening. She was not bringing the information. And so many things that I have said, she has not informed the people about that.

Is there a danger for a person in your position of getting in a cocoon, isolated from the world?

No. I don’t have any power. I don’t hold any position. The commune has several corporations, so power is divided. Every corporation has its own work field*. I don’t take any active part.
My only active part is to answer my sannyasins’ questions about their personal growth, about their problems, about the commune if they feel there is some difficulty.
If I am available then there is no question. And this time I will do everything.
For example, I am withdrawing the book, Rajneeshism. It is not my book. Sheela managed to compile it according to her ideas. She has taken my sentences from other books, but the idea and the whole pattern is like a catechism of a Catholic.
I am withdrawing it.
I have dropped the word Rajneeshee. Nobody is a Rajneeshee. There is no religion here. People are trying to experience themselves; this is a simple science, not religion - and absolutely individual. No question of collectivity.
It is the collectivity which is dangerous.
And soon I am going to withdraw red clothes so there will be no distinction between the sannyasins and the non-sannyasins. I am going to withdraw the mala.
Before I leave my body I will withdraw every possibility that any kind of fascist thing can happen.

So are you saying that this is not a religion?

This is only an experiment in religiousness. And there is a total difference between two.
A religion is a fixed creed. A religiousness is a quality. A religiousness does not make you Christian, Hindu, Mohammedan, but it makes you a different human being. It gives you different qualities: of love, compassion, gratitude. It is a religiousness.
But it is difficult to explain to bureaucracy. With INS it was so difficult to explain to them. Now, it is a very subtle point. To me, in existence there are no nouns, no pronouns - only verbs.

When are you going to allow the sannyasins to stop wearing red and their malas, and why do they wear them in the first place?

There was need. There was immense need in the first place to give them a certain identity, to give them certain courage, to give them certain challenge in the society so they become more integrated.
Soon I will withdraw everything that can be destructive in my absence.

Are you expecting to leave soon?

No, not soon.

The people who live in Rajneesh or Antelope have expressed a lot of interest in your spirit of cooperation or reconciliation. But they say that they need to see that town disincorporated, to believe you are sincere. How do you feel about that?

No. Why it should be destroyed as a city? What I am doing, I am giving it back its old name: Antelope. I am withdrawing the police force from Rajneeshpuram which we have lent to Antelope. We are ready to vacate Antelope.
The Antelope people should purchase their properties back or - the whole Oregon was showing so much love and was so much favorable to them - now this is the time to show it. Purchase the properties, and we are ready to vacate it. And then if you want to destroy the city, it is up to you. It is your city, we have nothing to do with it.

Most people say there’s no way they can buy that two million dollars worth of housing you have there.

If they cannot buy, then they can sell there. We can buy. Anyway, we are ready. This is cooperation.
If they cannot buy, then they should sell. That they can do. Or they also, they cannot do. They want without paying anything the whole land and all the houses and we should vacate and give them as donation?

Have you heard of any evidence that suggests that any of this wiretapping or these other crimes occurred in Antelope?

No. Antelope has nothing to do with it.

Do you believe you are the reincarnation of a mystic who lived seven hundred years ago?

I don’t believe it. I know it.

How do you know that?

Anybody can know it. Just there are few processes to go through.

I’ve heard that you were, as a boy, fascinated with death. Why did death hold so much charm for you?

It should be, because it is the only certain thing in the whole life. Everything is uncertain, only death is certain. It should be the central focus of every intelligent person.
My understanding is, it is death which has created all the religions. Otherwise there would have been no religion.

Who do you go to for advice?

I don’t need.

Do you ever get together with some of your followers and just sit around and have some wine and talk?

No. I don’t have time.

How do you spend your days?

I am completely so busy without business.
Six o’clock I wake up. Then two hours in my swimming pool and bathroom, which I love and I have always loved. Then my breakfast, and I go to my morning discourse.
Eleven I return and take my lunch and go to bed for two hours. At two o’clock I go for a drive into the hills. At four-thirty I go again to my bathroom and the swimming pool for two hours. Then I take my supper, and after that supper any interviews, which continue up to nine or nine-thirty.
Then I have to see my secretary for any work concerning outside communes in the world or here: one hour or sometimes two hours.
And at twelve I go to sleep again.
It is a simple life and the same every day.

Why did you stop reading in 1980 and how do you stay informed on world events? I’ve heard that you enjoy movies. Is that true?

Once in a while, because I don’t read any more. Otherwise I was perhaps the most educated man in the whole world. My own personal library was one hundred fifty thousand volumes, of immense value, and I was reading continuously.
But then I got my own truth and all those books started seeming rubbish. Slowly slowly they became meaningless. Once in a while one book may turn out to have some significance, but five years before I stopped it. It was too much.
You read one hundred books and one book sometimes turns out to be of any meaning. And that too is not going to increase my consciousness, my being.
So for five years I have not read anything - no newspaper, no radio, no television. Once in a while if my sannyasins see a film which they feel has something significant, then I see it. But very rarely.
For example, Dostoyevsky’s Brothers Karamazov, when it became a film then I saw it because I consider that book to be far more valuable than holy Bible. It is so immensely rich with insights.
So it happens once in a while that they bring something if they feel that it may interest me. Then I see it. But rarely.
I don’t have time, either. I cannot cut my bathroom time, I cannot cut my drive time, I cannot cut from anywhere. Everything is absolutely set up minute to minute, so it is very difficult. Even to see a film I have to see it in two, three days, because half hour here, half hour there, but.

Do you ever feel like getting into your Rolls Royce and just cruising out across the countryside on your own?

Yes. I have my own road.

Have you ever thought about just leaving the commune altogether and just going down to California or somewhere.?

No. Not California. Never. That is the last place I am going to. Hell I can go but not California.

Who do you admire in this country?

I don’t admire anybody in this country.

Is there anybody in the world that you have great admiration for?

I admired one man, J. Krishnamurti. One man I used to admire who is dead was P. D. Ouspensky, an Russian who was living in London, a mathematician. I admired another man, George Gurdjieff, who was a Caucasian living in France, died in ‘50.
Other then these three men, there was one man from Babylon, Michel Naimy, whom I had admired because of his book, The Book of Mirdad, has been my the most loved book. He shows tremendous insight, which only a mystic is capable of.
But very few people - only one is alive: J. Krishnamurti.
I admire him but that does not mean that I agree with him. I criticize him as much as possible. He criticizes me as much as possible. So there is only one agreement between us, that we disagree. But I admire the man just the way he admires me.

What does it mean to be enlightened? Do you lose some of your normal human emotions?

You certainly lose many things. And you gain only one thing. It is a very losing business.
You gain yourself, and everything else is lost: anger, greed, jealousy - all is lost. But it is not a loss because you come to realize the ultimate ecstasy beyond which there is nothing, only bliss.

How is your health?

Fine.

I’ve heard a lot of your discourses, themes of individuality, finding your own path, finding God in nature, capitalism. And these are themes that are as American as Walt Whitman, Mark Twain, Henry Thoreau. And my question is, how did an Indian guru become so American, and does this explain why so many Americans have followed you?

In the first place, I am not a guru. That is a dirty word. Because all gurus have been just exploiting people in the name of spirituality. I don’t belong to that gang.
And I am not an Indian in the sense that I don’t believe in nationalities. I simply believe that the whole earth is one.
So Walt Whitman I love as much as I love Rabindranath Tagore.
It doesn’t matter that Rabindranath Tagore is Indian and Walt Whitman is American. Both have something which transcends these stupid things: American, Indian, Christian, Hindu. Both have great flights into the unknown and immense power to express that which is almost inexpressible.
Walt Whitman is one of my loved ones. We have here a Walt Whitman Grove.
We also have something in the name of Emerson, something in the name of Henry Thoreau, something in the name of Abraham Lincoln. Anybody who has contributed in any way to human progress, to human growth, I have immense respect for it. It does not matter what race, what religion, what country he belonged.

In The Goose Is Out, your book, you say, “And to disappear into the whole is the only thing of any worth.”
You are a man with a very big ego. I see your picture everywhere, around all your sannyasins’ neck. And you certainly haven’t disappeared. Probably most people in the United States know who you are. So how do you explain this apparent contradiction?

There is no contradiction.
You are right. I have a very big ego, as big as the whole universe. That’s how I have disappeared.
Soon you will see my pictures on all the stars.

How could one follow your teaching in any case and find his own path, and yet come here and live in a commune and walk this collective path? That again to me seems like a contradiction.

There is no contradiction, because there is no collective path here. Everybody is doing his own thing.
Yes, they are living together for the simple reason because they are all doing their own things and nobody is interfering with them. That is the point that joins them into a commune.
In the outside world they can do their thing. Everybody is poking his nose, interfering in every way.
Here nobody interferes into anybody’s life, nobody condemns you, nobody makes you holier than others. There is no comparison. Everybody simply accepts you as you are. It is your business what kind of person you want to be. It is nobody else’ business to give you advice.
That is the only thing in the world outside. Everybody gives it and nobody takes it.
Here nobody gives it. The question of taking does not arise.

Do you believe that human consciousness survives death? Is there a soul?

I don’t believe in anything. I know.
It survives.
Only the body dies, not your consciousness. But don’t take my word. Don’t believe in me. You have to experiment on your own.

What role does meditation play in this movement?

That is the basis of this whole movement, the essential of my whole way of life. And it simply means becoming a witness - of everything - on three layers. Becoming a witness of all the activities of your body. Walking, you should walk consciously.
I can move this hand consciously. I can move this hand mechanically, without knowing. And you can see the difference between the two, when you move it mechanically and when you move it consciously.
When you move it consciously there is no tension, there is a grace, a beauty, a joy.
So every act of the body has to be witnessed.
When you become very accustomed of witnessing your body and seeing it as separate, as if somebody else is walking on the road and you are just seeing, sitting on a hill, then the second step: start watching your mind.
Look at the thoughts without any evaluation, without any judgment, as if you are not concerned: a traffic passing by and you are standing by the side of the road.
And a miracle happens. As you become more and more clearly a witness, thoughts start disappearing. Ninety percent a witness, ten percent thoughts. Hundred percent a witness, zero thoughts. And that is the point when you can move to the third step: now witness your feelings, moods, which are more subtle.
And when you become a witness of your moods - that is, your heart - the fourth step happens on its own accord. You don’t have to take it. These three steps you take it; fourth is the reward.
When the third is complete, suddenly one day you find a quantum leap in your consciousness. Everything has disappeared; you are conscious only of consciousness. You are aware only of awareness.
And there is absolute silence. But that silence is not empty. It is full of light and full of bliss and full of fragrance. And this is what I call enlightenment.
Meditation is the way; enlightenment is the success, the achievement.

Have any of your disciples become enlightened? Have they reached that step yet?

Yes, many.

I know that you developed dynamic meditation. I’m just curious if you’ve ever tried it?

I have tried everything.

How does your teachings compare with those of Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, Transcendental Meditation?

That is neither transcendental nor meditation. It is just an ordinary chanting which has been done in all the religions down the ages. You use any word or any mantra and you chant it inside, and chant it fast, and fast, and faster - so fast that there is no gap for mind to function, so fast that it creates a state of auto-hypnosis.
It is a concentration. You are chanting Ave Maria, Ave Maria, Ave Maria and you go on faster and faster. You are concentrated on one word. The mind has no space left for any other thought. And this Ave Maria continuously - and it does not matter what. You can chant your own name. The result will be the same. You will become in a certain state of deliberate sleep. That is what is hypnosis.
It is pleasant. It is healthy. But it is not meditation. It is good. It does no harm. But it is just an exercise of the mind. You will wake up after twenty minutes, ten minutes, fresher, feeling better, healthier.
So if you are doing it for these reasons, good. But it is not meditation.

In Come Follow Me you say that Christ is the very principle of religion, in Christ all the aspirations of humanity are fulfilled. But last month you called Christ a crackpot. You seem to have changed your view of him.

I think for that you come again, because then we can talk only on Jesus Christ and it will be good. It will be more justified. Then I can say exactly what I had said before and why, and what I am saying now and why.

The Soviets have said, at least in one article I read, that you work for the CIA and the White House. And I’m just curious how your movement functions behind the iron curtain. And whether there’s anything going on in this commune or in other parts of the world to get the message into communist countries.

Yes, there is my people and they are being harassed, and CBI thinks that I am functioning with the Russian KGB. And KGB thinks I am functioning according to CBI. That is great!
I would love to get from both something, but nobody is giving anything - except trouble.

They are torturing my people there. Twenty people they have found up to now only, but they are interrogating, harassing. They have taken their books, their tapes, their videos. And they are harassing them to tell them about other people: who are the other people, where they are. But they are not saying anything.
But there are many people.

This is in the.Is this in the Soviet Union?

In the Soviet Union there are people. In every communist country there are people. In East Germany there are many sannyasins. Even they wanted to make a commune. I had to stop them. I said, “It is becoming difficult even in democratic America. You don’t create unnecessary trouble for sannyasins. Just remain underground.”

How many sannyasins do you have in the world now?

Near about one million.

Is the movement growing?

It is growing. Certainly.

You have said in the past that you would like to build a city of one hundred thousand sannyasins here.

Certainly. I would like and I can.

Do you believe the state will ever allow you to do that?

Still I have the idea. Once I have finished with this litigation, the city is going to grow. This land is three times of New York. There is no problem. We can create enough water reservoirs, we can create enough food, we can make all the hills lush green. We can make it such a beautiful city that Oregon will be proud of it.
But those fools are trying to stop everything. But fools are fools. Nothing can be done about it.

So you’re confident that this city will endure all of this and flourish?

It is going to.

Was it your decision to come to the United States in the first place back in 1981?

No. I was not going to stay here. But my health improved and now my people don’t want my health to be destroyed again back in India. They don’t want me to go.
And moreover, now it has become a challenge. If they had given me green card early, in the very beginning, perhaps I would have gone. But now it is difficult.

Is there room in this community for non-sannyasins or others from the outside to live or invest here?

Yes. Soon we will create possibilities. But they are preventing everything. They don’t allow us to sell the land. We wanted to make plots, create facilities to sell those lands. But they don’t allow anything because the city is illegal. So we cannot do anything unless we are legal.
We would like, because there are so many sympathizers, so many lovers, so many friends, who are not sannyasins but who would like and want to live here. And I would like all of them to be here. It looks so monotonous, just sannyasins. And my people are fed up with just sannyasins. They want new women, new men. Whosoever has courage can come.

Have you any interest in dialogue with other religious leaders?

No.

In The Goose Is Out you write, quote, “Remember the fundamental law of all revolution. When the revolution comes, things will be different - not better, just different.” If you look at what’s happened here in this community in the last week as a revolution, are things better or different?

They are better.

They’re better. Why?

Because this was not a revolution. This was evolution. And evolution always makes things better. Revolution only changes things, never makes them better.

Isn’t the wisdom you express essentially that that western civilization has sort of sprung from: that of Socrates, his basic dictum, “know yourself” or “know thyself”? Isn’t that.?

Yes, certainly. I agree with Socrates about that. Okay?

Thank you.

Great. I had to agree with Socrates.

============================================================

Scott Miller, NBC, Channel 8, Portland, Oregon; Tom Paulu, Longview, Daily News, Seattle, Washington, USA; Scott Miller, NBC, Channel 8, Portland

Things you’ve been saying have meant a lot of changes for your sannyasins. Specifically: wear any color you like, don’t wear your mala if you don’t want to. You got any other changes in mind for your sannyasins?

I don’t know.

Nothing right at the moment?

Anything is possible.

Nothing you’d like to share with us right now, though?

No.

Why did you choose this moment? Why did you choose this moment when it would seem that you would need something to bind everybody together - like clothing and malas - to say, “Don’t worry about that any more, you don’t have to do it”?

This was the right moment to do it. I want my people to be absolutely free individuals. I don’t want them to be Rajneeshees. They have to be themselves.
While I was in silence, Sheela has compiled a book, The Book of Rajneeshism, which I am going to tell them to make a good bonfire. Then they burn it, they will invite you all, because with that book we are burning the whole idea of “ism”. I don’t want my people to be like any other ideology - communism, Buddhism, Hinduism, Jainism. That was my whole standpoint from the very beginning. I want them to be on their own, individuals - free. no holy scripture for them, no system of beliefs for them, no god for them to pray, no messiah or savior for them to surrender to - because all these things have destroyed humanity in the past.

But what about all the rest of your books? You’ve got lots of them.

Those books are simply books, not holy books.

How are they different?

They are different. Holy books pretend some speciality; they are from God. Holy books are lies. They are just books as we are, just human beings. I am not a savior or a prophet or a messenger of God or the only begotten son of God; I am as human as you are. My books are simply books as other books; no speciality is claimed for them. But Sheela had created a book which is just her own creation. While I was in isolation she compiled it from here and there from my books; added something of her own, deleted something. And she was trying to create a religion - and this is not a religion in that sense. It is simply a way of life. A kind of religiousness is there, but only as a quality. you cannot label it, you cannot name it.
So I am going to destroy every possibility that can again in my absence bring the same type of fascism into my peoples’ minds.

Are you planning on going anywhere soon?

No, I am not going anywhere - but I can die any day. About that there is no way to say.

You said you don’t want your disciples to be Rajneeshees. What would you like us to call them?

No need.you just call them by their name.

Sometimes we need to refer to them as a group of people that live here?

So it is just the Rajneeshpuram commune.

Nothing shorter than that?

No.

There certainly has been turmoil and some confusion and some chaos in this community, as you would expect given some of the things that these people have had to digest in the last two weeks. Is that what you had in mind?

Chaos is always good. Order is always dead. Out of chaos stars are born; out of order, only Adolf Hitlers.
So I don’t feel any problem with chaos. But when there is everything in order, then it becomes a concentration camp.
Chaos has a beauty. Freedom is just another name of chaos.

Do you think there’s too much chaos, though, that the buses won’t run on time, the crops won’t get harvested?

No. There will not be. My people are intelligent enough to live in chaos and live rejoicingly and do everything that is needed, but not to surrender to any fascist regime.

Some of your sannyasins have told me here they have really been going through some anguish lately. How do you feel about that? Some of them have been going through enough anguish to leave this place.

That’s natural. That’s absolutely natural. To rejoice in chaos one needs guts. Very few people have that much courage. To enjoy freedom, very few people are ready. That’s why a slavery exists in different names around the world.

One thing Hasya was saying today when we were talking to her is that another reason for telling people to wear what you want around your neck and on your back and everything else, is so you can blend into society better.

That’s perfectly right. I would like my people to drop all kinds of separation from the society.

Would you like to see them go out into society more than they have, perhaps?

No, only when they need to go out. But there is no need to create unnecessary divisions. There are enough divisions in the world. Why add one more?
So I am going to destroy everything that divides man from man. And I want them to be just human beings, purely available to all kinds of societies. And wherever they go they can spread the fragrance that they have attained.
This will open doors for many people to come into the commune, to become sannyasins. There have been thousands of people who wanted to become sannyasins; just one fear, that they will lose their job if they go in red and wearing a mala; they may lose their wife, they may lose their parents - and other human concerns.
I have one million sannyasins, and perhaps five times more people would have been sannyasins. Now I am opening doors for the others who have up to now been only sympathizers.

How come now? Why did you have people start wearing red in the first place?

It was needed in the beginning. It has served its purpose well; it became a world movement, unique in itself. There was no comparison with this movement.
Now we have made the mark, there is no need to carry it any more. Unnecessary.

You figure you’ve got a million sannyasins around the world now?

One million sannyasins are there.

You expect most people to stop wearing red?

I don’t expect; only few, not most. Mostly nobody goes out. And I have left it to them. It is their decision. If they want to go in red, that is their freedom. Who I am to decide for them?

Do you need more sannyasins now?

I don’t care about numbers, but there are going to be more.

Is that good or bad as far as you’re concerned, having more sannyasins?

It is perfectly good. I would like the whole world.

But you don’t care about numbers?

I don’t care at all, because I am not a politician. Politicians care about numbers. It is politics of numbers: how many numbers you have, that makes you that much powerful.

Does it have anything to do with money - the more sannyasins you have, the more wealth your.

We have enough wealth. And certainly more sannyasins will bring more wealth, but we already have more than we need.
And I am not against wealth. I am not a worshiper of poverty. I hate it.

The major bank that the various organizations deal with here cut you off, so to speak. You can’t have visa cards used here any more or there’s a good chance you won’t for a short time, at any rate at the First Interstate Bank. And your checking account may be canceled. What’s your reaction to that? If you’re so wealthy.

It is not any concern of me. I have not even heard about it. It is you who are saying to me, so I don’t know anything about it.
My people are enough intelligent, they will manage it. And not only one bank, many banks are asking to serve the commune. So if one bank cuts, they are cutting their own neck.

How would you feel about starting your own bank here?

That is possible.

I’ve heard the idea brought up.

Yes? Thank you!

Anything new as far as you talking to the FBI? If there’s any hope that you will have a chat with them or another law enforcement body. One of the state police people that I talked to, who perceived to be perfectly honest, tolerant and friendly during this investigation, has said that he’s tried ten times to talk to you, not about crimes but just to try and get around some of the misunderstandings, and he hasn’t been able to do it yet.

No.

Any chance you’ll talk to him or the FBI?

Just today, not ten times. Just one time.

Will you talk to him?

No. I said no, because what he wanted to talk, I said, “I can talk it in the morning discourse. You just write the question.”
And he is every day present there. He is a nice man. Unfortunately, why he entered into the police, that I don’t understand. He does not belong there. He is not a policeman, he is a human being.

Don’t you think it might ease some of the tension if you chatted with him?

I have told him.because he simply wanted to inquire about my well-being that there is no danger to my life, which I’m not concerned with at all. With the crimes that have been committed. And he did not want to talk about them.
I said, “These things can be talked in the morning discourse. These don’t need special interview.”

You spoke about hijacking and about demonstrations at embassies and.I took it with a grain of salt, to be perfectly honest. But other people didn’t. How do we know when to take you seriously. [drowned out by a roar of laughter]

There is no need to take me seriously at all. And I am amazed that why Americans lack the sense of humor so much? It is such a great quality. It is missing in Americans. They are too serious. I had never expected them to be too serious. Such a young country and too serious. They should be more sensitive towards humor. It is the quality of youth, quality of life. Only dead people cannot laugh, and only in graveyards no jokes are exchanged.

Some people might not take such things as hijacking with a sense of humor I think.

They will have to take, because seeing me anybody can understand that I am not going to hijack. I cannot even carry my cross on my shoulders. I am not a Christian. I don’t carry anything, have not carried anything for years. You will have to look at my hands.
One of my friends from Russia came to see me, and when he touched my hand he said, “You should never come to Russia.” I said, “Why?” He said, “If you shook hands with anybody, they will think you are a bourgeois. You have never done anything; your hand is so soft!” And in Russia it is a condemnation to be a bourgeois.
So I am not going to hijack anything. Neither I am going to protest against American embassies.

I would have a lot of trouble seeing you out there with a picket sign.

I just wanted to emphasize the fact that whatever FBI, state government, are trying is against American constitution and its values. Their effort is to protect the criminals, give them immunity, and charge innocent people. The whole idea is how to destroy the commune. That we are not going to allow. I have my ways how to stop it.

Like what?

The whole world, the whole world’s intelligentsia, will be against it. All the intelligent people in media will be against it. America will lose its credibility. And I don’t think they will be able to risk so much just to destroy a small commune in this desert which is harmless, which has not done any harm to anybody.
And we are so happy that few people who could have been harmful have left.

Does it bother you that this community still is, at least in many ways, cooperating with the investigators, even though you said you weren’t and you didn’t want them to?

Because my whole teaching is that everybody has to decide for himself. I may say it; that I am not going to cooperate, and I may tell my people not to cooperate; still, they are fee individuals. My advice is not an order, and they will not be for that punished, condemned, expelled. No, my love and respect will remain the same. If they decide to cooperate, it is perfectly good.

You talk about if you ever get your green card, taking a trip. What country would you most like to visit?

Germany, in direct [inaudible]

Germany? How come?

Because they are waiting for me. The German politicians are so much afraid that - I am not in Germany - but continuously in the parliament they are discussing against me. I am not in Germany, I have never put even a foot on German land - and they have already started cases against me in the courts. That means they are really interested.

Thank you very much, Osho.

Tom Paulu,
Longview Daily News, Seattle, Washington

You’ve indicated that you want to improve your relations with people outside the commune in Oregon and in the Northwest. Can you give us some examples of things you might do to do that?

For example, I have advised my people to change the name City of Rajneesh back to Antelope, because that was an ugly step, unnecessarily hurting people’s minds and creating hostility.
I have offered to the people of Antelope and their sympathizers in Oregon to purchase all the properties that we have purchased from them at the same price. Now, prices are almost four times more, and we have developed those properties, renovated the houses, but we would like to give them at the same price as we had purchased, just as a gesture of friendship.
And we will vacate Antelope completely. They can have their city, they can have their city council, their mayor. We have enough land and enough houses, we don’t need to bother.

Are you saying that in itself can be enough of a gesture to really change your image with people throughout Oregon?

I am not interested in changing my image. I am interested that as far as we are concerned, we are not creating any hostility. Whether they change their mind or not, that is their problem.
I have told to my people that they can use all colors, no need to use only red, so that they can mix with people more easily and the separation which their clothes create is no more there.

Do you think some people might perceive that as a threat? They’d rather be able to say, “Well, there goes a Rajneeshee - look out!”

Whatever they think, that is their problem. What is our intention, we are making it clear.
We are ready to withdraw all the cases against the government, the governor and attorney general if they are ready to withdraw their cases against us. Our cases are secondary. First they have started, so it will be simply gentlemanly: first they move their cases and immediately will move our cases against them.
And there is no need of any hostility. We have been telling them continuously that, “You can send your experts here. If we are misusing the land in any way, you tell us how to use it rightly and we will use it rightly.”
In fact, for fifty years the land was not used at all and nobody was interested in it. It was for sale for fifty years and nobody purchased it because nobody thought that it can produce anything. It was simply a desert.
We tried hard to make it an oasis, and now we are self-sufficient. Five thousand people’s food, vegetables, fruits, milk products - everything we are producing. And this they call misuse of the land.
They can come and they can see what misuse it is. If this is misuse, then we would like to learn what is use. And we are open.
All the ranches neighboring our ranch are poor, dead. In fact, they should tell those ranchers to come here and learn how to transform a desert into an oasis. On the contrary, they are just harassing us.
Their land-use laws seem to be more important to them than real land use. It seems for them man is made for laws, and laws are not made for man.

You commented that there’s a possibility you would patch things up with Sheela. A few days ago there was an interview in the German magazine Stern in which she was quoted as saying, “The hell with Osho.” Do you still do you still think that you could repair your relationship with her?

No, there is no need. I can go to hell. I don’t see any harm in it. In fact, hell is full of the best people of the world. Only heaven is dull.
If she had said, “Heaven with Osho,” then I would have objected because whom do you expect to meet in heaven? You cannot meet Byron, Shelley, Vincent Van Gogh, Picasso, Dostoyevsky, Walt Whitman. All these people you will meet in hell. And I love good company! So she was perfectly right. There is no problem.

Are you taking more authority yourself in.?

No. I have never had any authority, I don’t have any and I will never have any. My love is enough.

Well, your love wasn’t enough in Sheela’s case to prevent her from trying to poison you.

It was enough in that case too. Just because I was silent and in isolation.And whatever she did, I still feel that she was not intentionally criminal. The politicians of Oregon forced her, and when you have to deal with politicians you have to learn their language, and you have to deal accordingly. So she started becoming political, cunning, lying. She was not in my contact; she was in contact with the politicians, with the legal experts, with the courts continuously. All these people corrupted her. And when they were doing everything illegally, she started doing illegal things herself.
There is a certain synchronicity. If you deal with criminals, sooner or later you will become a criminal.

What’s to prevent her successors from eventually having the same problems, assuming that all these legal problems.And certainly there are a lot of police here today, and politicians making statements.

First, because I am available now. I was not available in those three and a half years. In my presence nothing can go wrong. And I have suggested to my people to chose a totally different kind of group.
For example, Sheela was uneducated - just a waitress in a hotel, must have suffered from inferiority complex. Was raped at the age of sixteen, became pregnant. In India abortion was illegal at that time, so she had to suffer an illegal abortion. All that made her mind crippled, and in some way against humanity. The man who raped her she used to trust just like her father; and since then she has never been able to forgive any man.
Now I have chosen a totally different kind of group - well educated, coming from rich families, having no inferiority complex, very creative. Hasya with her husband created the best, one of the best films: “The Godfather.”
And all the people that I have chosen now are mostly American, for the simple reason to make a bridge with Americans. Sheela’s whole group was non-American.

Did you feel when all these revelations came out a few weeks ago that there was some lessening in the support you were getting from the sannyasins, that they felt let down?

No, there is no question. There is no question. In fact I will be supported more, because every day messages are coming from sannyasin whom Sheela had driven out of the commune just because they were more competent, more intelligent, and she was afraid. She was continuously afraid that somebody who is more competent will take her place. So she drove them out. They all will be coming back: the vice chancellor of the university, the chancellor the university, many psychologists. All simply left because she was humiliating them.
Now, those people are highly educated. Somebody has PhD, somebody has double PhDs, somebody has a DLitt. Those people cannot be humiliated by a waitress of a hotel who knows nothing.
I had to teach her everything, even what to say on the television, what to say in an interview. I had to teach her everything; still it never came right.

She was certainly much more.She could be very hostile on television, which is not your style at all.

Yes, she was hostile. She misunderstood - I told her to be assertive, but to be assertive does not mean to be hostile. You can be very loving and you can be still assertive.
So there is no possibility that the new group will do the same. Almost impossible.
And I am now available and will remain available till I am alive.

Do you think the group can hold together after that?

I don’t even think about it. It depends on each individual. If they want to be together, good. If they want to disperse, then they can have a good celebration and say good-bye.

There’s some speculation that maybe you’re going to go some place else when you can, because some people draw a connection between what’s happened here recently and what happened in India before you came here.

No, I am not going anywhere, particularly unless my green card is given to me. If America wants me to go out and visit other countries and other communes and leave them for few days to rest, they should issue the green card. And if they don’t want that, then I am not going anywhere.

Concerning your decision to tell people they could choose whether or not to wear red: is there any particular reason why that came today? Had you been thinking about it for a while? Did it come to you in a sudden flash?

No. About me you have to understand one thing: I don’t think at all. Everything is spontaneous. I was not even aware that this will come this morning. It came. I was surprised as you, as others were surprised.

Because some people on the outside might see this as a response, some image.

What other people think, I never bother about them at all, because there are four billion people on the earth. And I am a poor ordinary man. Thinking about four billion people, what they are thinking about me, will be simply too much of a torture. So I simply don’t think at all; I go on doing whatsoever comes to me. I don’t think about the consequence. When the consequence comes, then I will face it. And I keep tomorrow always open.
And I am not a very consistent man. Tomorrow I may change. So those who have purchased clothes other than that may be at a loss. Yes! I am not saying.yes. So tomorrow morning, who knows?

============================================================

Chicago Sunday Times; Jim Gordon, The Atlantic Monthly Magazine and the Washington Post

Osho, I wonder whether you have considered the events of the last few weeks in light of the biblical story of the serpent in the garden - do you believe that a serpent came into your garden, and might it have the same results?

Perhaps you do not know my interpretation of the story. God is the criminal in the story. In the first place, to prohibit Adam and Eve from eating the trees of knowledge and the tree of eternal life. He provoked the desire in them. This is simple psychology. Otherwise in that garden of Eden there must have been millions of trees - Adam and Eve would not have found even up to now - which is the tree of knowledge and which is the tree of eternal life. Indicating the trees, prohibiting the children, is simply giving them a challenge. And nobody who has any integrity is going to obey such a thing. More emphatically, when the order is absolutely ugly and against humanity, what is the fear if Adam and Eve become wise, if they attain to eternal life? The God must be jealous, because then they will be exactly of the same status as himself - and he does not want to do that. He wants them to remain naked animals.
So according to me, the serpent is the first revolutionary and the first who brought humanity into existence. The whole progress, evolution, all science, all knowledge, everything is indebted to serpent, not to God.

My question meant to get at the temptation to power that Adam and Eve were presented with.

It was not a question of temptation for power. To be wise never makes anybody tempted towards power. Only idiots are tempted towards power. The wise simply laugh at the whole race that goes on for power, and somebody who has tasted the fruit of eternal life, what more is there to gain by power? The serpent was not tempting them for power; the serpent was simply telling them the truth - that God is afraid, he does not want anybody equal to himself. He remains to be in power.
So to me the story has a totally different meaning: the serpent should be worshipped in every church, every synagogue, and God should be put behind the bars in every prison. He was against all that has happened, because of the serpent. The serpent in the story is nobody but devil himself, taking the form of a serpent.
I want to emphasize the fact, because devil and divine come from the same Sanskrit root; they both mean God. Looking into this light, whom you are thinking as God must be something very ungodly, and whom you are thinking as devil is certainly divine. We need more serpents and less gods.
So now you ask me - this is my interpretation of the story.

So your position is that the temptations to power will not or have not corrupted and undermined your movement as they historically have damaged other movements?

Every mind carries in the unconscious the lust for power. Unless you become totally conscious, awakened, you are bound to have in the darkness of your mind, the lust for power. All that is needed to bring it up is an opportunity.
I was in silence, in isolation - that became the opportunity for Sheela and her group to exploit the commune. I was not at all connected with the world for three and half years - no newspaper, no television, no radio - and I have told everybody not to bring me any information; I want to be completely silent. Only Sheela was given the duty, if commune needs something urgent that she cannot decide, she can come and ask me. So what she was doing: anything that was non-essential, she was asking me, and anything that was essential, she was deciding herself. She was informing me only nice things that she is doing and she was keeping me in dark about every criminal act that was going on. But there is a limit to everything.
Finally she became afraid that sooner or later I will come to know about it. So she tried to kill three persons who were also capable of approaching me - my physician, my dentist, my caretaker - that these three people are dangerous. They can inform me about things which she is hiding. And she tried to poison my caretaker, my physician. My physician she tried three times and just because he is a physician, he immediately became aware that something poisonous has been given to him, either in tea or in coffee, and then finally, I was made aware of it.
The moment I knew that this is happening, it was certain, then many more things must be happening. These things are never isolated. If you need to kill three people, particularly those who are close to me, that means there is much which you want to hide from me. I started speaking.

Could you tell us what moment was that? Describe the moment when you first became aware of Sheela’s activities.

About dates and days I am absolutely useless. To me time simply does not exist. I use the watch only when I am giving an interview or giving a discourse in the morning, just so that I don’t waste your time or other peoples’ time. Without the watch I will not know how many hours have passed or how many days. I don’t have any idea of days, I don’t know what date today is, what month. I live in a timeless state. And I don’t need to know about, but it must have been something - seven, eight months before, when I became aware that it is time that I will have to come out of silence and start speaking again so that I am available to the commune and people can open their mouth.
As I started speaking, she was the only one who was miserable. The whole commune was dancing and happy that I am again speaking, because they were thinking perhaps I am not going to speak again ever. She was trying hard convincing me, “Don’t speak, because it may destroy your health again. Somehow you have recovered.” I said, “What I will do with the health? Let it be destroyed.” But now I see, something is happening that I had to be in the open.
The moment I started speaking she started traveling around the world into other communes. Mostly she was in Europe or in Australia or in Singapore or in India or in Japan, she will come for one or two day, and then she will go again. And the whole reason was: she did not want to face me and slowly, slowly, people started coming and telling what things had been happening.
That a man has been killed, that the people who has been brought here in the name of Share-a-Home program were not really brought for Share-a-Home program, but for taking over of the Wasco county. And they were kept completely drugged. Gallons of drugs were imported from outside. They were not purchased from America, because then there will be a suspicion - for what gallons of drugs are needed? And all those poor people were kept drugged, so that whatever is told to them, they will do.
One man was drugged, accidentally - perhaps a bigger dose than he needed - and he died on the spot. They simply threw his body out of Rancho Rajneesh. It is so inhuman.
Then I became aware that they are taping every phone that comes to the Ranch or goes out from the Ranch - all phone calls are being taped. This is against human rights. It is interfering into peoples’ privacy.
Then I became aware that not only they are taping; they have bugged, not.the whole hotel, so nobody who is staying in the hotel - officers were coming, journalists were coming and they were all aware what they are talking, what they are thinking.
My own room was bugged. The same fear: that anybody out of the three persons may say something to me - they will know it immediately. My caretaker’s room was bugged. President Hasya’s whole house was bugged, because she was most afraid of Hasya. Because I was in silence, most of the intelligent and more educated people she simply by and by forced them to leave the commune, harassed them. The chancellor of the university escaped, the vice-chancellor of the university escaped, psychologists, psychotherapists, doctors - anybody who had some sense of dignity - simply escaped.
So she has made it absolutely clear that people, only who are subordinate to her, totally surrendered to her - in my name - can remain here. These people all who have left, are now calling that they want to come back, because they have always loved me and they have not left the commune because their love for me has changed, but it became impossible to keep oneself free, individual, to save one’s self-respect.
Just yesterday I became aware that the mayor of the Rajneeshpuram was punished by Sheela because he will not do something that she wanted him to do which was criminal. So he refused and he was punished. Now, to punish a mayor of the city, to dig trenches for many days - now anybody who has any self-respect will feel like leaving. He left. He has informed from California that, “I would like to come back. It was Sheela who forced me. There is a limit of patience.”
Hasya came very late, and she came with a project. She and her husband have made one of the best movies - Godfather. She wanted to make a movie on the commune, on my movement, on my thoughts, so naturally I allowed her to see me. And I told her that she is absolutely welcome; she can come with her crew and be here. Because I have allowed her, Sheela could not do anything and she became aware of her intelligence, creativity; she saw certainly that she is going to be her rival. When her all crimes are exposed - and the moment all her crimes were slowly being exposed, she escaped from here with twenty criminals who were part of the gang. She has placed all her people on all the power posts in the commune. So they are all hiding in the Black Forest in Germany.
This was simply an opportunity - it would have happened to anybody. And particularly to a woman, because women have not tasted power for millions of years. They are having really repressed desire to have power.
Secondly, she was just an uneducated person - a waitress in a restaurant. Lower a person is, more is his feeling of inferiority complex, and the greater is the problem somehow, to prove to oneself and to others that, “I am not inferior. That I am superior - superior than everybody.”

Jim Gordon,
The Atlantic Monthly Magazine, and the Washington Post

I’ve been waiting many years to sit here.

I have also been waiting. It is never one-sided.

I first saw your picture about twelve years ago when Shyam Singh was wearing a mala around his neck. I’ve been knowing about you for all those years and doing meditations.

Good!

Reading books. And I’ve been in Pune.And you’ve touched me a great deal over the years in many ways.

That I can see.

I’m here tonight as a journalist.

Don’t be bothered about journalist. Just be a friend. Journalism is something.you can take care of it. It is far below than friendship and love and intimacy. You can explore more easily as a human being.than as a journalist. Journalism is not yet risen to the status of an art, because it has to feed the masses, it has to be sensational. It cannot be truthful, it cannot make good the news. It has to make everything in some way bad.

That badness or that negativity has also been in my mind. It’s not even bad - there are doubts that I’ve had.

Doubt is not bad. Negativity is a totally different thing. Negativity means you have already taken a position - against. Doubt means you don’t have any position; you are ready to inquire, with open mind. Doubt is the best point form where to begin. Doubt simply means a quest, a question; negativity means you have already a prejudice, you are bigoted. You have already decided. Now all that you have to do is somehow to prove your prejudice right, so you can choose from whatever I say and prove your prejudice right.
Doubt is immensely spiritual. Negativity is something sick. So I love doubt.

I have a lot of doubts to bring up.

That’s perfectly good! You start!

When I was in Pune, there were young girls, who in a kind of group mind.There was like of a cheerleader saying to them, “Go get sterilized.” and that made me very sad. I’m not talking about thirty-five year old women, but young, young people - sixteen, eighteen years old - some of whom later decided, whom I saw, because I’m a doctor also, who wanted to have babies.
I felt like at times there was a group mind at work, even there, in Pune, and there was a pressure on people, and I wondered why you didn’t stop it.

No. I was in favor of it, and I am still in favor of it, because the world is already overpopulated. And only an inhuman being, who has no respect for children, can give birth to a child, for two reasons: he will be giving his child this world, which is in a mess, which can end up in a, in a third world war any moment and you want your child to be burned into nuclear weapons - one thing; secondly, the world is so much overpopulated that in Ethiopia thousands of people have died out of starvation - one hundred person per day for almost the whole year - and the same is the situation in other third world countries.
In India, fifty percent of people are undernourished. Even in America, which is the richest country in the world, thirty million people are undernourished. Do you want your child to be a pauper, a beggar? And that is what is going to happen, because you are not the only one who wants the child. Just in India, after the British left India, it has doubled its population - from four-hundred-million, now it is eight-hundred-million - Pakistan not included, Bangladesh not included. In forty-four-hundred million they were included. If you include those two also, it has passed one thousand million already.
The country is dying and it is not only a question of people starving; when they are not nourished well, first their brain dies - their intelligence stops growing, they become retarded. Because intelligence is a luxury: a man can live without it, cannot live without the heart, cannot live without the blood, but can live without the brain - there is no problem.
So when it is a question of under-nourishment, the first victim is the brain. Would you like your child to live a life without a brain, without able to think, without becoming conscious of beauty, music, literature, of all that is valuable, all that for thousands of years we have created. It is not for the poor man. The poor man has not the intelligence to understand Mozart or Picasso or Bertrand Russell. It is impossible.
Fourthly, if the third world war does not happen, then man - because of the lunatic influence of all the religions - has created a disease, AIDS. In fact now politicians can relax: there is no need to go on piling up nuclear weapons - AIDS can kill the whole humanity without any difficulty. And there seems to be no way to prevent it. There is no cure for it.
Would you like your child to be born in this world? I am still against my sannyasins having children. If you want children, adopt. Why be so fixated that it has to be your semen. Adopt! Why be so fixated that it has to be your semen? And can you recognize your semen? If ten samples are placed before you - you cannot - so what is the point? If you cannot recognize your child in its beginning, what difference does it make? It is better to adopt a child - there are so many orphans in the world.
I am still for absolute birth control, at least for twenty years, so that the population decreases. We can live happily on the earth only if we can decrease the population to one-fourth of what it is today, then there is no need of any communism to create a classless society. We can create a super-capitalist world, and yet classless. We can have abundance of everything so there is no point of hoarding it. People hoard things only when there is scarcity. Now money, wealth, everything is so scarce, that people hoard it.
In Russia, communism has failed. It is enough proof that the whole philosophy is absurd. They have succeeded only distributing poverty. They have distributed equally, but they have made the whole country poor. I would not like the world to be equally poor; I would like people to be abundantly rich so that there is nobody poor. Still I don’t want that anybody should force them to be equal, because that is against human freedom and that is against human rights.
Create abundant of wealth, keep the population in control - there will be nobody who is poor, all his needs will be fulfilled, and those who are more creative, more intelligent, and can create more wealth, of course, they should create more wealth. So there is no need for equality. Richness is needed. Equality is unpsychological.

But up to now richness has not brought equality.

It has not been, because of these stupid religions who have been teaching against abortion, against birth control, against sterilization, against the pill - these stupid religions are the cause of all poverty.

Don’t you there’s enough to go around in this country itself?

No. There are reasons why this country still have poor people, because seventy-five percent of your national income is going into war. That’s why people are poor. Your politicians are responsible for it.
Ronald Reagan should be brought before the supreme court - he is responsible for all the street people, for all the poor people. And this is not your country, not my country - except the red Indians, everybody is a foreigner here. Just become somebody has a green card does not make any sense. I can have many green cards - that makes no difference. Green or blue or yellow, any color, but everybody is a foreigner here. And the people to whom the country belongs, you have cheated them, you have deprived them of their land, you have deprived them of their property, of their self-respect. All Americans are parasites. And what you are doing with those red people? You are giving them pensions - that is a very psychological way to avoid any revolt - because those people need not work so what they will do with the money?
They will gamble, they will drink, they will use all kinds of drugs, so they are rowdy, drugged - and who bothers about the country? And they will produce more children, because each children brings more pension. So you are helping to create the population become bigger of the red Indians. And here, seventy-five percent of your income is going into a very stupid kind of enmity with Soviet Russia.

So what do you suggest to do here, now?

America should be the first, because I respect the American constitution the most in the whole world. There is no constitution which has so many human values. It can become the constitution for the whole world, but it creates great responsibility on the people of America.
Their first responsibility is that, “Now we are in a state where third world war means simply global suicide. Nothing can survive. Soviet Russia has enough, you have enough - both the powers have so much destructive energy that they can destroy every man seven hundred times. And you are not Jesus Christ, neither I am, so resurrection is impossible. And seven hundred times - even Jesus Christ will not be able to maintain, even he could not maintain one!

But we’ve been trying over the years, to stop the nuclear war, and I don’t see that our efforts are doing much good.

No. Your effort are not sincere, neither Russians efforts are sincere. The first sincere effort will be: create a world academy of sciences and release all the scientists from government services. And appeal to the Russian scientists to come and join the world academy. And there are scientists in Russia who would like to join, because they can see what they are being forced to do. Their best scientists who receive Nobel prizes have been thrown into Siberia.
So just try to invite them and offer all your scientists - make them available to the world academy. And give all your nuclear weapons and everything to the world academy of sciences, which is no more under your control.

I’m suspicious, because scientists have created a technology that’s totally gotten out of hand.

They have created technology.but the problem is they can also use the same technology which is destructive in a creative way. Every energy is always neutral. It can create, it can destroy - the same energy. But because they are all employed by the governments, who are interested only in wars, and who are ordered to create only war material. And now science has come to a stage where nobody can make anything individually. Those days of Galileo and Copernicus are gone, when you could have a small lab of your own in the house and do experiments - those days are gone.
Now science has developed so much, it needs billions of dollars for any new experiment. So individuals cannot afford it. Give to the world academy of sciences all the power, all the money that you can afford, and all your weapons, and invite Soviet Russia also - but you take the initiative first!

How.What role do you see your movement - you and your sannyasins - playing in this kind of.?

We can give our land - the whole land to the world academy - and my sannyasins can serve in every other way to the world academy. They will need cleaners, they will need food, they will need doctors, they will need restaurant, disco - everything they will need - and we will give our land free. There is no question of it, because it is going into the service of humanity.
I would like this place to become the capital for the whole world. I am ready to offer it.and my people will help them. And we have a university for meditation which will be available to all the scientists, which can change their minds, can make them more calm, more quiet, more serene. And out of that calmness, serenity, destruction is impossible. They cannot serve death; they can only serve love, life, laughter. And they can see my people, that they are living so joyfully, so ecstatically - this is infectious. We will make them dance!
And all the scientists need to dance, to play music, to sing, because then they cannot create destructive things. Their music, their dance, their song, will be preventive, will be a transformation of their being. And if they can meditate also, we are opening a totally new era in scientific investigation.
This can be done by UN; American government can help UN. Take over all war material. Somebody has to take the initiative and somebody has to take the risk!

As I think about it, my mind goes in two directions. One is, it’s beautiful and the other is, it sounds like a pipe dream.

It is a dream.but it can become a reality. And a time has come: if you don’t make it a reality, then either dream or death - you have to chose. It is better to choose the dream and give it a try.
The world needs one government. Nations of Leagues proved impotent, UN is proving impotent, for the simple reason because they don’t have any power. They are just debating clubs!

I’m writing a book on new religions and I’ve spent time with different groups, and a number of the people, who are leading groups, have the same idea and are trying to approach it in their own way. The Maharishi is trying to approach it in his way. Even Reverend Moon has spent millions of dollars on bringing scientists together. What do you think the difference is between the way you’re approaching it and the way they’re approaching it?

The difference is that I don’t consider their meditation at all a meditation. Maharishi Mahesh Yogi I know perfectly well - his meditation is simply chanting, and that is a method of auto-hypnosis. It is not harmful, it is perfectly good if you are doing it just for rest, relaxation - after twenty minutes you will feel good, better - but it is not meditation. It is just repeating a certain name - you can repeat your own name, so fast, that it does not allow any other thought to have any space in the mind. And your mind becomes focused only on one thought.
The nature of the mind is to be constantly changing. If you focus it on anything, then the second alternative mind knows is to go to sleep. That is auto-hypnosis. It can be done by looking at the light, it can be done by any concentration method. So Maharishi Mahesh Yogi’s transcendental meditation is just a joke; it is not meditation, it should be accepted what it is. It is good, it does no harm to anybody, so I am not against it.
But I want to make it clear that it is not meditation and nobody can come to realize oneself through it. Nobody can reach to the deathless within you. And where is the source of life, bliss and ecstasy, well-being is just an ordinary thing - just a good sleep will do that, a good shower will do that. It is not much.
And Reverend Moon is just another Christian, and what he can offer is prayer, not meditation, because in Christianity there is no place for meditation. Any religion which believes in God has no place for meditation. Only religions which don’t believe in God have place for meditation. This is a simple division.
Jainism and Buddhism are the two religions which don’t believe in God. That’s why their whole emphasis is on meditation; prayer, to whom? - there is no God. All that you can do is to go deeper and deeper into yourself. And India for thousands of years have been experimenting and they have almost exhausted every method - there are one hundred twelve methods and I don’t think that anything can be added. They have exhausted all possibilities. Ten thousand years effort of thousands of people, they have developed the science to its completion.
Reverend Moon can offer only prayer.

I understand what you’re saying, but from the outside it looks similar.

From the outside many things look similar.

So how are you going to get across the internal change that’s possible?

I am making it clear to the press, to you. My method is totally different. It is a method of witnessing. It is not hypnosis. It does not lead you into sleep. It leads you into more awareness, more alertness. You have just to witness three steps.
First, all actions of your body; second, all actions of your mind - thoughts, imaginations, dreams; third, all actions of your heart - moods, happiness, sadness, and when you become completely capable of watching all these three, the fourth happens on its own accord. Two miracles happen: one, the more you become aware, in the same proportion, thoughts and feelings start becoming lesser. Ten percent awareness and there are ninety percent thoughts; ninety percent awareness and there are ten percent thoughts; hundred percent awareness and there is zero, no thought. You are simply alert, looking at nothing.
When it happens totally, that on all the three steps you are simply alert - there is no mood, no thought, no action - a quantum jump happens. It is not within you; it happens as a reward of your witnessing. Suddenly you find yourself at the center of the cyclone. Suddenly you are in a space you have never been, which gives you immense insight into everything, which gives you twenty-four hours a tremendous blissfulness. Whatever happens outside you makes no difference to your center; it remains the same.

Is why you didn’t act with Sheela. Why you let her become your secretary? -Somebody with very obvious limitations as well as strengths.

It is my own insight that is decisive. It is not a question of thinking pros and cons. It is my insight and Sheela served her purpose perfectly well. Now she was going beyond it.

Why not stop her before she goes beyond it?

I stopped it. I stopped her in the right time.

But she’s half-berserk. Or more than half.

No. Nothing. She was needed at that time. Hasya or anybody else would not have tackled the problems that she managed to tackle. She was continuously in the courts, continuously fighting with the politicians, continuously fighting with the Oregonians, continuously facing all the hostility - and she managed it perfectly well.

But she provoked a lot of it too.

It is not really the case - provocation came from the other side. No minority ever provokes, but every minority is always condemned. Such a small minority of five thousand people - do you think any logic in it to provoke hostility? We wanted all friendship, but it was natural on the part of Oregonians to be hostile. Everybody is hostile to the newcomers, to the strangers - and we are certainly very much strangers.
And somebody like Sheela was absolutely needed. So I did not stop her; I let her do till I saw that the commune is established - now there is no need for anybody to fight. I have changed the whole group. I have put all the Americans in all the higher posts, while with Sheela there were all non-Americans on the higher posts. Now this is a second phase for the commune, because four years is enough - Oregonians have understood one thing, that we are going to be here.
In the beginning they were hoping that they will throw us out; at that time Sheela was absolutely essential and she did well, and the commune will always be grateful for it. And everything illegal that she did, Oregon state government, Wasco county, attorney general - everybody provoked her, because they were doing illegal acts against us.
It is a very natural thing: you cannot fight when people are doing who have power and who have majority, and they are doing illegal acts against you. And they have courts in their hands. Then she started being illegal. That’s how she turned more and more into a politician. That was a natural course. It was to happen.
If you deal with politicians you cannot remain non-political. You have to learn in the same ways same language, same strategies - and she learned and she did exactly what they were doing.

Sometimes she did a bit more than what they were doing.

Perhaps. It will be revealed soon, when Sheela is exposed with her, all the politicians and all the people who provoked her will also be exposed. That is my fear, that politicians, the police, FBI, CBI, they may like to make a deal with Sheela that, “We will protect you and we give you immunity. And you just dump all the crimes on innocent sannyasins.” So they can destroy the commune.
For four times they had appointments with me and for four times they canceled. In fact they should have asked for an appointment with me, in the very beginning - that was the first thing to do, because I have announced all the crimes against Sheela.
But they did not want to face me. And four times they accepted and they went on, at the last moment they will cancel. Then I told them, “Then I am going to call a press conference and make it clear that you cannot make a deal with the criminals.”
The reason is that these are the peoples who did provoke Sheela to do things, because they were doing the same things, our phones were tapped by INS - Sheela learned the same strategy from them: she started tapping the phones here. So when Sheela is exposed, INS is going to be exposed with her. From where she learned and why? - it was just a self-defense measure.
In Antelope we had the majority; still we were not interested in making the government. We have no interest in politics, but for small permits they will not give. Knowing perfectly well that you are a minority and you are refusing legal permits which are absolutely justified, to the majority, you are provoking the majority.

But can’t you see why they would be nervous, particularly about so many strange people coming in, and about people moving so fast, when they’re coming here to be by themselves?

If they are nervous, they should consult some psychoanalyst! That does not mean that they should not give the permit! They can give it nervously, but they should give it!
So when it became clear that they are going to hinder everything, then Sheela had to take the step and take over - that became a hostility, but who created it?

On the level of Antelope, sannyasins were in a majority - they had much more power, much more understanding of the world, much more ability to deal with things, and that was a time to show compassion.

For what?

For those people.Who are in the town.

We have been showing compassion in every way. We have been showing compassion to them in every way. We have not harmed anybody. We have not refused any permit to anybody. They cannot make any complaint that we have done to them.

It’s like a, if you’re going into an area where there’s a primitive tribe and where you’re infringing on their customs.

Whatever their customs, how you manage to take the whole country from red Indians?

It’s.Not my idea.

Whose idea?

It was basically arrogant Christians who thought they had a right to the whole country.

So these people must have been your forefathers.

Not mine. I’m a Jew from Russia.

That is good! That’s why you can understand a little humor. To be a Jew is really great!
They should think that they have taken the whole country from other people, forcibly, and we have purchased the properties from themselves; they should not have sold! We were not forcing ourselves on them. They were selling their properties, we purchased. At that very time they should have understood, that they are selling properties to these red people. Two-third properties belonged to us - they should have stopped selling!
It is such a simple understanding: if you don’t want these people, don’t sell your properties. Once you sell your properties, then you have to give as much facilities these people want, otherwise they will take the government and have all the facilities that they wanted - and that’s what happened: we had to take the government and have all the permission that we wanted.
But I have told, since Sheela left - because this all happened when I was in silence - I have told that change the name from City of Rajneesh back to Antelope, because it is not right, unnecessarily to hurt anybody. And I have invited them to purchase their properties back.

They’re not going to do that.

If they cannot do that then they can sell their remaining properties also - we can do that. We are absolutely fair, this way or that. If you don’t feel like living under sannyasins government, just sell your properties - and more people are not there, only twelve, not more than twelve - so what is the problem? We have one hundred sannyasins there - the problem is for us. To remove one hundred sannyasins and sell all those properties - their problem is small. And we are ready purchasers - they need not find anywhere. Just the market value and we will purchase them.
So either they should purchase.and the whole Oregon was in their favor, so they should ask the Oregonians - if they cannot purchase, Oregonians can purchase!

Make a museum.

They can make a museum or anything! My own idea was this, that if they sell their properties, those properties are so rotten that I don’t want my people to live in those properties. We have made a new housing complex for five hundred people, so we will demolish all the properties and change the zone and make beautiful gardens, lawns, public park or farming and finish with Antelope completely. If they sell their properties, we can make it a beautiful spot for everybody to visit. Or they can purchase and do whatsoever they want: they can make a museum or they can a zoo.which will be far better, because all those twelve look like persons who should be in a zoo!

That’s not very nice!

It is right! Nice or not.

You haven’t seen them all. Some of them are not so bad looking.

No. I have seen their pictures on the television. Most of them look retarded. And the remaining will make a really good zoo. If they want, we can make it!
But we are ready, for everything! We are ready to vacate, we are not interested in their property, in their town, in their houses - nothing. We simply want to move out of it, but they should cooperate in moving out.

Why are you so snobbish?

I am a simple person. I am not snobbish.

It feels to me like you are, because.

It feels because you are a Jew! It is a Jewish attitude, to feel anybody snobbish, because all Jews are snobbish. Their snobbishness is just on their nose! I am not snobbish; I am simply being straightforward.

But they’re just country people. I mean they’re simple people.

I’m not concerned with them. They may be Gods. They should purchase the properties or they should sell their properties, so we are finished with them. I am not a bit interested in those people. So there is no problem, but if they don’t purchase the properties then we are going to keep our people there, our police there.

A while ago when we were talking, I could feel very much your interest and concern for people in Ethiopia, in India, who were starving because of lack of birth control - why are you not concerned with the people in Antelope?

Because they have been very hostile, inimical, showing guns at my people, shouting that they will kill me. Still we have not done any harm to them. They are not worthy of any compassion. They look criminal people and we have to keep the police there simply for those people, because they all having their guns and my sannyasins are not having guns - what is the purpose of their having guns and moving with guns?

It’s the American West - everybody here has guns.

Then my people will have too guns!
If it is America, then we are in twenty-first century. That way they will not get their city back. Certainly what we can do without any problem to change their name, that we are going to do. Then we will wait - we have invited them. If it doesn’t happen, we will change the name again!
And it is the majority to whom the city belongs. It doesn’t matter who is the majority. But we are not in any way preventing them, having their city. We want to help them in every possible way. And they should appeal Oregonians who can purchase those properties - they are not many - and we will vacate. And then they can have their own council, their own town and whatever they want to do.
We have raised taxes four times - about that they are making much fuss continuously, but they don’t understand that one hundred sannyasins are paying four times more and only twelve Antelope people are paying four times more! But if we want to develop that city, make the roads better, the water supply better, the fire brigade up to date, then money is needed. But we can give them certainty, that if they purchase all our properties before moving, we will make the city tax-free; then it is up to them - no tax at all.

On the ranch, what developed here was a surrender of people, to people above them in the hierarchy. Couldn’t have done something.?

No. I was not aware of anything. Now I am doing everything. And there is going to be no hierarchy, there is going to be no surrender, submission. In fact, I am changing their clothes and I have told them they can use any color, so they are not discriminated against, and just be as everybody else is, so you can mix with people and there is no barrier unnecessarily.
I don’t want any hostility for the simple reason that we are not here to fight and waste time in fighting; we want our people to meditate, to rejoice, we want to be left alone, but they are unnecessarily poking their nose.
If we do any harm to anybody, certainly we should be prevented, but we are not doing any harm to anybody.

In my meeting Sheela, certainly one could see her intelligence, at least in very practical matters, in her cleverness about things, but you could also see the very oppressive side, the very mean-spirited side as well. You must have seen that being in contact with her every day?

I know! But it was needed. For all those mean politicians all around, I could not give the commune in the hands of some innocent people - they would have destroyed it.

But you didn’t see what she was doing on the Ranch itself?

No. Because I was never coming out and never meeting anybody.

Do you think it would have made sense to have other people coming to talk to you about what was happening?

No. Nobody was allowed.

But why not?

I am decisive about myself - if I want to remain silent, it is nobody’s business to disturb me.

But if you’re creating such a big experiment, don’t you think it would have been helpful to have had at least one other person coming to talk to you?

No. The experiment means nothing before my silence. I am teaching everybody to be an individual and depend on his own insight. And if he feels that he is being forced to do something that he does not want to do, he is perfectly capable of revolting against it. There is no need to submit and many had left.
Because now there will be a totally different atmosphere. But whatever happened, although it was not good, but looking at the world only bad people could have managed it; good people could not.

It feels to me like you may have used those people.

No. I have not abused anybody.

Over the last year I thought to myself, when is he either going to get rid of Sheela or turn things around? And it felt like maybe you were just letting her go and do something.

No. I will do only when I feel; when I saw the point to do something, I did it.

How did you know the point to do something?

When she poisoned my physician, that was the point when I started inquiring from my physician, from my caretaker, about the things and then I declared that I am going to speak and meet people. And then information started coming by and by and I started exposing her. Then I informed the government, the police, the FBI - they are all here.
But doing almost nothing and we have given them every proof and they go on talking that we don’t have any solid proof. I don’t understand what solid proof they want - do they want Sheela murdering somebody, caught red-handed?

This is America.

Whatsoever it is, but what solid proof they had against Nixon?

Nothing happened to Nixon.

Nixon had to leave his presidentship. Otherwise he was going to be thrown out.

Same with Sheela.

No. But she has gone herself, and she has done more criminal acts than Nixon. Nixon has not killed anybody. Has not poisoned people to kill them. She was even putting poison in my milk.

Why did you wait nine months or so?

It was needed, because she was fighting so many cases - I did not want to disturb in the middle. I wanted to things, to come to a conclusion from where a new group can start. And this was the time, when many cases are finished and the new cases will start almost eight months afterwards, so these people within eight months will be perfectly prepared to take over and they will be able to fight - there is no problem.

You play a very risky game.

Certainly! I am a risky person. And it is a game. And I know the right timings. I am just a referee - nothing.

Over the years there have been a number of very powerful people who have been with you - your sannyasins - a number of whom have left, or have been kicked out, like Shyam. Why do you think, that happens?

No. Shyam has been kicked by me myself. Because he was a pain in the neck! And I don’t want him here at all then. I am allergic to perfume - he will not take a bath, he will insist to meet me, and his perfume will create asthma for me - for two, three days I will suffer attacks of asthma. And I had told him that, “If you come to see me, then you have to follow, you have to wash completely - you cannot come in the room with all this perfume. But he never listened; always he will come and he will insist and force that, “I am coming from England and just to see Osho,” and he was making me sick. Every time he came, he made me sick. And I never wanted any advice from him about my health, because he is a quack; he is not a physician or a doctor or anything.
One day sitting just by my side he took my feet in his hand and started massaging. I said, “You don’t do that.” He said, “This is an acupuncture point. And massaging it is very good for allergy.” I said, “I never consider you a physician and I don’t consider acupuncture of any importance. You simply leave my leg.” But no - out of love he will have to massage and the only thing that happened, the whole night I had to cough and could not sleep a single moment, and next day I said that, “This is what you did, because sitting so close to me.” So.and he was deceptive, deceiving, and exploiting sannyasins.
He had a center in London, but he was exploiting the sannyasins for his own work and I told him that, “There is no need. If you don’t want to wear the mala and the orange, then simply don’t wear them. You simply come as Shyam Singh - there is no need to come as a sannyasin.” When he will come to me, he will be in orange and in mala, and he was seen all over the world, from every place I received letters that, “Shyam Singh is neither wearing mala nor orange.”
I asked him that, “This kind of lying and deception is not good. You simply give up the mala and just be straightforward. If you don’t have the courage to move in those clothes, then why just coming to meet me you change the dress and the moment you go to the airport, you change the dress again. Nobody knows that you are a sannyasin - this is not good.”
Just now his telegram has come as he heard about Sheela that, “Can I come and I can help the medical center if there is any need?” I have told him, “No, and forever no, because medical center is a part - you will simply start treating me that I don’t want. I’m tired of your treatment.” So it was simply, he was a harassment to me. So nobody else has kicked him; I myself has kicked him.
And if he wants to come back, he has to learn, because my sannyasins are taking every care, that’s why for four years I have not had a single attack. Every sannyasin is careful about perfume, cigarettes, they come to see me then they take bath that no smell is there, that they are not perspiring - that’s how they have been keeping me in health - otherwise just a slight smoke, dust, perfume, and I am in a danger.
So Shyam Singh is, to me, almost like a disease: I don’t want him. You can tell him.

Yes.

Yes. He is.I love him, he is always welcome if he behaves.

============================================================

Swami Videha, Italy

Translated in English the name of the newspaper is “The Pleasures”, and it’s a magazine which likes to have many questions and short answers.

You just start.

So, we start from the idea of pleasure. Can enlightenment be the topmost pleasure, as a definition?

It is not pleasure. Pleasure is always something opposed to pain. It is never separate from pain. So pain can become pleasure. That’s why there are masochists in the world who torture themselves and enjoy. Your so-called saints are nothing but people who know the art of changing pain into pleasure. Pain can become pleasure; vice versa is also true: pleasure can become pain. For example, it is a great pleasure to kiss someone you love.
But if you are forced to continue kissing - a gun behind you - how long is the pleasure going to be pleasure? Soon the pleasure will become a pain. You eat something: it is pleasant, there is pleasure; but if you eat too much it becomes pain - otherwise you wouldn’t see so many obese people.
Thirty million people in America are suffering from this disease. They cannot stop eating. The pleasure is so much that they go on eating, knowing perfectly well that it is going to become pain.
So one thing has to be understood: enlightenment is not pleasure because it can never become pain. There is nothing opposite to enlightenment. The unenlightened person, his state of mind, is not opposite to the enlightened person and his state of mind. The unenlightened state is simply the absence of enlightenment - it is not opposed. It is like darkness. You just bring a candle in the room and there is no darkness. It has never been there; it has no positive existence of its own, it is simply absence of light.
So the unenlightened person is simply asleep, the enlightened person is awake. There is no opposition. Enlightenment is the transcendence of all dualities: pleasure, pain; love, hate, life, death - all oppositions.
Enlightenment is the situation where you have come to a point of witnessing all the opposites as complementaries and you are only a witness. So I cannot say it is pleasure - I can say it is bliss. And that is the difference between bliss and pleasure. Pleasure needs something; you are dependent.
If you love someone, you are dependent on the person-that’s why you are always afraid to lose them; also suspicious, also jealous. You love a woman - she is your pleasure, but side by side all these things are growing in you: suspicion. You can never be certain whether she loves you or not, there is no way. She can pretend. She may be loving somebody else - if not now, tomorrow. What is the guarantee that she will love you always? There are more beautiful people around, more talented, more charming, more charismatic; hence there is suspicion, fear, jealousy. This is your pleasure!
With all these things mixed in, what kind of pleasure is this?
Bliss is absolutely pure.
First, it is not dependent on anyone, it is your own. Its source is within you, it does not come from outside; hence, nobody can take it away. There is tremendous strength instead of weakness, instead of fear there is great fearlessness. Instead of feeling jealous, there is great compassion, because your bliss cannot be stolen, cannot be taken away.
When Alexander the Great came to India he wanted one sannyasin to come with him as a guest to Athens, because his master, Aristotle, had asked only one gift: “Bring an authentic sannyasin with you, because that is the only thing the West is unaware of. We don’t know what kind of man is a sannyasin.” Wherever he went Alexander inquired, “Can I find an authentic sannyasin?” People said, “It is very difficult - you have come a little late. Three hundred years ago there was Gautam Buddha, Mahavira, Sanjay Vilethiputta, Ajit Keshkambal and there were many people who were authentic, realized beings - but now it is very difficult to find such people. But you can go on searching as you go on invading the country; perhaps somewhere.”
He came across a man who was a naked fakir standing by the side of the river early in the morning - a beautiful sunrise. Alexander approaches him with his naked sword and tells him, “You have two alternatives: one, be Alexander the Great’s guest, which is a rare honor - it has never been given to anybody, and I can promise you it will not be given to anybody else again, so you will be unique - but you will have to come with me to Athens. My master wants to meet an authentic sannyasin.”
And the sannyasin laughed loudly and said, “First, you drop the idea of Alexander the Great. Anybody who thinks himself great is not great. One who is really great is not even aware of it. So first you drop that word. That is sick and shows inferiority. Secondly, put your sword back in its sheath; it won’t be needed. Thirdly, I am not coming. I am a man of freedom - wherever I want to go, I go. Nobody can force me, bribe me, threaten me. And you are trying everything: bribing me, persuading me, and with the naked sword threatening me.”
Alexander said, “Then the second alternative, is I will cut off your head.” The Sannyasin laughed again. He said, “That you can do, because that does not matter: it will not touch my blissfulness at all. You can cut off my head, you can cut my body into as many pieces as you want, but you will not be able to touch my blissfulness, my ecstasy. That is beyond your reach. If it is your joy and if I can be of any help, I am ready: cut off my head.”
Alexander in his notes writes, “There have been only two times in my life when I felt really inferior. Here was a man who says, ‘You cannot touch my blissfulness, nor can you kill my spirit. You can destroy this house, I will find another - a fresher one, a newer one.”‘
Blissfulness is totally different from pleasure. Pleasure is of the body, joy is of the mind; bliss is of the soul. Listening to beautiful music you feel joy. Seeing beautiful architecture, sculpture, a painting, you feel joy. Seeing the Taj Mahal, listening to Mozart, you feel joy - that is of the mind.
Bliss is absolutely beyond both body and mind.
My teaching is not for pleasure, but for blissfulness. I am not against pleasure, remember. I am not against joy, remember. Have as much pleasure as you can, but don’t forget this is only the beginning. You have to go far. Unless you reach blissfulness, you have not arrived.

You say that you know yourself. Now, imagine lying down on a couch and the Freudian analyst asks you the furthermost remembrance you have of yourself. Which one will it be?

In the first place, I will put the Freudian on the couch! No Freudian can put me on the couch. What do they know? Even Freud knows nothing of any importance. He is full of fear, is afraid of ghosts, is afraid of death - so much that even the mention of death and he goes into a fit, his mouth starts foaming. This is your founder of psychoanalysis! These idiots.you think they know anything? If I meet Freud I will put him on the couch. He needs analysis. Do you know that he was not analyzed, ever? And many of his very close friends wanted to analyze him, but he refused. What is the fear? The founder of psychoanalysis should be available to his own methodology. The fear is that he is just as psychologically split, schizophrenic, full of fear, full of repression. He does not want, before his colleagues and disciples, to expose himself. He never told a single dream of his own. He is talking about others’ dreams, interpreting their dreams - what about his own dreams? He should begin with his own dreams.
It is very easy to interpret anybody’s dream.
For example, if you are in your dream flying in the sky. Many people have dreams of flying - Sigmund Freud will say that means ambition, that you are very ambitious. What about Freud, if he has the dream of flying? Then his disciples, friends and colleagues and students will interpret it: “You are very ambitious” - and he wants to pretend that he has gone beyond ambitions. He was one of the most ambitious people in the world, very afraid of anybody who was more intelligent than him.
That’s why many people left him who were really more intelligent than him. Adler left him for the simple reason that he had found a better explanation for dreams. He said there are a few dreams which are sexual, but all dreams are not sexual, because all men’s desires are not sexual. And man goes on repressing all his desires, so his dreams cannot be only sexually interpreted. This is absolutely rational. He left the group and Freud condemned him, said that he betrayed him.
But was it a religion? What is the meaning of betrayal? Science knows no betrayal. You have to argue with Adler, prove your thesis amongst your colleagues. And whoever comes closer to truth - it doesn’t matter who is coming closer - has to be accepted. But no, Freud was very dictatorial: he knows the truth.
This is something which comes as a heritage with every Jew. From Moses to all the prophets, to John the Baptist, to Jesus, to Sigmund Freud, to Karl Marx, the same trend and the same attitude: “We are the only possessors of truth, it is our monopoly. We are the chosen people of God”. These are different versions of the same theme.
Moses has contaminated the Jewish mind so much that even people like Marx, who deny religion, are unaware completely that they are still in the hands of Moses.
Sigmund Freud was afraid of Jung because he was just next to him, and people had started talking about Jung, saying that he is going to be the successor. That made Freud very much afraid - successor? Jung was not agreeing with all his theories, hypotheses, and if he becomes the successor - he was young, Freud was getting old - he will destroy the whole of psychoanalysis and the movement. And it is not only a movement, it is a question of a Jewish business firm.
Freud expelled Carl Gustav Jung from the movement while he was alive, so nobody could in any way change anything. His word was holy. This is not a scientific attitude. And he certainly created one of the biggest businesses of the century. But Jews are known to do this.
Jesus created the biggest business of the whole history. Jews cannot forgive themselves. They unnecessarily crucified this poor carpenter’s son. They should have used him, and right now rather than there being millions and millions of Christians, there would have been millions and millions of Jews. Jesus created the biggest religious establishment. Sigmund Freud did the same, Marx did the same. Jewishness has something in it: the art of creating established businesses. So no psychoanalyst has the guts even to face me. If you have anybody, you can bring him.

What about the farthest remembrance you have of yourself?

That is very difficult, because I remember even my past lives. You mean this life?

Any remembrance?

But I remember many past lives! One thing is certain: even in my past lives, I remember perfectly well, I have never eaten spaghetti. That much is certain.

I feel that an Italian will always project in you a father figure. And also for Germans you will be always projected as a leader. And if I look at a French lady, she can see in you a beautiful man to lie down with. Why is it so difficult to accept you as a simple human being? And why is there all this projection happening.

Only a simple human being can see me as a simple human being - and it is very difficult to find simple human beings. Everybody has some projection. To be simple means: without projections, without conditionings, just a clarity, a silence, an understanding. But you are right, different people will see different things in me.
I am just a mirror. You will see your own face, you will see your own desire. And if I don’t fulfill it, you will be angry at me. I receive many angry letters from sannyasins, and I simply laugh at their stupidity.
They first project. I have never agreed to their projection, they have never even told me their projection. And when I don’t fulfill, and don’t act according to their expectation, then they simply freak out, they are angry. But what can I do? So many people.if I start fulfilling everybody’s projection and everybody’s expectation, then life will be impossible for me. And why in the first place should I fulfill anybody’s expectation?
My whole effort here is that you drop all projections, and you be simple, just the way I am simple. Just two mirrors facing each other - nothing is reflected. And that state when two mirrors face each other and nothing is reflected, I call friendship.
When I said this morning that my people are my friends, they should understand it is not an easy job. To be a friend is one of the most arduous challenges.
And from now on, sannyasins are not going to be called Rajneeshees. They are going to be called only friends of Rajneesh. And they have to understand the meaning of being friends. It means no projection, no expectation.
Neither I am responsible for you, nor are you responsible for me. I love you because I have too much to give; you love me because you are overflowing with love. There is no obligation on anyone’s part.
To be a follower is very easy. You dump your whole responsibility on the leader, on the father figure, on the messiah, the savior, the prophet. It is human beings themselves who have allowed all kinds of exploitation. You want somebody else to save you. That is not right. If you have fallen into a ditch, try to get out of it - don’t wait for the savior to come; the savior never comes. The savior is like tomorrow, which never comes; he is always coming, coming, coming, but never comes. And you will die in the ditch, waiting - waiting for Godot.
I want you to be absolutely free in spirit. I am not anybody’s father figure, so you cannot depend on me. And I am not your leader, so you cannot say one day, “You have misled us.” It was your joy to come or not to come. You enjoyed coming with me, that was your joy.
I allowed you to come with me, that was my joy. I had never said that we are going to achieve something, I never promised anything, and you don’t have any reason to be angry. What a strange thing it is that for thirty years I have been telling people - and there are many sannyasins who have been for fifteen years with me, or even more, but deep down still some kind of expectation continues, and that is your dependence.
And if I go against your hidden expectation immediately you explode. You start feeling shaky, your trust is lost, I simply wonder. I had never asked you in to be with me the first place.
Just be a friend, with no strings attached. Is it not possible just to be friends, allowing the other his own being, his own way, his own life? Never trespassing - because that is the meaning of friendship, not to trespass. So it is true that a French woman will think just the way a French woman is conditioned to think. The German will think just the way the German is conditioned to think.
But I am going to destroy all your conditionings: French, Italian, German, English, Dutch, whatever - it doesn’t matter: my function is to deprogram you. Only then can you be again as simple and innocent as a child. And out of that innocence is beauty, grandeur, love, fragrance.

There is a rumor that you’re going away from here. Do you have any projects for the future?

I have no future, and future does not exist. Those who have future don’t have the present. You can’t have both. If you want to have the present - which is the only reality - then forget all about future. Future is destructive of the present. You think of the future, you project on the future; meanwhile the present is slipping by.
That which is real you are losing for something which is not real. And remember whenever what you call future comes it will come as the present, never as the future.
And your mind by and by becomes habituated to projecting into the future. Future comes, but it comes as the present, and in the present you don’t have any interest; your whole interest is in the future.
So always the future comes in the present and slips out of your hands and you go on thinking about the future. Future never comes. One day death comes. There are many people who realize only at the moment of death that they were alive, but they could not manage to live it - and now there is no future.

In the present are you staying here?

Yes.

How long is this present?

As long as possible. I don’t know about the next moment. You just forget the future and come to the present!

You live surrounded by many gadgets which a western eyes don’t consider spiritual things. And the question is, why do you need them?

What the Western people consider as spiritual - have I to fulfill their considerations? I am not born to fulfill anybody’s expectations, either Western or Eastern. I am living my life. Who are they to decide about me? I don’t care a bit about them, why should they waste their time about me?
I am a contemporary man, I am not going to live five thousand year behind the times. I am going to use the latest gadget possible, and I don’t see that it disturbs my spirituality. On the contrary, it helps; it makes my spirituality contemporary, fresh, new. The people who are worried are the people who have created a split between materialism and spiritualism. They think that sitting on a beautiful, comfortable chair you cannot be meditative. They are simple idiots. What is the problem? Sitting on a comfortable chair is really helpful for meditation. The Indian way is to sit in a lotus posture, putting your feet in such a tortuous way that I don’t think you can meditate; you are continuously worried about your feet!

Like those people there? [indicating the group in front of Osho]

They are enjoying; and nobody is sitting in the lotus posture. You don’t know the lotus posture. Does anybody here know it? It means to sit - yes, that is the lotus posture.not perfect! Do you think that kind of torture is going to help spirituality?

No. So there is an economic idea hidden behind the experiment you are doing here? Like people come, they invest everything in the commune, they work all the day; there is no money going around inside the commune and it’s quite difficult for the people outside who are earning money themselves to understand this idea of economy. Can you explain it?

It is very simple, and they will have to understand it sooner or later. One thing: currency notes should be banned, should be made illegal. In fact they should have been illegal long before now, because a currency note moves in so many hands. Sick people, people who have tuberculosis, people who have infectious diseases - those currency notes are moving in all these people’s hands.
Now, people even have AIDS. And in India I have seen - I don’t know what people in other countries do - when they are counting large numbers of notes, they use their saliva to count the notes with a thick bundle they use saliva so that only one note comes out, not two notes or calculation is wrong.
With AIDS, people counting notes with saliva is dangerous. They can infect people who are absolutely innocent, who are not homosexual, who have never committed any kind of perversion, but who can suffer through AIDS. So the simple thing is the currency card. Every city should have currency cards, so you keep your own currency cards.
And because of the computer, it has become so simple that there is no need for currency notes. This has to be done if AIDS is to be prevented. People have to be taught not to use saliva when they put a stamp on an envelope; or some other kind of envelopes have to be developed which do not need saliva. Otherwise people are simply just habitually licking them - but that saliva is carrying poison.
Currency cards are the only way to prevent this unnecessary spread of disease not only of AIDS but of many other diseases. And the world sooner or later is going to be converted into communes. We are the pioneers, we have heralded a new age.
Families are really out of date. Just think: we are five thousand people here. The average family, we can suppose consists of five people. That means one thousand families would be living here. Then one thousand families have to cook food, one thousand families have to think about cleaning the houses, one thousand families have to think about washing their clothes. One thousand families have to think about their children, sending them to the school, bringing them back home, all kind of things. They have to think of employment - and even in America, there are millions who are unemployed, what to say about poor countries?
Almost half of India is unemployed. Half of India means four hundred million people have no jobs. How long can they survive? And these are the people who then finally turn into criminals. You are forcing them to be criminals, and then you will be punishing them for their crime. This is very strange. Not much intelligence is needed - if you keep four hundred million people unemployed, how are they going to feed their families, their children, their old parents? Then they will have to do something: smuggle things from outside the country, steal, sell drugs, manufacture alcohol, do any kind of thing which is not legal. And then they are caught and punished without any consideration of what is going to happen to their children. I don’t think this is justice.
A person is caught because he was selling dope; he goes into jail. Now what about his children, what about his wife, what about his old parents who are sick, need medicine, need care? The court is responsible for taking care of all these people - but nobody even bothers. You have not punished one person, you have punished many people; and those people will turn into thieves. Those children cannot be educated, they cannot pay the fee, they cannot purchase books. In fact there is no food in the house - what is the point of purchasing books and going to the school? They will start stealing from the very beginning, or begging, or doing something which is not good. Girls will become prostitutes - there is no other way.
So your whole legal system is creating all kinds of illegal things in the world. Your law is not protecting the society but is creating criminality. My suggestion is, why one thousand families. That is unnecessary wastage. Here we have one kitchen which can be managed by a few people. There is no need for one hundred or one thousand kitchens, one thousand women unnecessarily engaged. In their life they will not be able to read good literature, listen to music, meditate, sing, dance. There is no possibility - they are taking care of children and thinking of tomorrow’s bread. There is no need for this.
In a commune we have reduced the kitchens to one kitchen. Everybody is free - just a few people prepare food. And then you can have better food, because all women are not great cooks. So why, when you can have the best cooks, why eat food prepared by a wife who is a third-rate cook? You have to eat it, and you have to praise it, and you have to say, “Great! I have never tasted such delicious dishes before.”
All the clothes of the commune can be taken care of by one laundry; the experts can take care. And in the same way, cleaning can be taken care of by a few people. And the remaining people do not have to search for jobs; the commune provides them. All kinds of jobs are there: farming is there, gardening is there, vegetable greenhouses are there. Doctors can go to the medical facility, legal experts can go to the legal association, professors can go to the university, teachers can go to the school. Children can be taken care of in the hostel. All women need not worry about children. They can be loving to them, they can go to see them, they can have once in a while the children with them. But the children are taken care of by the commune.
The family has to be replaced by the commune. So big cities should be divided into communes. For example, a city which is very big can be divided into ten communes, twenty communes, and they take care of the whole thing. And they are the sole masters of their commune. They should put everything that they can into the commune, and the commune will take care of them. This way we can create more wealth, more enjoyment, more nourishment, caring, for the patients, for the old, for the sick.
And money is no longer a problem - money does not exist. This is a simple concept of a better society. And slowly, slowly, the whole world should be changed into communes. There is no need for nations, no need for states. Each commune should be an independent commune. No need for any hierarchy and bureaucracy; every commune should decide for itself. So we can dissolve nations and families. These are the two greatest diseases which we have to get rid of - and the commune is the medicine.

You have in Italy three communes. Two of them have been closed, and other one is reduced now to twenty-six people. The reason was given by Sheela that Italy is a third-world country, economically. So it means Italy doesn’t fit your vision of communes?

No, it was just Sheela’s idea. It won’t be so now. Italy will have its own commune, so tell Italian sannyasins that they should start commune. At least two communes in Italy are absolutely necessary, and then we can have more. The problem is that you have to teach Italian friends that their communes fail because they are lazy. And rather than taking responsibility, they become a burden on the commune. German communes are flourishing, earning money, living comfortably, for the simple reason that people are not lazy. So what has been done - I had suggested that those Italian communes were never going well and there were fights. And the money is not there, and every month the leader is changing, because the one who was taking care is tired, people don’t listen. I have said to send Italian commune sannyasins to learn how to work, to German communes. So each German commune can absorb at least twenty Italian sannyasins. They just have to get the idea how things work, and once they get the idea they are as intelligent as anybody else. It is just that their national heritage is of laziness, so they have to understand that nobody is going to baby-sit them, they will have to take their own responsibility.
And if German communes can function well - not only can they provide comfort for themselves, but they are capable to help other communes which are in debt - I don’t see why in Italy it cannot happen. So you just send the message that all sannyasins first should move to German communes or Dutch communes - just for a learning period of two months, three months to see how things are working - then go back and start planning. There is no problem in it.
For example, one commune has enough land.thirty sannyasins are there, but just dependent on one woman sannyasin who has given the land. Now she has to provide food and clothes also, so she is getting fed up. That is not the idea of a commune, that “I have given you the whole land - you can cultivate it, you can create - you don’t need to do anything. I have to take care about your food, about your clothes, and about your other needs.”
That commune, Pratiti’s commune, is perfectly good, and she wants somebody to take charge, so that she is free; she is willing to give the whole property to the commune. So just tell Pratiti, “We will take care.” And if those lazy people are not willing to go, then tell them to leave the commune, to live on their own. Accept only people who are going to work - because “unless you work, who is going to provide all your necessities?” And I have so many beautiful Italian people who love me that it is just a question of a little understanding. The whole Italian economy may be going down; that does not matter. Our communes can remain high, can be more economically stable, and can prove to other people that “you are unnecessarily getting into a depressive economy. If we can manage, you can also manage.” Italy will have its communes, but something has to be taught to them. The people are good, loving, but lazy.

You spoke a lot about the missionary position in making love, and also about French kissing, which are the only two things the Italian knows about making love. Since you don’t like them, you can give some advice also in this direction to Italians.

You don’t know much! First, instead of kissing start rubbing noses - which is more hygienic and really more fun. You both will start laughing. In kissing only one difficulty is, you cannot laugh. In this way both things are possible: you can rub noses and you can laugh too, at the same time. AIDS is avoided and the experience becomes richer. Noses are very sensitive parts.
Eskimos for their whole history have never kissed, kissing does not exist among Eskimos. It does not exist in a few tribes in the Himalayas too. And when the first time they saw Christian missionaries kissing, they could not believe that “these people have come to teach us, religion. They don’t even know how to make love!” This is so disgusting to Eskimos - and if you think impartially you will agree with them. Kissing someone is mixing saliva with the other, exploring each other’s mouth with your tongue. Just think of it and you will feel like vomiting. What are you doing? This is love? This is not love. Just traditionally because people have been doing it, you go on doing it.

You talk out of experience of things?

Yes. Everything I say, I say on my own authority, my experience.

In these days there is a public opinion which is following you day after day with big headlines, new ones every day. And many are getting the idea that the story is built-up, everything that is happening. How much of this story is advertising?

Not anything. Right now everything is absolutely true. There is no need of advertising. We don’t need any advertising, I have never needed any advertising. I am so unpredictable that I can make any statement which becomes immediately news.

This is true!

There is no trouble in it. And I use every media. If television is available and radio is available and newspapers are available, then what is the need? Jesus said to his disciples, “Go on top of your houses and shout loudly to spread the word, the message.” I will not say that to my people unnecessarily. Going on top of your house.and how much can you shout? And here for at least twenty miles there is nobody around. Who is going to hear you? Only sannyasins who are hugging somebody on the street. They will simply say, “Shut up! Don’t disturb us. You go somewhere else to spread the word - we are already practicing it.” There is no need.
We have all the media, and I’m going to use it fully. Whenever I do anything, I do it fully. I squeeze the last drop out of everything, there is no problem in it. And if politicians can use the media, if businesses can use the media - if all kinds of lying advertisements are on the media - then why should truth remain behind? It has to come into the marketplace. Its presence only will be enough for many lies to die.
If you write a book, somebody has to purchase it, first; secondly, he has to read it. The book has become out of date. If the person can see it on the television, without purchasing a book and without reading it. and remember always, seeing reaches deeper in you than reading.
Reading is only words; seeing has a totally different effect, it is almost life - as if you are hearing me. My gestures will be missed in the book. My silent pauses will not be there in the book, nor my eyes, which say so much you may put the same sentence in the book, but it has lost almost eighty percent of its meaning, because that eighty percent was not in the sentence, but in things around it: the eyes, the hands, the personality, the man, the face; his emphasis, his way of saying a thing, his voice, his authority, which penetrates the heart.
The coming days are the days of television. And television makes me available to the whole world. Buddha had to travel for forty-two years continuously, and then too he could not go out of his state, Bihar. Not even all over India; in forty-two years he could manage to cover only one state. India consists now of thirty states, and at that time, it was double what it is now. Sixty states - and he covered only one state. I can manage sitting in my chair to cover the whole world. And it is not long, soon scientists have to come up with a three-dimensional television. This television is not yet enough, it is flat. Once it becomes three dimensional - which is not too big a problem - then whether you are listening to me directly or listening on the television screen will make no difference, because both will be three dimensional.

Do you think history will be divided into before and after Osho?

There is no need, there is no need. You divided it after Jesus - let it remain divided with Jesus.

The pope is worried about that, you know.

He may be worried - keep him worried. But there is no need. But if my people decide, then it is their problem. I am not preventing either, I am simply provoking.

There was a statement about AIDS which the pope didn’t like so much, when you said the Vatican should become an AIDS resort.

Why should he like it? He is responsible, and all the popes before him are responsible. It should be made clear to him that if you have any compassion, change the Vatican into an AIDS camp. Make celibacy a sin, and let all your monks be married to the nuns. And for you we have chosen Mother Teresa.

This can make the headlines of the Vatican! When you sit in the chair you transcend any sexual definition. But when you dance with a female disciple, you are real macao [macho?]-looking. Why such a difference?

You think that even while dancing I should look as if I am sitting in the chair? Or vice versa - sitting in the chair I should look as if I am dancing? The change is bound to be there - sitting in the chair is a different posture, dancing is a different posture, eating at my table is a different posture. They have to be different. They simply show that man is not linear, that man is multi-dimensional. Dancing with a woman, certainly I have to be respectful to a woman. I am not a homosexual.

Do you consider yourself a latin lover?

Yes, certainly. I am a lover, and every gesture of mine shows that I am a lover. I love every beautiful thing in the world, and that is my teaching to my people: love everything beautiful in the world. Okay? Can we dance now?

============================================================

Sandy Hill, America Show, Paramount TV; The Denver Post, Denver, CO

Hello, Osho. I understand you’d like to know just a little bit about this broadcast. It’s so new that a lot of people aren’t quite sure. But it’s now syndicated across the country. It’s a joint project between both Paramount and CBS. You’ve grown weary of us already?

Yes.

So why do you keep putting up with us?

I will continue.

You have a story to tell, which is why you do.

I enjoy.

You do seem very serene, though, and very happy for a man who is in effect ending a religion which has been created totally around him.

It has been created around me, but not according to me. I have been always against organized religions. They have exploited humanity. They have kept people in darkness because their whole logic is based on belief. And anybody who believes stops inquiring. Belief is a dead end.

But do not the people who have come here and who surround you and who are devoted to you believe in you and your.?

No. Nobody believes in me and I don’t have any system of beliefs, no ideology. They are here because they love me, and love is not a belief. They are here not as my followers, they are here as my friends. I love them.

But they do follow you and follow your teachings.

No. I explain.

They don’t believe in what you say?

No. They do whatsoever their intelligence, their rationality, feels right. I can explain my experience, then it is up to them to do whatsoever they want to do with it. There is no demand on my part that they should believe it.
My only request is: inquire, doubt. Doubt until you come to a point where doubt becomes impossible, where you have stumbled in some indubitable truth. Then there is no question of belief; you know it.
Either you know it or you do not. There is no third alternative.
Belief is a trick. You don’t know but yet you behave as if you know.

Why have you chosen at this point to end this belief, this religion, of Rajneeshism?

Because it has never been there. Just I has been in three and half years silence and isolation. I was completely cut off from my people.

You chose to cut yourself off.

I have chosen it. For thirty years I have been speaking. I needed a period of rest, not to speak at all.
So for three and half years I was completely silent, not reading any newspaper, not listening to the radio, not seeing the television. And I have given my whole authority to my secretary, Ma Anand Sheela.
I have always respected women more than men, because I feel that they function more through the heart than through the head, because I can see that they can be more loving and caring about people than men can be.
Sheela was perfectly right - very pragmatic, very practical - to take care of five thousand people in this desert, to make houses for them, roads for them, create enough food for them: vegetables, fruits, milk products. She made the commune perfectly self-sufficient. This was the good part.
But on the other hand she started feeling - which is very human, a unconscious desire in everybody - lust for power. She has been just a waitress in a hotel and suddenly millions of dollars were in her hands. We have put two hundred million dollars in this desert, to create an oasis.
And she was my representative. She had all my authority. And my people love me, so in my name they were ready to do anything.
She started unconsciously taking advantage of the situation. She became addicted with power. Five thousand people following everything that she says because she is always saying it with my name, in my name.
And then she created the whole idea that this is a religion. She collected fewof my sentences from here and there - I have four hundred books - and she managed to compile a small book: Rajneeshism.
It is not my book. She has made it. I have not even read it.

But it’s excerpts of speeches or teachings that you have made, is that accurate?

I don’t know because even the name is against me. I have been always against isms, ideologies, religions. I want every individual to find his own truth. Nobody can deliver it to him. It is not a commodity.
No savior can save you, and there are no saviors. All are pretenders. There is no God and there are no messengers of God. This existence is complete in itself and man’s intelligence is existence’s greatest point of evolution. To destroy it by repressing through some faith, through some belief, is against humanity, against truth, and certainly against me.

But you have said that Christianity failed but that Rajneeshism was the first religion. And now it seems that it, too, has failed.

What I had said simply means that language is always a problem. It.you have to use the language that is available. When I was talking to the INS, I insisted that I would like to call my philosophy a religiousness, but they said, “That is difficult because we don’t have any category for religiousness. You can apply only under the category religion. We don’t have any category for religiousness.”
I explained to them that there is a difference. A religion is a fixed dogma, a fixed belief system. A religiousness is just a quality like love. It is not an organized thing. It has no priests, no priestesses. It is rebellion against all that destroys human reason.
But they said, “We cannot accept the application unless You use the word religion.”
It was just because of them. I said, “Okay. I will use the word religion just to fulfill to your stupid categories.”
That’s why I used that word: that all religions have failed; Rajneeshism is the first and the last religion. And I meant really the new kind of religiousness. All old kinds have failed.
But in these three and half years silence, Sheela managed to create it in a more organized, fascist fashion: a religion, a hierarchy.

She corrupted your ideas?

She corrupted my ideas, certainly. And she became the high priestess.
As I started speaking again, she became very much afraid and very much sad because I declared that this is not any organized religion and this is not going to be just like Christianity, having popes representing Jesus and Jesus representing God. All that nonsense is not going to be repeated here.
Before I leave my body, I will destroy every possibility that can give an opportunity to another Sheela to make a religiousness, a freedom, into an imprisonment.
That’s why I have chosen this moment. She has fled from here out of fear, and whatsoever she has done in three and half years, I have to undo it.

And removing the religion will undo it?

Yes. Yes.

Will there be substantial changes here as a result of it? Or is this merely a semantics game too? As you said, language is a problem.

No, everything. And now I am going to fight against INS also. They will have to create a new category. Man is not for law, law is for man. And if we are creating a new kind of religiousness, then they have to create a new category. Otherwise we will fight up to the Supreme Court.

[interruption to change film]

Do you really feel comfortable with this temperature?

I am comfortable.

Is anyone from the outside going to be able to see any changes here? Is there something tangible about this?

Yes, everything.

Perceptible to an outsider?

Yes. It will be perceptible to the outsiders too. For example, now there will be no uniform for sannyasins.

Why not?

Because that makes them separate from the whole humanity.

Did you not choose that in the first place?

I have chosen. It was needed at that time. It was necessary.

Why was it necessary then and it’s no longer?

It was necessary for them. They were Hindus, they were Christians, they were Mohammedans, they were Buddhists, and they wanted to declare that they are no more belonging to any old religions. They wanted to declare it twenty-four hours with their dresses.
Now there are one million sannyasins around the earth and they are already made the point that they are no more part of any old, rotten system of thought. They are individuals and they are seekers on their own. They don’t believe in anyone, they don’t hope that any savior is going to save them. They have taken their life in their own hands. And they are perfectly contented, joyous.

But also having difficulties throwing off those robes and the symbols that are a part of it, aren’t they?

There will be a little difficulty, because you become identified. But I am here to make you free of all identifications. Unless you are free of all identifications, you are not free. You are clinging to something, thinking yourself special. And I want my sannyasins to be just ordinary human beings, not the chosen few of God like Jews, not the chosen few Nordic Aryans like Adolf Hitler.
Every religion believes that they are the chosen people of God and everybody else is lower. They somehow tolerate you. I want my people to be absolutely ordinary. There is no question of being chosen and special. In fact, all those ideas are egoistic and against man’s growth.
So it is going to be difficult for them, but every growth is difficult. And inner growth is the most difficult thing because you have to leave many things out as you move in. Finally everything is left: the body, the mind, the heart. Then only you come to the center of the cyclone. Then you come to know yourself. And that realization to me is religiousness.
It does not make you a Christian, it does not make you a Hindu, but it gives you a certain quality which I call religiousness.
I can call it godliness.

Godliness?

Yes. There is no God, but godliness is possible.

If there is no more Rajneeshism.No more religion, will there continue to be a Rajneesh and a Rajneeshpuram?

Rajneeshpuram is just the name of the city. It will continue.

You’ll keep the name even though.

Yes.

Taken from a religion that no longer exists?

No, it is not taken from the religion. It is the people who love me who has given it the name. And it does not have anything to do with religion. Otherwise you will have to change San Francisco. Then many of your names you will have to change because they belong to some religion.
This is just their love. They love me and they want to call their place.

But they can no longer identify themselves as Rajneeshees, is that accurate?

They are no more Rajneeshees.

But there is a Rajneesh.

There.I am a Rajneesh! But I am not a Rajneeshee. They can love me, they can call their city if they feel calling it. They want to change it they can change it.
I have already told my people in City of Rajneesh that, “Change the name back to Antelope.”

And will they?

They are. They will. “Because it is not your city. Why hurt other peoples?”

When will they change it back?

Soon. Whenever their council meets they will change.

Have you also offered to sell some of the property back to.?

All the properties. I have offered that.

All of the properties?

All the properties that we own. And we own two-third of the properties in Antelope. We have offered they should purchase them. And we will vacate because we have enough property here: one hundred twenty-six square miles. What do we need to hurt people unnecessarily?
There are only twelve old residents and one hundred sannyasins. If they don’t purchase the properties, we have also offered: “You can sell your properties. We will purchase your properties.”
This way or that, but finish it.
But the city will be called Antelope. It has its own name, there is no need to change it.

Is this kind of a peace offering to the community on your part?

Certainly.

Do you think they’ll accept it?

That is their business. We offer. If they don’t accept it, that is their problem. We don’t have any hostility against anybody. But if they have hostility then they will suffer. Their hostility will burn their heart.
We are not at all in any trouble, in any fear. And we are offering: whatever Sheela has done against them, we are changing everything.
We have offered to the governor that, “We will withdraw all our cases against the state, but you have to be understandable that you withdraw all the cases that you have put against the city of Rajneeshpuram. You have put the cases first, so it will be gentlemanly to withdraw first. The moment you withdraw all your cases, we withdraw all our cases. But if you want to fight, then it is perfectly good. We will fight to the very end.”

You said earlier that you really want your sannyasins to doubt, to be skeptical.

Right.

And many suspect that perhaps this series of bombshells that have been dropped, as a result of Sheela’s activities, might be part of a hidden agenda that you have and that perhaps you too intend to leave?

No. I will not leave America.

What if you lose the deportation hearing?

I will fight, because on every grounds I have the right. You all are foreigners here. And foreigners pretending to be owners of a country which belongs to red Indians. On what grounds you can deport me? First deport Ronald Reagan.
And these people - your forefathers, all Americans - have come into this country as invaders. And you should feel the guilt. You belong to the invaders.
We have not come here as invaders. We have purchased the property and we have paid more money than needed.
All your ancestors from Columbus onwards entered America without any visa, without any green card. So what right these people have to decide about me?

You have [unclear] that you’d like to see this group, the Rajneeshees, become an intrinsic part of the state of Oregon, but haven’t the antagonisms really in this local area gone so far that is that approachable? Is that achievable?

We don’t care.

Did you not say you’d like to be?

We, on our part, are offering peace, friendship. If they want to remain hostile, we don’t care. Whatever we can do to be peaceful, we will do. But if they understand only the language of hostility, we are not worried about it.
America is the country of freedom, democracy. We can fight through the courts for our rights.
I respect American constitution more than holy Bible. And American constitution is in our favor on each and every point.
And this will be a historical event, that we will be fighting for the American constitution against Americans who are corrupting it.

I’d like to just go back for a moment.

You can go anywhere you want.

To your decision now to end the religion: first of all, religion was not for you, but it had been corrupted by Sheela. Was that solely the catalyst for the decision to end the religion or were there other elements that came into play?

No other element.

Not reports of dwindling followers, not the legal battles.

No. Nobody is dwindling. More followers are coming. Sheela has thrown many people. While I was in silence she threw all those people who were most intimate to me, of which, naturally, she was afraid. She threw all the intelligent people who were far more capable than herself. She is uneducated.

What did she do with them?

The vice chancellor of the university, the chancellor of the university, she threw them out by and by, harassed them, just for the simple reason because they can take her place any moment. And the commune would have supported them because they had been with me long before Sheela came to me. They understood me far more better than Sheela understands me.

Do you understand how an enlightened man such as yourself, how all of this could have evolved without your knowing, with your right-hand person? It is extraordinarily confusing for many.

It is extraordinarily confusing because you don’t understand the nature of enlightenment. You think the enlightened person is omnipotent, omniscient, omnipresent. You think that the enlightened person is a godman. That is all bullshit.

I don’t know if we can use that on TV.

If you are honest you have to use it. And bullshit is nothing unspiritual. It is a simple word with tremendous meaning.

Very graphic.

Yes. So please use it.
The enlightened man only knows himself and nothing else. Everything else is just projected by the followers.
For example, I don’t think Jesus ever walked on water or he ever turned water into wine or that he raised dead back to life. Any man doing these things would have become a national hero in Judea.

[Interruption for cameraman]

Is anybody a Jew amongst you?

How much in debt is the commune?

Not at all.

So she didn’t run off with any.?

No, she managed the money that was to come to the commune during these three years slowly slowly from European communes, donations, small parts she started accumulating in a Swiss bank.

How much.?

In her own name. Forty-three million dollars.

You can prove that through the books, that it is indeed forty-three million.?

No, not in our books, because it never reached here. We know the figure from Sheela’s secretary.

Who is still here?

.who is dying by cancer in California. We have sent our man, because she has all the documents and all the proofs and she is willing. Sometimes it happens when death is close one wants to unburden any lie, any deception. She herself wrote that these forty-three millions are very heavy on her and she wants to give us the whole details.

She’s got facts, figures, papers.?

Yes, everything. But commune has not missing anything, because though that money never reached commune, so it is not in commune’s papers. So commune is not in debt.
But Sheela has stolen that much money on the way, and she has done many kinds of crime which slowly are sannyasins bringing it up.

Sheela has been quoted recently as saying that the accusations that you’ve made against her are “absolute nonsense” and that she had told you that your penchant for expensive things - watches, automobiles - were getting everyone into trouble.

If she is correct, then we will pay her the ticket to come here and face me.

You deny that?

I deny it completely, because neither the watches belong to me nor the cars belong to me. And they both belong to the commune. They are commune property. And even if I have those ninety Rolls Royces, they don’t make up for forty-three million dollars.

The people here adore you. I mean, you are their world. This has been an horrendous period for all of them, individually, and certainly for you. But do you almost feel as if you, by having taken that vow of silence, that was the catalyst that brought this on everyone, all of you?

No. It helped. You see only one side. You don’t see the other side. And everything has two sides.
My being silent helped the commune to settle, because I am an unpredictable man. Every day I can say something which can disturb the politicians, which can disturb the state, the government. The commune will never be settled if I had continued to speak.
Now the commune is settled, I can start speaking again. So this is the other side of it. My silence helped the commune. Now I will be speaking everything the way I have always spoken. Whatsoever is truth to me, I cannot compromise on it.
For example, just this morning I told them that the holy Bible is the most pornographic book. And I am going to take out all the pornographic portions, which are near about five hundred pages, and we are going to publish colored pictures of pornography, glossy with Bible quotations, and prove to everybody that “This is your holy book. And your courts are carrying it for taking oath. The Playboy is far more sensible.”
So it was good. My silence helped the commune to settle. My silence certainly helped Sheela to have a power trip.

But you have no regrets.

But what harm she has done? She has simply destroyed herself and her whole gang. Now they are hiding in Black Forest in Germany like criminals.

What about the accusations of the hobo who had been killed, and I understand now that there was a laboratory found where there were bombs being made.

So everything we are delivering to the police. Any criminal should be punished, should be brought to the court. We are helping. The police is here, FBI is here, state police is here. Our police is working, and we are discovering everything that she did.
And this could happen because of my silence. This is the other side.
But one has to remember that you cannot make me responsible for Adolf Hitler, because why I was not born in Germany at that time? Otherwise I should have fought against him. You cannot make me responsible for Josef Stalin. Why I was not born in Russia at that time?
You cannot blame me for my silence. It is my birthright to speak or not to speak.
And I had come to America in silence. I did not begin it here. I began it in India. I had no idea of coming to America when I began silence. I came into silence.
But both the things happen, the good things happened, the bad things happened. And both will have their effects.
Whoever is responsible for bad things will be sooner or later caught, and whoever is responsible for all the good things will be rewarded. Existence is very fair.
As far as my silence is concerned, it is absolutely out of both. Neither it has done good nor it has done bad. I was simply silent and absent and in isolation.
And I have the right.
When I am asleep, if something happens you cannot make me responsible for it, that, “If You had not been asleep then this murder would not have happened.”
My silence has done good for me. My health was bad. Thirty year continuously in India traveling from one place to another place, talking to millions of people, fighting against every dogma and every stupidity. And India is so full of it that no other country can be compared with it. Naturally I lost my health.
I was never sick. I was so healthy that people used to say that my body seems to be made of marble. And then slowly slowly these thirty years of continuous traveling and continuous fighting destroyed it.
I needed a rest, and those three years have immensely helped me. Now whatsoever crimes she has done, she will be punished for them. And in America, where twenty percent presidents are killed, you think one hobo is killed is much of a crime?

Do you?

Just I am asking you. Where twenty percent presidents are killed who have all kinds of security, the most sophisticated security in the whole world. If a hobo is killed, I don’t think there is much to brag about it. She should be punished for it. She tried to poison three other people but fortunately they have survived. She has bugged hundreds of houses. My own room she has bugged.

Will normalcy ever return to Rajneeshpuram?

It has returned.

Bill Harlan,
Denver Post newspaper

A sannyasin friend said to me, “I bet that Osho will get rid of the bullets.” and I want to know if you intend to do that.

I am ready right now to get rid of them, but who is going to take the responsibility of the commune? If anything happens to the commune, then who is going to be responsible? Because we receive every day threats from Christian fanatics, from Hell’s Angels, that they will come and destroy the city and burn the city. So what do you want?
I can get rid this very moment. But certainly you cannot take the responsibility. Ask the governor if he is ready to take the responsibility, or the president. If he is ready to take the responsibility, we will be more than happy.
We are not people who want to fight with anybody. We are not fanatics about anything. And we have nothing to defend. There is no reason. In fact, we are simply wasting our energy and our people in carrying guns. Just ask the governor, the state government, the federal government - anybody should take the responsibility that nothing happens to the commune, and if anything happens to the commune then they will be responsible for it.

The greatest threat right now seems to be from the government itself, from the INS or from Oregon authorities. Is it possible that these weapons would be used against the legal authorities of the state?

No, because with legal authorities what these toy guns can do?

In this morning’s discourse I heard you say that you’re nobody’s master, that you have no disciples. Yet - and it was very impressive, your entry into the Mandir, your very beautiful robes, your chair which is almost thronelike - these seemed to be the accoutrements of a master. Why all the trappings?

Because of my health, my sannyasins have made everything. Whatever you see - my chair is made by my sannyasins according to my physician for my back, and it has proved right. My robes are made by sannyasins. Everything from my shoe to my head is made by my sannyasins. Even my watch is made by my sannyasins.
What do you think about the watch?

It’s much more beautiful than mine.

Yes, but it is much cheaper.

Cheaper?

Yes. Because these are not diamonds. These are simple proletariat stones. And if my people lovingly bring simple things to me, I cannot refuse.

I heard you say this morning that love is a state of being and that in a relationship love cannot exist, that a relationship will kill love. Yet it seems in watching your sannyasins with you, and you with them, that there is an incredible relationship.

No. There is no relationship. You are an outsider, that’s why it seems so. It is a state of being so overwhelming that they all become part of one state, that my being and their being is one, that their heartbeat starts beating in the same rhythm as my heart.
It is not a relationship. It is just what Karl Gustav Jung calls synchronicity, just as when the sun rises and the flowers open up. Do you call it a relationship? It is synchronicity. The sun goes down, the flowers close. Do you call it relationship?

Again as an outside observer, to come to Rajneeshpuram and see sannyasins working quite hard, and albeit they’re enjoying it, they look happy at their work, but they’re working quite hard, long hours, staying in fairly simple accommodations. And then on the other hand to see you drive by in the very beautiful rainbow-colored Rolls Royce, and I assume that you have very nice accommodations.It looks as if the immediate conclusion to be drawn is that there’s some kind of exploitation going on here.

Yes, that’s what the outsider will come to the conclusion.

Well, how do you respond to that, or what are your thoughts on that?

They have made the house. I have never.my house is made by my sannyasins themselves. No outside worker has been called for anything. They have made the roads, they have made the houses, they have made a house for me. They love me.
They have made a beautiful garden because they know I love trees and they feel sad that I have to live in a desert. They don’t want me to see the desert. They have surrounded my whole house with so thick trees that I cannot see the desert at all from anywhere.
They have brought peacocks - three hundred peacocks in my garden. When they all dance, then it is really something worth seeing.

Why? Why do they do that?

Just they love me! And love needs no why. Whenever you ask why, that simply means you don’t understand love.

Getting back to another thing, I just remembered.

No, just finish first it. Otherwise you may have to come back. First finish it. If this question is finished.

Yes, I think this question is finished.

.then move.

On death, I believe you said that the man who understands life does not fear death.

Right.

And yet I see warnings that two-thirds of the population will die from AIDS, and alcohol being used around the commune, and the security, and that looks, if not paranoid, at least extremely cautious. And there seems to be a contradiction there.

There is no contradiction at all. As far as I am concerned, there is no fear of death. If you want to experiment, you can shoot me here, right now, and you can see whether there is any fear or not.
But these people are not in the same state where they know that there is no death. They are moving to that point, but they have not reached.
For their security I have to take every precaution. The security is needed, then they will need security and it will be given to them.
If I see the danger of AIDS which the outsiders are almost blind - and they are being kept blind by their government, by their church, by their religious leaders, political leaders, by their doctors even. They are kept blind of all the dangers that are looming on the horizon.
Doctors don’t want to do anything with AIDS because to admit a patient is dangerous to the doctor’s health themselves, because AIDS is not only infectious when you make a sexual contact. Just the saliva of the AIDS patient carries the virus. His tear carry the virus. His mucus from the nose carries the virus.
So no hospital is willing to take the AIDS patient. The best way is not to diagnose the patient, that he has AIDS, and leave him in the society. Now, this is crime, because that man will be spreading AIDS in thousands of ways. Eating in a restaurant he can cause it, by anything he can cause it.
I am fully aware of its dangers, and I don’t want my people to die an ugly death. I would like them to die in glory. But to reach to that glory they have to flower into their meditation.
So every precaution is being taken. There is no paranoia about it. It is simple understanding.
When you see a snake on the road and you stop, is it paranoia or simply intelligence?
They have been told to use gloves, they have been told to use condoms while making love, they have been told that homosexuality is unnatural and they should try, go through psychotherapeutic groups so they can become heterosexual and natural. All six thousand people in the commune have gone through tests.
I don’t think there is any city in the whole world which has gone through the test so totally.
They are fast asleep about the danger.
And when we went through this test we found two persons had it. But we have not condemned them as they will be condemned outside.
So people outside are afraid going for a test. Who knows? If it turns out that they have AIDS, then even their wife, their children, their parents, will throw them out of the house. Their job will be gone. Their friends will turn their backs on them.
But I have told my sannyasins that anybody who has AIDS is a victim, he is not a criminal. He is a victim of religious lunatic ideology about celibacy.
AIDS is a religious disease. It has been created by monasteries and nunneries where you put only man in one place and women in another place and you don’t allow them to meet with each other and force them to remain celibate.
Naturally, it is absolutely unscientific to be celibate. You cannot be, because your body has its own program and it does not listen to your ideology. It does not know you are a Christian monk or a Hindu monk. It does not know that you are taken the vow of celibacy. It goes on creating male sperms in your body, so what you are going to do with those male sperms? And they are in a hurry to get out, because their life is not long.

What happened to the two people who were diagnosed as.?

Yes. We have respect for them, love for them. We have made them the best houses available. The most scenic place we have given to them.

Here on the ranch?

Here on the ranch, but far away from the commune. They come to the discourses, and seeing the respect and love of the whole commune they are also careful not to be in any physical contact with anybody.
And they.I have told them that, “You should use these two years - perhaps you may live at the most two years - you use these two years for meditation. Make a curse into a blessing. Even the richest man has not the guts to have a two-year-long weekend. Now you have for two year complete freedom from all anxiety - even from death because it is now certain, so there is no question about it. It is going to happen. You can meditate without bothering about tomorrows. And the commune will take care of you.”
So we are taking care of them. Our physicians are going to visit them. And we are keeping them engaged so they don’t get bored. They are making beautiful gardens around their houses. Whatever they can do - typing discourses, writing books, poetry, listening to music, seeing films - we have made every arrangement for them so that these two lives.two years life is a beautiful experience.
And if they can meditate - they are meditating - perhaps they may die enlightened.
And the AIDS will not affect at all to their inner glory. It cannot reach to your innermost core.
So it is absolutely stupid of outsiders to think that we have any paranoia. In fact, what we are doing they will be doing soon. If they don’t do it, they will see AIDS spreading like wildfire.
Every day one man in LA is dying from AIDS. This is only LA. Around the world how many people are dying every day? Nobody knows, because governments are repressing information. They are afraid for their prestige. No government wants that they have so many people suffering from AIDS.
It is a strange situation. Everybody is hiding it. From the person himself to the medical profession, the government, everybody is trying that there is no problem.
This is really idiotic.
It is better to face the problem and to see its danger. There is no fear, no paranoia.

A sannyasin told me that this is a good time to be at Rajneeshpuram, that things are going to be happening. I think the word he used was juicy.

Right. Really it is juicy, what is happening. A fascist regime has ended. People are feeling immense freedom, sense of relief. A great burden has moved away from their heads. Now they can say whatsoever they want to say. Nobody is bugging their houses, nobody is taping their phones, nobody is calling them like Gestapo and inquiring them about what they had said to their girlfriend in the night, what they said on the phone to their parents.
So there was an atmosphere of great fear, which has suddenly disappeared as Sheela and her gang escaped from here. All black clouds disappeared. The sky is open and sunny.
And it is juicy also because I am destroying everything that can repeat the history. I don’t want it to be repeated again.
I cannot remain always here. One day I will have to die, but then it can be repeated again. Before that I am going to destroy all possibilities so it cannot happen again.

Well, what will it mean to be a sannyasin in the future, from this day forward?

From this date forward a sannyasin will simply mean that he is initiated into the meditation techniques here, and he makes a commitment to himself that he will follow the path.
But it is going to be individual, alone. He will be responsible himself. It is not going to be a collectivity, a congregation.

Will the nuts and bolts of the commune change? Will the system of volunteer work change? The common meals?

Many things will change. For example. It will take a little time for few things to change. Work hours should be reduced. Sheela was taking twelve hours, fourteen hours, in the name of devotion, in the name of surrender. But it is ugly.
People did it joyfully because they were doing it for me. They were doing it as part of their love, but if you work fourteen hours, then when you are going to rest? When you are going to love somebody? When you are going to go for a morning walk? When you are going to dance in the disco? When you are going to sit in the restaurant and gossip? It is not right.
Six hours is perfectly okay, more than that is too much.
So it will take a little time, because the work that she has left has to be completed before the winter. Once it is completed we will start reducing.

A sannyasin said to me along those lines that - with a laugh, and almost with glee - “Now we can be negative.”

That’s right.

Have you noticed this?

Yes.

Is the quality of information you receive from sannyasins different?

I am receiving everything, and I have allowed every corporation head - because there are many corporations. Only Sheela was coming to me. She was head of one corporation, the biggest corporation, Foundation. But there are many corporations, almost nine or ten. So I have allowed all the heads of the corporations to come whenever they feel like their people want to say something to me.
Or they can write letters and they can receive the answers. They can write questions. I am every morning answering their questions if they are useful for all. Otherwise they will receive individual answers.
It is true. They can be whatever they want to be.
A forced positivity is not positivity. If it comes out of one’s own responsibility and freedom, it is beautiful. If it comes out of fear, it is ugly. Then negativity is far better.

I think there are some legal clouds hanging over the.

They are nothing. [unintelligible word] Those clouds I have been fighting for thirty years and have almost become accustomed. Without them sometimes I think, “What I will do?”

If the decision at the INS goes against you and the supreme court rules against you also, then what will be the future of Rajneeshpuram?

It is impossible. You should understand my strategy. They have six categories. I have applied on five categories. I am capable to receive the green card.
Sixth is the marriage, which I can do any moment.

Would you do it?

I can marry anybody and apply for the sixth category also. Perhaps in the whole history of America nobody would have applied on six categories.
And I will fight on each category separately, because I have applied separately on each category. If they refuse me on one category, I will fight for that category up to the Supreme Court. It will take at least twenty years. If the Supreme Court says yes, okay. Otherwise I start on the second category. Again from the lowest court it will take twenty years.
Six categories will take one hundred twenty years. My followers, my lovers, my friends - whatsoever people call them - will have to fight, because I would have gone. And by this time all INS officers would have gone, all judges would have gone, many presidents would have gone. One hundred twenty years is a long time.
That’s why they are not. In four years they have not been able to decide on a single category to say anything. Their problem is if they say yes, which they cannot say because the political pressure is on them. They cannot say yes, they cannot say no either, because the moment they say no I move to the courts. Then the case is beyond their jurisdiction. I will fight in the courts.
And they have no reason to say no on any category.
So I will see. There is no problem. I will enjoy it. It will be such an excitement.
But I am going to be here. If they want me once in a while to go out of America, they should issue the green card as quickly as possible. Then I can make tours around the world and maybe off their neck for awhile. Otherwise I am going to be here.

It seems that you’ve angered local people through some of your statements, and I know you have a tendency to make the outrageous statement. Would it be more politic to, perhaps, not mention Mother Teresa in the same breath as Hitler.?

I am not a political person. I am not a politician. I simply call a spade just a fucking spade.

What’s the purpose of all this, the religiousness, the commune, the state of being with your followers?

What is the purpose of your life? Is there any purpose of your life? To take my interview is your purpose of life?
There are things which have no purpose. Life has no purpose. Love has no purpose. Beauty has no purpose. Blissfulness has no purpose.
Things which are in the category of purpose are mundane. Machines have purpose. Man has no purpose.
What is the purpose of dancing and rejoicing and singing and painting and writing poetry? What is the purpose of Michelangelo or Leonardo da Vinci or Picasso?
Once somebody asked Picasso while he was painting that, “I have been watching for two years.two hours but I can’t see what is the purpose of your painting.”
Picasso said, “I was going to ask you, because you have been watching for two hours. Perhaps you may have figured it out by now.”
And he said something really significant: “Nobody goes to a roseflower and asks, ‘What is the purpose? Why you are?’ And if the roseflower can dance in the wind, in the rain, in the sun, and nobody bothers him about purpose, then why people bother me? I am enjoying painting, that’s enough. More than that is not needed.”
A purposive life is the life of a slave.
A life without any purpose is playful. It has immense joy, moment to moment but it has no tomorrow, no end. It is not going anywhere. It is simply being now and here.
I am enjoying myself. My people are enjoying with me. What more is needed?
The people who ask these questions, the outsiders, are not aware why they are asking it. Their life has no joy, no song, no flowering, no fragrance. They are just dragging their life, so naturally the question arises in their mind: “What is the purpose?”
A healthy person never asks, “What is the purpose of health?” A healthy person never goes to the doctor to inquire, just find out, “Why I am healthy?” Only the sick goes to inquire the cause of sickness.
Health is natural. Sickness is unnatural.
To live joyfully is natural. There is no purpose and no end. It is intrinsically valuable.

Obviously you’re surrounded by happy people.

That’s true.

I understood you to say that none of your sannyasins are enlightened. Did I understand that correctly?

They are on the way.

Is it possible for a sannyasin to be enlightened.?

Yes, certainly.

.And remain a sannyasin?

That is up to him. I never interfere into anything.

In this unusual environment that you’ve created just here in Oregon but starting back in India, one would think that in all that time that perhaps at least one or two sannyasins might have achieved that.

Yes, few sannyasins have achieved.

Are they here?

Their names cannot be told for the simple reason that will create unnecessary seriousness in them, jealousy in others. And I don’t want that. It is perfectly good that they are enlightened and they are enjoying it. To make them serious is to make them sick. And to make them others’ objects of jealousy is also not good.
So I am not going to declare anybody to be enlightened unless I am just joking about some idiot. That’s another thing.

You mentioned in discourse that there have been no children born in Rajneeshpuram in four years.

No.

Why so few children in Rajneeshpuram?

You can understand. It is simple. The whole world is overpopulated. People are dying of starvation, thousands of people every day. And soon more will be dying because nobody is taking care. Everybody is interested in creating nuclear weapons.
Even a country like India where fifty percent people are undernourished is selling its wheat to countries from where it can purchase nuclear plants, engineers, experts. Half the country is going to die in the coming years and they are not concerned about it. They are concerned about nuclear weapons.
I have sent a message to Rajiv Gandhi. Their family has been intimate to me. One of his friends was here few days before and he asked me that, “Rajiv has inquired, is there any message for him?”
And I said, “Just tell him, ‘Don’t be stupid. You don’t need nuclear weapon. And even if you can create nuclear weapons, it will take three hundred years for you to be as big a power as Soviet Union or America. In three hundred years your whole country will die in starvation.
‘And in these three hundred years, Soviet Union and America are not going to wait for you, that, “Let us India also come and become a big nuclear power, then we start ahead.” In three hundred years they will be three thousand years ahead of you.
‘So you just don’t go into this race. It is not for a poor country. It is not even good for a rich country. Even in America there are thirty million people who are poor, hungry, on the streets. So don’t sell your wheat. Give it to the poor people. They produce it and they die hungry.”‘
And you are asking me why no more children? I have simply told my people that, “You have to see. The whole earth is so overpopulated - four billion people already. By the end of this century there will be five billion people. There will not be even elbow room to stand. You need not go to any church, any meeting; you will be always in the church, in the meeting, in the congregation - always in the crowd.
“And crime will increase and disease will increase. This is not the world to bring your child in.
“AIDS is spreading, which will take two thirds of humanity in its grip. There are cases where even children are born with AIDS. So what you are going to give to your child as inheritance? This ugly world full of AIDS, hunger, starvation, nuclear weapons, the third world war always hanging on the horizon? This world you are going to give as a gift to your child?
“If you love, you cannot do this. This is not possible.”
And they understood it, that that’s certainly true. And not a single child has born in four years.
And this should be the case all over the world. For twenty years no child. So for.within twenty years we can reduce the population at least to its half. One fourth will be the best, so everybody can live comfortably, peacefully, intelligently.
This small planet has a certain capacity.

I’m sorry, did you say reduce the total population by one half or.?

One fourth.

One fourth. So one fourth of the people, in other words, one billion instead of four billion.

Yes. One billion is enough.

How many people will come to Rajneeshpuram?

It is difficult to say, but we have enough land: three times than New York. So at least one hundred thousand sannyasins will be here.

How soon might that number be reached?

That depends on your stupid politicians; how long they go on being stupid I cannot predict.

What I’ve heard you say is that you’re not a prophet. Is that accurate?

I am not a prophet.

Are you a holy man?

No. I am simply a human being. Holy man is simply holy shit. Okay?

============================================================

Richard Wagner, CBS Network; Scott Miller, KGW-TV, Channel 8, Portland (NBC Affiliated); Bob Chase, KEX Radio, Portland; Sally Hill, Associated Press, Portland; Mike Housical, The Globe, USA; The Daily Telegraph, Syndey, Australia; The Star, London, UK; Linda Kramer, San Francisco Examiner; Jerry Thompson, Canadian Broadcasting Corporation; Mike Zeilinzinger, Night Ridder Newspapers; John McCoy, Seattle Post Intelligencer; Eric Follet, Stern Magazine; Bill Harlem, Denver Post, Colorado

Osho,
The press understands you are going to make a statement first and then they could ask questions.

Beloved Friends,
I welcome you all on this historical event. For the first time in the whole history of mankind a religion has died. I have never wanted it to be born in the first place. But because I was in silence and isolation a gang of fascists managed to create it. It was absolutely necessary that it should be completely destroyed. I am against all religions, because they have done only harm to humanity. They have given you nothing except the disease AIDS - that is their great contribution. Their insistence on celibacy is the cause of all sexual perversions in the world.
They have divided humanity into Hinduism, Mohammedanism, Christianity, Judaism. There are three hundred religions on the earth. Because of these religions humanity cannot be one. No child is born Hindu or Christian. But these conditioned, forced, in every possible way to adopt a religion of their parents. This is a great crime against human beings, because they are not given the chance to inquire into reality: what is the truth? Even before they have asked the question they are being supplied with the answers, ready-made answers. There whole life they will go on carrying those ready-made answers like parrots and deep down their ignorance will remain the same - there will be no transformation.
Belief is the enemy of truth. Faith is poison to every enquiry. Doubt is innocence and it is not given to you by anybody. You bring it with you, you are born with it. Doubt means questioning, it means quest, it means individual enquiry. All the religions are based on belief systems, that’s why they have crippled human mind. They have kept humanity in a retarded state. Science is based on doubt. Just within three hundred years science has given so much to humanity, that in ten thousand years religion have not been able to do anything comparable to it.
I hate the word ism. And because I was silent Ma Anand Sheela managed to compile a book Rajneeshism. That was not my book. I have never read it - the question of writing does not arise. And today you have seen that is has been cremated. It is an event of great rejoicing, because I don’t want to belong to all those criminals who have given you holy books - no book is holy. All books are just books, either they are good or bad, well written or not well written. How a book can be holy. But once you call a book holy, you become blind. Just look in Holy Bible, there are five hundred pages of sheer pornography. This is your holy book. And this is the book kept in the courts; and you have to take oath on a pornographic book? I don’t want to add anything into this ugly literature. My books are simply books - just as I am simply a human being.
I am not a savior. That is so humiliating to human beings. I am not a messenger; I am not a prophet. Nobody has ever been a savior. Jesus could not save himself even. And what guts, what nerve. He calls himself the shepherd and the whole humanity, sheep. And there are millions of people who don’t feel even insulted.
To what degradation human mind has fallen? Don’t you have any pride of being human? I want to restore your humanity to you and the only way is that I should not be in any special category. I am amongst you, just like you an ordinary human being. With a little difference, very little difference: you are asleep, I am awake. It is my own fault. I am not condemning you. If I can’t sleep, whose fault it is? Not only that I am awake, I go on trying other people to wake up. The reason is: because I have known sleep and I have known all the sweet dreams and all the nightmares, but I have also known the beauties and the blessings of awakening. And I would like to share my experience to everybody.
Hence I am not your leader, you are not my follower. Just being friends is enough, more than enough. Perhaps only in friendship something can transpire between me and you. Only in loving sharing perhaps you may wake up.
I don’t have any catechism, no theology, nothing for you to believe in. I have taken away all psychological nonsense. I have taken away God from you, because that is nothing but a small child’s desire for the protection of the father; it is retardedness. Only retarded people believe in a God; only greedy people believe in heaven; only cowards, people full of fear and paranoia believe in hell. I have taken all those things from you: there is no God, no heaven, no hell.
I want to share only one thing with you, which does not make you a religion, but it certainly makes you a new kind of man. I call that methodology, meditation. It is an inward journey. You have to go alone on it. The crowd cannot go with you. As you go deeper within yourself. Just by witnessing your thoughts, your emotions, your feelings a tremendous mutation happens: thoughts stop, emotions disappear, feelings evaporate, all that is left is pure awareness. And that awareness is your flowering, your ultimate reach beyond which there is nothing. You have arrived home.
Certainly one who reaches to this peak he will have many qualities. Religiousness will be one of those qualities. So you will not be a religion, but you will have a quality of religiousness. What do I mean by religiousness? A gratitude to existence, a love affair with the flowers, with the birds on the wing, with the sunrise, with the sunset, with the trees, with animals, with people. This love affair I call religiousness. From this day you should not think in terms of being a religion, but in terms of being religious: a quality of love, gratitude, a sensitivity for beauty, for music, for poetry and all that makes you ecstatic. The dance comes on its own, the song arises on its own and it is an individual approach.
You are not to follow somebody else’s footsteps, because you are not going outside, you are going inside yourself, where you will not find any footsteps, because nobody can enter in your interiority, in your subjectivity.
Do this because just my silence and isolation gave Anand Sheela and her fascist gang to exploit you. I am going to destroy everything so history never repeats again. I will not be always with you - one day I will have to go. Before that I want to destroy every possibility. I don’t want any popes behind me, any high priestess, any Ayatollah Khomeini. No, I want to leave you alone, so content and fulfilled that you don’t need anybody between you and the truth of existence.
Hence I have withdrawn red cloths. Now all the colors of rainbow are your colors. You can use any color, so you can mix with the wider humanity more easily. And when there are so many colors, why get addicted to one color? But if you love it and if you want to keep it, it is up to you. It is your freedom. You need not wear mala with my picture in the locket, no. You have to go inwards, the mala will be left out. Somebody may steal it, damage it, there is no need of it.
But, it is up to you. I don’t want to enforce anything on anybody. You can use mala if you like, if you can use whenever you like, you can stop using whenever you like. The only thing that you have to remember is don’t forget that life comes to its fulfillment only when you have reached to your innermost center. That is the only truth. Everything else is nonessential. The only essential thing is to realize your being, your silence, your reality. And for that no belief is needed.
Sheela has created a hostility. That’s a simple methodology of all fascist minded people. Create hostility in the neighbors, that makes you dependent on the leaders, because you are afraid. The leaders promise you they will protect you against the enemies. This becomes a great opportunity for them. Now we have to drop all hostility completely. Nobody is our enemy, we are not against anybody and anything that Sheela has done in three and half years, we have to undo it.
City of Rajneesh has to become again Antelope. I have advised the council that, “Please change that name.” Antelope was perfectly beautiful name, and why hurt people who had lived there for generations? And I have offered to Oregonians that if they want they can purchase all the properties belonging to sannyasins and we will vacate Antelope completely, because we have enough land here, three times bigger than New York. So what do we need poor Antelope for?
And just before coming to your press conference, I was delayed in an interview with Attorney General Frohnmeyer. I have told him that now, there is no point in your case against the city of Rajneeshpuram. His only argument was that religion and state are being mixed. Now there is no religion! So while you were burning Rajneeshism, the book, in the crematorium you have burned also poor Frohnmeyer. Now there is no point in it. If religion itself is not there, the city becomes immediately legal.
Any questions?

Richard Wagner,
CBS Network.

Could you explain why you make the statement that religion has given humanity nothing except the disease AIDS? I don’t understand that.

You are right. It has given many more things too.

For instance?

It has given a divided humanity, it has given thousands of wars, bloodshed, murders, burning of living people, it has certainly given many more things.

But specifically, how has religion contributed to AIDS?

Two reasons. One, every religion propagates that celibacy is something spiritual, which is absolute nonsense. Celibacy is unnatural. And there has never been anybody who was celibate unless he was impotent. Your body functions according to its own program. It does not know that you are a Catholic monk. It goes on creating male sperms same way, whether you are Catholic monk or not. What you are going to do with those sperms? The natural repressed is bound to find some perverted way and religions managed monks to live together, nuns to live together, and they are not to meet each other. That was full opportunity for monks to be homosexuals. Homosexuality is a contribution of religions and AIDS is the ultimate outcome of homosexuality. So it is a long chain.

What came first, religion or AIDS?

Religion.

But we all understand that AIDS is a virus. How can a virus be caused by a religion?

Homosexuality can be caused by religion and homosexuality can cause the virus.

Scott Miller,
KGW-TV, Channel 8, Portland (NBC Affiliated)

If in fact you don’t have a religion going here, how can your foundation still claim tax exempt status and won’t that create a problem for you getting donations in the future?

The foundation is to spread meditation which creates a new kind of religiousness, although it is not a religion. It is far better than all the religions. It claims to be a charitable tax exempt status. In fact, no religion should be given any tax exempt status. Because homosexuality is not a charity.

Does what you say include then your foundation here? Do you believe that you should be giving up your tax exempt status?

It is not a religion; it is simply a religiousness. It should be given, it is charitable. It is not going to give AIDS to humanity.

I guess I hear you saying that you are a religion or you are religious for the.

It is totally different.

You are religious when it comes to tax purposes.

No!

But you’re not religious when it comes to.

No! I am not saying that.

. Separation of church and state.

. You are misunderstanding me.

Set me straight then!

So try to understand. I am saying that I am not a religion. We are meditators, we don’t belong to Christianity, to Hinduism, to any organized religion. And we don’t have any organized religion either. We don’t have any beliefs which make a religion. Meditation is a scientific method, but the scientific method can contribute to human growth immensely. It can give you more peace, more silence, more joy and ultimately a feeling of deathlessness.
I call this experience religiousness. And I will claim tax exempt status for it.

I grant you there is a very fine line there, do you think.

I am going to fight for it.

Do you think the Internal Revenue Service will see that fine line that you’ve just described to me?

I will see. I will see how much brains they have.

Bob Chase,
KEX Radio, Portland.

With regard to the investigation that is underway at Rajneeshpuram, I’m wondering if you have subpoenaed to offer any testimony with regard to the investigation?

I have not received any subpoena. In fact I have asked the investigators that I want to be interviewed and four times they gave me the appointment and just fifteen minutes before they informed it is canceled. They seem to be afraid, just taking my interview. I have not received any subpoena. I would love! I want to see your investigators, because I also want to know what is their depth. I can also investigate them. I am waiting for their subpoena; I will enjoy it!
Up to now they have proved very coward. Four times on my request they gave the appointment, FBI, state police, attorney general’s office, county police, all top people are here. And they could not take a single person’s interview. What kind of people you have got? And tell them, if they don’t subpoena me I am going to subpoena them!

Sally Hill,
Associated Press, Portland

At a previous news conference I asked you whether Oregonians and your disciples could ever coexist peacefully and you answered, “never!” yet it seems that these overtures you’re making to Oregonians and those in the former city of Antelope seem to head along those lines. Can you speak to that please?

That time you had escaped the moment I said, “never,” without even waiting that what I am going to say. “Never”: you thought you had understood my meaning. It was a single word, it has many implications. You need some lessons in journalism.
First let me make you aware that I had said “never” for coexistence, because coexistence is a political word, and I hate politics! Secondly, coexistence means you remain hostile to each other but somehow because fate has managed you to be together, so you accept each other unwillingly, just the way America and Soviet “non-coexist.”
I wanted to say that day also, but when I looked I saw you had already left.

I went to get my notebook.

I mean. Coexistence never, because I want one existence. Coexistence is between enemies. I want one existence. We are already four year old Americans, somebody may be hundred year old, somebody may be two hundred year old, we are the latest ones, the most fresh and young. We want one existence. I had refused the coexistence.

How do you intend to go about attaining this one existence?

Because I am withdrawing everything that Sheela has created as a rift. City of Rajneesh was one of the basic rifts. I am changing it again into Antelope, I am offering all the properties that we have purchased from Antelope people back to them, or to anybody who wants to purchase, and we are ready to move from out of Antelope. So Antelope belongs to Antelope people, it is their city and whatever they want to do they can do.
We are ready to drop all the cases against the state if the state understands a simple thing that now there is no religion, they should drop their case of mixing religion with state. We will withdraw all our cases against them. These are the steps that we would like to take. We have put in this desert two hundred million dollars to change it into an oasis.
If the state is helpful, and we don’t want any illegal help, we can change this whole desert into an oasis. We can make it one of the most beautiful holiday spot, a tourist center which will help Oregon’s economy immensely. We are ready to do everything.

Mike Housical, The Globe, USA, The Daily Telegraph, Syndey, Australia, The Star, London, UK.

Sir, you talked earlier about how you would like to leave these people when you finally decide to leave them. Have you decided if you’re going to spend the rest of your days here or have you plans to travel on?

No, I am going to be here.

Forever?

Forever. Green card or no green card, I am going to be here forever!

You don’t have plans to open any other communes in any other parts of the world?

Yes, I have all over the world so many communes, almost in every country.
But the people come here for three months, four months, to stay with me, and then go back. I am going to remain here. If Oregon or American government wants me to travel then they should issue tomorrow my green card. Then perhaps I may start thinking of traveling!
But it is not a promise - I am saying, perhaps.

Linda Kramer,
San Francisco Examiner

Regarding your comments on AIDS, should practicing homosexuals leave the commune?

We are trying, the whole commune, six thousand people, have gone through the vigorous tests to know whether they have AIDS or not. We have found only two persons and few homosexuals. Out of these two persons, one has died; only one remains. We are providing him everything, love, respect, because he is only a victim. The real criminals are there in the Vatican.
And the homosexuals - I am telling them that you start dropping this habit and move towards heterosexuality. And they will do it, because they can see what is the outcome of it. Now no homosexual can say that they are more progressive then heterosexuals, that they are avant-garde, that they are far ahead intellectually, these heterosexuals are lagging behind just like animals. No, they cannot say that. AIDS has stopped all their mouths. It has proved that homosexuality is a degradation.
So we will change them. And we have all kinds of therapies and those homosexuals have to go through all the therapies. We are going to deprogram them from their homosexuality.

Would you discourage people who don’t wish to lose the habit from coming to you.

Then they can leave! We don’t want homosexuals here because they are potentials for AIDS. Either they have to change or they have to leave. The choice is theirs. Okay?

Jerry Thompson,
Canadian Broadcasting Corporation

I wonder if you could tell us what you know about where Sheela is now and the latest. We in Canada haven’t really heard all the news and the statements you have made about the attempted murder, the arson, wiretap, and various other things like that. So could you tell those in Canada who don’t know anything about this what the story is behind that, what happened and why?

You are too late! That story is old. We create new stories. That story you can find in old newspapers and other places.

Do you expect ever to see her again, or have you said your last words to her?

I am perfectly willing if she is courageous enough, she should come here and face me before the commune. She is making allegations which are absolute lies and she is hiding like a criminal in Black Forest in Germany. Now if she has not committed any crime, why she has escaped? If others have committed the crime, they should have escaped. Her escape is proof enough.
And the whole gang that has gone with her, they are all involved, because sannyasins are going and telling it to the police, to the FBI, revealing all the facts and they have found all the evidences. All the houses were bugged. And they have created far more sophisticated mechanisms than Nixon had used. Every telephone was taped. We have found all the mechanism that they were using; all that has been given to the police.
They had left in their room, in Sheela’s room, literature on poisons, literature on how to kill people, and they had attempted three persons to kill. And one of them was my own personal physician. He suspected that this poison is a certain poison which is not detectable. So he was examined here, in Bend, and doctors said that, “There is no disease, but you are certainly sick and the only explanation is that some poison has been given to you which is not detectable.”
When Sheela left we found the literature in her room. In one of the books the only poison that is underlined is the same which my physician was suspecting, the undetectable poison is underlined. That is the only poison that is underlined in the whole literature. So they were giving that poison to many people, now many other people have come because nobody ordinarily thinks is somebody offers you a cup of tea and you become suddenly sick, you don’t immediately think of poison. You think perhaps you are sick, you rush to the doctor and doctor cannot find any disease. He says, “Just rest.” What else can be done about it?
We have found in their literature books how to make bombs and we have found chemicals and other material which makes bombs.
They had killed one person, they overdosed him, one of the street people that they had brought here to take over the county. And three thousand people were keeping drugged completely for twenty-one days so that whatever she wants, they will do. They were like robots. And drums of drugs have been imported from outside America, because to purchase from here will become a problem, what you did with all those drugs? So those drugs were purchased from outside America and were brought in.
One of the street people they overdosed; he died on the spot. They simply threw his body outside Rancho Rajneesh. The police has found the body, but they could not figure out what has happened to the person, who was the person, because he was a street man, no address from where he has come, no identity card, nothing. So they simply dropped the case. Now people are coming up and saying that he had died here in the city and they had dragged him out.
They burned the planning office in The Dalles and now there is absolute evidence of one sannyasin who had driven the people who bombed, burned the office and she drew them back. She had gone with Sheela, afraid that she may be caught, but in Seattle she started feeling that it is better to be caught than to carry this guilt whole life and then to remain like a criminal in a foreign land. So from Seattle she came back and she confessed and she has confessed all other crimes of the group, because she was on intimate of the whole company.
So every evidence is there now. If they want to catch those people, they should not wait long.

Do you think that her intention was merely to take over and replace you, or did she have some other bigger plan in mind?

No, certainly this was the. Because even my milk was poisoned. Not in such a dose that I will die, but in such a dose that I will not come out of my silence; so I became. Remain sick and I don’t feel like speaking. She was afraid of my speaking to the people again because that will certainly expose her. And that’s what happened. She wanted to become the chief priestess of the religion, controlling so much money, so many people. I have one million sannyasins around the world. To control one million people around the world, all the communes, all the money; she was almost in a position of a queen!
And she has come from a very low class. She was just a hotel waitress.

Are you making any attempt, is your organization making any attempt to track her down and deal with her own your own?

No, we are not making any attempt, we are giving every evidence to the police. We don’t want to take law in our own hands. There is no need.

Mike Zeilinzinger,
Night Rider newspapers

Even before the recent rift as you describe it, law enforcement agencies were already here, already looking at records. Not in the commune, but were already investigating this operation. now that they are here, now that many outsiders have come to look into the files and look into the books and look into the tape recordings that have been discovered, do you fear that whole process may destroy this place and destroy what’s going on here?

No. They may try, because I don’t trust this attorney general. He may take the advantage to harass sannyasins. I have heard the rumor that he plans at least to arrest one thousand sannyasins which are absolutely innocent and he is not trying to take any action against the criminals. But as far as commune is concerned, there is no problem. We are giving them every evidence, we are absolutely open, we have given them space inside the commune and they are free to move and find whatsoever they want. And sannyasins themselves are going to them and giving information.
But attorney general’s interest seems to be not to catch the criminals, but take an advantage of the situation and destroy the commune. I will not allow this to happen. The governor and attorney general both are in conspiracy against the city. The governor wants to bring emergency on the city. Strange, you are here, there is no riots, there are nobody who is murdered, killed, people are cooperating with the police and still he wants to create an state of emergency. For what reason?
And attorney general has put the National Guard on alert. I want to know the whole world, that these dirty politicians are the ones who are destroying democracy in America. We will fight for democracy and we will fight for human rights. We are not going to allow them to harass innocent people.
We are not taking the law in our hands, but if they do not do anything, then my communes in Germany will start suing them in the courts, because they have deceived the German communes also of money and not small amount, forty-three million dollars. If they move and hide in Switzerland, then my commune is going to reveal to the police that Sheela has committed bigamy. Her husband is here, American husband. He was also poisoned. Because he did not die, she went away and married a Swiss sannyasin, just to remain in Switzerland. She has committed bigamy.
So we will see. If these people don’t do anything, still we will find laws. In India she cannot enter, because there she has committed many crimes. And now we are informing Indian government, ten million dollars, books she has brought from India and she has not paid back the money to the Indian foundation.

Could you elaborate a bit on this conspiracy that you allege?

Right now it is very difficult, what is in their mind, because they don’t open their mind. Even I have been just now in interview with the attorney general, and I said it again and again, that your case has gone down the drain. He did not answer that. You know politicians are very clever not to speak what is in their mind, what they want to do. But whatever is their mind, we are alert.

John McCoy,
Seattle Post Intelligencer.

You said earlier that you were not the head of a religion, you were not a prophet, you are not a savior, you are a meditator among friends, among fellow meditators. Why then are you so remote? Why are you in the chair, you in the Rolls Royce, not available except at these discourses to your fellow meditators?

Because I have achieved. They are on the way. And obviously so many people cannot be accommodated in this chair.

How about the Rolls Royces? Many could be accommodated there!

They all belong to these people; nothing belongs to me, I don’t anything.

Will they ride in those cars?

They don’t want. I had offered, I had asked the trustees who own the Rolls Royces that give them to the sannyasins. They are not willing. They say because I have used them, for them they have become immensely valuable and they will keep them as memorial. So they do not want to give and sannyasins don’t want to take either. And sannyasins have enough cars.
The commune has almost more cars than any city can claim, hundred buses, five airplanes and nowhere to go!

Eric Follet,
Stern Magazine

You would like to make your friends here in the commune self-reliant in every way, material as well as spiritual, not dependent on you anymore.

That’s right.

Does it not mean that your final and most logical goal must be to dissolve the commune and leave it?

My commune does not consist of idiots; it is an commune of very much intelligent people. And many intelligent people whom Sheela has driven out, out of fear, because they were more intelligent than her and she was afraid. Any moment they can take over and manage better. They are all coming back. The chancellor of the university, the vice-chancellor of the university, all old sannyasins with all the education possible in the world. We have geniuses, scientific, who can do miracles, who can start producing anything we want. We have best surgeons, one of the best plastic surgeon. We can have one of the best hospital in America, where people will have to come. We can open industries, we can open businesses. We have all kinds of geniuses, there is no problem.
Money is not a problem at all. Money is the simplest thing in the world. I have lived without money my whole life and I have lived as richly as anybody can live. Perhaps even kings and presidents cannot live so richly. And I don’t have a single cent. I have not even seen how one dollar bill looks like. I don’t have even pockets, because I have nothing to keep in my pockets. But I have people who can manage anything.
When Sheela left she told few sannyasins that, “Now it will be difficult for you to arrange more Rolls Royces for Osho.” The sannyasin simply laughed. And after she has left they dropped the regular Rolls Royce, they have started purchasing limousines. Now I have got six limousines. Soon ninety limousines will be there!

Are these German limousines by chance, German cars?

Yes, I love. Now I am chauffeur driven, I am not driving myself. You can see outside my latest limousine there. And Rolls Royce is making one special limousine which will take one and half year, which will be one of its kind in the whole world. It will cost half million dollars.
My people can arrange anything, there is no problem. So don’t be worried about money. And I am not against wealth, I am not against luxury, I am not a masochist ascetic. If we can enjoy paradise here, then why wait for death?
And I have not seen in any religious scripture that Rolls Royces are available in paradise. I think Jesus must be still moving on his donkey. Poor fellow, here was also moving on his donkey, in paradise the only Son of God still moving on donkey. Let them move, what we can do?

The little book which you ordered to be burned today contains almost nothing else but quotes of you, which you use in quite similar form in your other books. Does that mean that you will burn all your books one day?

No, those are simply books and this was Sheela’s effort to make a holy book. We have burned a holy book.

Bill Harlem,
Denver Post Colorado

This morning you mentioned several requests from local people for peace offerings from you. I believe you mentioned a Methodist that wanted a Rolls Royce. You said that these people be offering peace offerings. Could you be more specific, what would you consider a peace offering from the local community?

Just a rose flower will do. But they are not even that generous!

Sannyasin told me at the burning this evening, I asked him what the deep meaning of this ceremony was, and he said, “Well, it’s all a big joke.”

That’s right! That is right because I consider sense of humor as one of the most important religious qualities.

Thank you, Osho.