---
title: The Sword and the Lotus 01
series: The Sword and the Lotus 01-25
talk_number: 1
url: https://oshoworld.com/the-sword-and-the-lotus-01
language: English
duration: 02:06:01
author: THE WORLD TOUR
scraped_at: 2026-01-03T09:33:55.451263+00:00
---
Osho,
You invited me not to get angry with blind people. I'm not – how could I be? When I see their sadness and their misery, I only become infinitely sad. They are tired, and I offer them a rest. They are thirsty, and I offer them a glass of water. But they are so afraid. What to say if I invite them to the source? Beloved Osho, how can I touch them in spite of the wall of their fear?
The second question feels somehow connected: how can we forgive the people who put you in jail?
The world is sad, it is in misery. There is great suffering in the hearts of people. But you need not be sad about it, for the simple reason that by becoming sad you join them, you create more sadness. It is not a help. It is just as if people are sick, and you see their sickness and you also become sick. Your sickness is not going to make them healthy, it is simply creating more sickness.
To feel for their sadness does not mean to become sad. To feel for their sadness means to look for the causes of what is creating all their suffering and misery, and to help them to remove those causes. And at the same time you have to remain as joyful as possible because your joy is going to help them, not your sadness. You have to be cheerful. They should know that there is a possibility of being cheerful in this sad world. They have completely lost hope, because everywhere they look there is sadness. They have accepted the fact that sadness is just the nature of things – you cannot do anything about it, you have to suffer it.
And the religious teachers have only been giving them consolations, giving them some hocus-pocus, hypocritical ideas. They have kept them miserable for centuries because they have made them accept misery as part of life. Not only that, they have raised their sadness and misery to some spiritual status. They have been telling them, “Blessed are the poor.” So not only have they accepted their sadness as just a simple fact of life about which you cannot do anything, but they have also started feeling good about it, feeling it is something spiritual, that it is a test given by God to them.
Rich people are not going to enter into the kingdom of God; it will be the poor, the miserable – they will be received with great joy and welcomed. All that they have to do is not to make any fuss about their misery – accept it as a blessing in disguise. And if for centuries you go on saying such things, you poison people’s minds. But it seems that they are not alone in their sadness; everybody is sad. In fact, they will feel afraid to be cheerful in this vast crowd of sad people.
So it is not going to help if when seeing them sad, you also become sad. It is simply making them more convinced of the fact that joy does not exist on the earth, it is something otherworldly – the fate and the destiny of the earth is misery. So simply give them an example that it is not true: “If I can be cheerful, rejoicing, your whole fabric of stupid theories is proved irrelevant.”
Secondly, you have to remember…. You say that you are not angry, but become sad seeing their sadness. There are people who become angry – these are the people who create revolutions, changes in the society, in the state. But all their revolutions have failed, because anything coming out of anger is coming out of ignorance. It is not going to create an authentic change. Change for the better is impossible out of anger.
I want you to remember one thing: sadness is just anger upside down; it is not different. It is repressed anger. If you analyze it then you will see the fact. Sadness can change into anger very easily; anger can change into sadness in the same way. They are not two things…perhaps two sides of the same coin. So whenever you are angry and you cannot express it, the situation is not such. It is too dangerous to express it, too risky to express it.
For example, a child becomes angry at the parents, but he cannot show it because he is so helpless and dependent. Then he becomes sad. His sadness is inverted anger. The same child goes out and gives a good kick to the dog. He wanted to kick his parents, but it was too risky, too dangerous. But the dog he can beat. He repressed the anger, it became sadness. But when he comes out and sees the dog, he starts beating him. The sadness changed into anger.
You have been a revolutionary. In the same circumstances you have felt anger before – anger against the whole society which creates so much misery and so much sadness and so much poverty. You have been angry against the establishment – political, religious. You have been angry about the whole educational system, that it wastes time – almost one third of one’s life – and still does not help anybody. You have been angry.
Then you came to me and I said to you that anything coming out of anger is not going to do any good. Because the source is poisoned, the fruits of it are not going to be anything else. You understood it; you changed your anger, you repressed it. Now you have become sad, but it is the same energy. I have prevented you from being angry; now I prevent you from being sad. I would like you to be cheerful. It looks awkward. People are sad and in misery, and you are cheerful.
I have been condemned around the world for teaching such things. When people are in suffering, you are supposed to be sympathetic, to join them in their misery; you are not supposed to be cheerful.
So when I say be cheerful, be happy, rejoice in the fact that you are not in the position of being miserable and suffering, I have a certain purpose behind it. The purpose is that you have to become an example to those people who have completely forgotten that life can also be a rejoicing. In spite of all the darkness you can still be unburdened of the darkness, you can still dance. Darkness cannot prevent your dance; it has no preventive force. To me this is real service.
I want my sannyasins around the world to become examples. And when people see so many people rejoicing, question marks will start arising in them. Perhaps they have accepted a wrong philosophy, and misery is not destined for this earth: “It doesn’t seem so, because on the same earth there are people who are rejoicing, who are immensely happy.” We have to break down their stupid ideology, and the only way is to live differently, not just like them; otherwise, you are supporting them.
The second thing: these people are sad, and these people are miserable because of themselves. They have followed wrong ideas, and they are clinging to those wrong ideas. They don’t understand the relationship between their ideology and their life. They don’t see that their religion, their philosophy, creates the basis of what they are going to be.
Jesus says to people that everybody has to carry his cross on his shoulders. But why does everybody have to carry his cross? Can’t he carry his guitar? Why choose a cross out of so many things in the world? And why carry it? And when you are carrying your cross on your own shoulders, how can you dance? How can you laugh? It will go against the cross, and the weight of the cross will not allow you to rejoice.
Have you seen any picture, any statue, of Jesus smiling? He is burdened with the whole world’s misery. He is doing what you are doing: he is sad because the world is sad. But his sadness has not helped the world. Two thousand years have passed – even his crucifixion has not helped, so how can it be of any help if you carry your cross on your shoulders? Even the crucifixion has failed, so just carrying your cross on your shoulders is sheer nonsense.
But people have accepted these ideas. They have laid their life’s foundations on such idiotic, stupid theories and now they find themselves miserable, sad. They go on sowing the seeds of poison. Who is going to reap the crop? Of course, they will have to reap the crop too.
The only hope possible is from a source of joy, and you can say that you have changed your foundations. Unless you change your foundations, you cannot get rid of your misery.
The misery is not really only materialistic. I have seen the poorest people happy. They don’t have anything, but they have not based their life philosophy on wrong ideas. It is more a question of what kind of spirituality you have accepted. Is it something beyond death? Is your spirituality not of this world but of some other world?
If your spirituality is something that is going to happen only after you are dead, then what are you going to do before your death? Nothing is left except being miserable and waiting for death. And all kinds of suspicions and doubts will arise, because nobody comes back after death to say to you that whatever you believe is true or untrue. So no evidence exists about what is going to happen to you after death.
Waiting for death cannot be a joyful act. Life, which your religions teach to renounce, is available. And joy and cheerfulness and blissfulness are part of life. They are living qualities, they are fragrances of intense living. Your religions teach you to renounce life, then what do you expect? You renounce life, and with it you have renounced every possibility of being blissful.
Sadness, misery, suffering: you have created them by your accepting a wrong kind of ideology. You have been cheated by your priests, you have been cheated by your politicians. You have been exploited by all the vested interests for the simple reason that they want miserable people. The miserable person is easily enslaved; the cheerful person, the blissful person, cannot be enslaved.

I am reminded of Diogenes, one of the most beautiful men who has walked on this earth. He lived naked – he had a beautiful body. And those were the days when people were sold in the markets as slaves.
So a few merchants who used to deal in selling slaves saw Diogenes lying down by the side of the river. They were overjoyed; this man would fetch a good price. They had sold many slaves, but never such a healthy and such a proportionate body and such a beautiful man. But the problem was how to catch him. They were only four, and he was more than enough for four; he would kill all of them. But something had to be done.
They were hiding behind a bush and thinking of a plan – perhaps when he was asleep then they could manage it.
Diogenes was listening. He said, “Don’t be stupid. What do you want? Just tell me. I am not a man to be enslaved, but you look so miserable that I am ready to go with you.”
They could not believe it!
Diogenes stood up and said, “Where do we go? You follow me!”
They went to the market. It was a strange scene. He looked like a master, and they looked like slaves following him. And the whole marketplace suddenly turned towards Diogenes. It was a breathtaking scene. They had never seen such a slave – “He should be an emperor!”
He stood on the platform where each slave had to stand before he was auctioned. Standing on the platform he looked at the crowd and declared, “A master is ready to be sold. If any slave amongst you wants to purchase a master, he should come forward.”
There was great silence. Even in such a situation Diogenes was not sad, he was not miserable; on the contrary he was enjoying the whole scene!
One king came up and asked the price. Diogenes said, “I am a priceless being, but you can give whatever you want to give to these poor fellows, these four persons. They have brought me here out of compassion, so you can give them as much as you like.”
The king gave them the money, took Diogenes in his chariot, and rode towards his palace. He was immensely impressed by the man, his strength. He talked on the way, and when they reached the palace he said to Diogenes, “You are not meant to be a slave, you are a master. I free you.”

We create our life inch by inch, and whatever happens to us, nobody else is responsible for it. So the only revolution that I teach is an individual revolution.
The way is to help those people to understand that you are clinging to wrong kinds of concepts. This very earth can become a paradise, but you will have to forget the paradise that is beyond death. That is causing your trouble. This very moment can become an eternity of joy, but you will have to forget all those promises which your prophets and your saviors and incarnations of God have given to you.
Jesus says to his people, “I will come for the salvation of the whole of humanity.” One disciple asks him, “When?” And he says, “Very soon. In this very life you will see me.” Two thousand years have passed – there is no sign of Jesus anywhere. But this has been the strategy of all these people – to postpone everything for the future.
Krishna did the same thing. Five thousand years ago he said, “I will come. Whenever there is suffering, whenever there is misery, whenever the good, the virtuous people are tortured by the vicious, I will come to save you. This is a promise.”
For five thousand years everything that he said has been happening every day, every moment. The good people are tortured, the vicious are in power, the whole of humanity has lived in misery, in suffering – and there is no sign of Krishna anywhere. But this is a strategy to postpone things for an unknown future; then you cannot ask because the man is no longer there.
It is easy to promise for the future.
I promise you about the present.
Nobody has done it before. It is very easy to promise for the future. You need not deliver the goods because you will not be there and you will not be answerable. I say to you my promise is for the present, the future does not exist.
So you have to change people’s conditioning. They are not miserable unnecessarily; they are miserable because they have created a certain pattern around their beings which makes them whatever they are. Your sadness will not help them. You have to be cheerful, you have to rejoice. You have to make it emphatically clear to them that what you are saying is not only possible, you have made it actual in your life. And if thousands of sannyasins can do that…
I don’t think people want to be miserable, I don’t think they want to be in suffering, it is just that they have been taught to be in suffering and that there is no other way.
In different ways Hinduism says to people, “You are in suffering because of your past lives’ karmas. You have been doing evil acts – nobody knows if that is true – and because of your past lives’ evil acts you are suffering now. All that you can do is to patiently suffer, and don’t do any evil act so that in a future life you will not have to suffer.” Now, Hinduism has used the whole strategy of past and future, leaving the present for your suffering. Then the past has the cause; in the present you have the effect. And if you are patient – that means you don’t react against your misery, you don’t do anything against your misery, you don’t listen to any kind of revolutionary thoughts – then in the future you will have a beautiful, blissful life.
Nobody knows about past life, nobody knows about future life. All that you have is the present life – which is suffering. They have sandwiched you between two non-existential things. And they have made it clear: be patient. That is why, in India – which is the oldest civilization in the world – there has never been a revolution of the poor against the rich, of the powerless against those who have power. Patience is the antidote to revolution.
Don’t be angry, because that leads finally to revolution, and that changes nothing. Don’t be sad, because it is only anger upside down, and you create more sadness; you become, again, another example of sadness.
Become an example of joy. It will look very illogical that people are sad and you are cheerful. It is not graceful, it is not mannerly, but what is mannerly is not going to help. So it is not a question of manners and grace and etiquette, it is a question of creating in the minds of people who are sad that the possibility of getting out of sadness exists herenow.
They will try in every possible way to deny it. They will say, “You must be pretending. How can you be cheerful in this world?” They will say, “You must be posing.” They will say, “You must be mad! How can you be sane and cheerful in this miserable world?” They will say, “You seem to be hypnotized.” They will say all kinds of things just to protect their ideology which they are holding very close to their hearts, not knowing that that is the poison that is going into their bloodstream.
But you have to fight and make it clear to them that it is not pretending, it is not posing; that you are not mad, that you are not hypnotized. And even if madness makes people happy, it is better than being miserable. What is the use of your sanity? If hypnotic processes make people rejoice, then what is wrong in them? It seems you have decided to remain miserable; you won’t allow any weight to go out of your misery. Then don’t make a fuss about it – remain miserable. But remember, it is your responsibility, it is your doing.
It is a difficult task, but it has to be done. It is difficult because their conditioning is thousands of years old. It is very thick, and you have to cut it through and through and reach to their very hearts. But it is not impossible.
If I can reach to millions of people’s hearts you all can make the effort. And this is the only way to change this miserable state of affairs. You just have to have enough courage, because it is going against the crowd.

In my childhood it happened I had a Sanskrit teacher in my school who was a very old-fashioned man. He was very fat, and he had a very big turban. He was the teacher of Sanskrit, a dead language, and he also lived according to his subject matter – in a very antique kind of way. But he was a very simple man too, and because he was very simple, we used to call him Bholenath. It simply means a simpleton.
He was very furious whenever he heard it. And we used to write in big letters on the blackboard before he came into the class: bholenath – lord of the simpletons; that is the exact meaning. The first thing he would do was that he would rub it off, and he would start shouting and making a scene – and we all enjoyed it.
He died, so I went to his house with my father before his body was taken to the funeral pyre. I was standing there with all his relatives and friends and neighbors, and then his wife came before his body was to be taken away. She came running out of the house, fell on him, and said, “Oh, my Bholenath!”
I could not contain my laughter – I had never thought that this would happen! When a man is dead…Even we were not thinking about his nickname, but his wife comes there and calls him Bholenath! So I laughed loudly. Everybody was shocked, and my father was very angry, but now there was nothing he could do – I had laughed.
On the way home he told me, “I will never take you anywhere. Can’t you see a simple thing? The man is dead. His wife is crying, his whole family is mourning, all his relatives are sad, everybody is sad. And are you mad or something? – you started laughing!”
I said, “You don’t know the whole thing; otherwise you would have laughed too.” And I told him the whole thing.
He said, “This is great! It is good that you had not told me before.”
And I told him, “As far as I know, all those relatives are simply pretending to be sad, because they never helped that man. When he was sick and he needed medicine, I took medicine to him. I stole money from your pocket for his medicine. Those relatives have not been of any help to him. And his wife, who was making such a scene, is in a love relationship with a neighbor. In fact, she is one of the causes of his death, because it was too much for him.
“He was a very simple man and he could not conceive that his wife would deceive him. All that was just a show. I don’t know a single person there who was really sad; they were all following a certain rule of the game.”
My father said, “Whatsoever may be the case, you have to follow the rule; otherwise you make me embarrassed.”
I said, “I am not going to follow the rule, I am simply going to do what feels right to me. And if you cannot take me, I can go alone. I may not be standing by your side, but everybody knows that I am your son, so it will not make much difference. I will just be more free, not standing by your side, and I will do exactly what I want to do. I was the only honest person there; I loved that old man. I don’t see that any harm can be done to a dead man by my laughter, and I can’t see either that all these pretenders – their sadness, is going to help the dead man.”
I told my father, “If you don’t want to be embarrassed it is better you don’t come to such places. I am going to, and I am going to do whatever I feel like doing, because I don’t think honesty can hurt anybody; at least it cannot hurt a dead man. I was the only one who loved that man, respected that man.”
My father thought for a few seconds, and then he said, “Perhaps you are right – because I was also pretending to be sad. I had nothing to do with that family, nothing to do with that man. I had just gone there because of you, because you were his student and it would look bad not to go there. I was also pretending.”

We have to cut all these pretensions. You become sad, seeing somebody else sad. Perhaps he was sad looking at somebody else who was sad…. Someone has to come out of this whole mess and be honest, and just be himself. It may be shocking to people, it may be embarrassing to people, but sooner or later they will understand it. And that understanding is going to bring an individual revolution.
This is a good chance. When somebody is miserable you have an opportunity to approach the person and to make it clear to him why he is miserable, to show him the causes. Perhaps in his misery he will be able to understand what causes are there. If he wants to get out of misery he can drop those causes; nobody is holding them there for him. And if he does not want to get out of misery, then it is his joy not to get out of misery. But then don’t make a fuss about it.
This will go against the teachings of all the religions because they will say that when somebody is sad you should be sad. That is thought to be human. I don’t think it is so. It is inhuman. If somebody is sad you have to destroy it.
The beginning has to be with your cheerfulness. Cheerfulness has a contagious effect: just one single cheerful man can change a crowd into laughter. It has tremendous power; we just have to learn how to use it.

And your second question: “How can we forgive the people who put you in jail?”
I can understand. But they have not done anything that is new, they have simply repeated an old pattern. If they can poison Socrates for the simple reason that he is corrupting people’s minds, without proving it…He was one of the greatest men in the whole history of man, who was sharpening people’s minds, not corrupting – and still they poisoned him.
If they can kill al-Hillaj Mansoor…he had done no harm to anybody. All that he was saying was that God is not there above in the heavens; it is within you, within me. But the Mohammedans could not tolerate it. If God is not in the heavens then the whole structure of their religion falls. Then to whom to pray? Then for whom to make mosques? Then the priesthood…then even Mohammed’s being a messenger of God becomes a lie, because Mansoor was saying God is in everybody’s being, he is not something separate. A simple truth, not harmful to anybody – but he was killed.

One of the Sufi mystics, Sarmad, was killed in India. Mohammedans have a simple prayer: “There is only one God, and Mohammed is his only messenger.” Sufis don’t use the whole sentence, they simply use half of the sentence: “There is only one God.” Then comes the full stop.
Asked why they don’t use the full sentence that Mohammed is the only messenger, they say, “Because the second part is not true. There have been many messengers, there are many messengers, there will be many messengers. Whoever realizes the truth becomes a messenger. It is nobody’s prerogative, it is everybody’s birthright. So we cannot use the other part.”
The story is very beautiful. Sarmad was brought to the Jama Masjid in Delhi and asked, finally, “Are you going to use the full sentence in your prayer or not?”
He said, “How can I? – because I myself am a messenger.” They cut off his head.
Before cutting off his head they told him, “We give you a chance to think again.”
He said, “Don’t bother – just cut off my head. But I say to you that even my head cut from my body will continue to say the same thing – that there is only one God.” And the story is that his head was cut off and it rolled down the many steps of Jama Masjid shouting loudly, “There is only one God!”
Sarmad was such a simple and such a beautiful man. There was no crime that he had committed, but this is how it has always been.

The fundamentalist Christians in America became tremendously afraid of me – and I can understand their fear. I was the first man who had taken away thousands of Christians from the Christian fold.
Christians had been doing that all through the centuries: taking millions of people from other religions and converting them to Christianity. And it has been thought to be a great service to God. I was the first challenge to them – nobody had done this before.
And the challenge became more significant because Christians have been able only to convert orphans, beggars, the poorest of the poor. And these people that they have converted to Christianity have nothing to do with religion. They have been given food, they have been given houses, they have been given schools for their children, they have been given hospitals for their sick…They have moved from Hinduism or from other religions to Christianity – this is not a religious conversion.
What was hurting them very much was that I had taken out the cream – not the beggars, not the orphans, but the best minds, the youngest people, the best educated, the most intelligent. I have taken them out of their fold, and I have not put them into another fold. I have simply taken them out of one prison and have left them free, I have not put them into another prison. From Christianity into Hinduism, or from Christianity to Mohammedanism – that is simply a changing of jails.
This was the problem for the fundamentalist Christians. Ronald Reagan himself is a fanatic, fundamentalist Christian. And if this fire becomes bigger…and they have no means to prevent it, because they had no arguments against me. I have all the arguments against them.
First they tried legally to destroy the commune and throw me out of America. For four years I was in America without any visa. I had been telling them, “You can say yes; you can say no,” but they were afraid, because if they said no, I might go to court. Then it would go beyond their hands and become a legal case.
On what grounds were they saying no to me? They had no grounds to say no to me, so they would not say it. And they could not say yes, because the pressure from above was not to say yes. So for four years they were committing the crime of keeping a person in the country without any visa. My application was with them, and they would not answer it.
They tried all kinds of legal ways, but we were winning cases against the government. Then they became desperate. It seemed legally they could not win. So something had to be done, and had to be done quickly before we became deeply rooted in their soil. So this was their desperate effort: they arrested me without any arrest warrant. They arrested me without showing any reason why they were arresting me. They had none. They did not allow me my basic right to call my attorney. They did everything illegal.
And from Charlotte, where they arrested me, Oregon is not more than six or eight hours’ distance. It took them twelve days to cover that distance. They were keeping me in jail without any trial – which is absolutely illegal. For three days in the Charlotte court they could not prove anything against me. Still, the US Attorney insisted to the court that I could not be given bail. All six people who were with me were given bail because there was no case.
Now, you can see their strategy. The people who were with me on the plane were given bail, but for me, especially, they would not give bail. They could not show any crime that I had committed, so they said in their appeal to the court that it was because I had unlimited sources of finance. And I have thousands of friends who love me, who are devoted to me so totally that they would do anything for me. If I were given bail…whatever money I had to deposit – five million dollars, ten million dollars or fifteen million dollars – the government was not going to accept any money, saying that I would leave America.
And from behind the scenes they were pressurizing the woman magistrate who was not even a judge. They were bribing the woman by saying, “If you give him bail” – and this was absolutely illegal – “then you lose your chance of becoming a judge. If you don’t give him bail then your chance of becoming a judge is certain.”
This was told to me by the sheriff of the jail himself. He said, “This is absolutely illegal. We have never heard of this, that without any crime proved, somebody has been put into jail, has not been given bail. The reality is,” he told me, “from behind the scenes the woman is being pressurized. She does not have guts and is afraid to lose her post of judge.”
In those twelve days they lied at every step, even to the point where they wanted me to sign under a false name: David Washington. And this was being forced on me by the US Marshal himself!
In the middle of the night he told me, “You have to sign under this name.”
I said, “You are supposed to be a law-enforcing authority. Under what law does this idea come? On your coat is written Department of Justice. At least for the moment remove the coat – because what justice is there? This is not my name. You are forcing me to do something illegal.”
He said, “I cannot answer you. Whatever I have been told from above” – and this “above” always means Ronald Reagan, because who is above? – “I am simply following. Please, don’t be angry with me.”
I said, “I am not angry with you, I am simply surprised at you and your integrity. You don’t have a backbone, any spine. You write it!”
He had said, “If you don’t sign it then the whole night I have to sit here, you have to sit here. Neither can you sleep, nor can I. If you sign, then you can go to the cell and you can go to sleep.”
I said, “I will not write it. I can sit the whole night here, but I will not do anything illegal. You write the name, you fill in the form. I will simply sign it. I don’t want to keep you awake the whole night.”
So he filled in the form. And that was my strategy, that he fill in the form in his own handwriting so that becomes the proof that I have not filled in the form. And I signed my own signature. He looked at my signature and said, “What have you signed?”
I said, “It must be David Washington. Can’t you read?” He looked at it – it was in Hindi; I always sign in Hindi. And I told him, “You will repent for it. You cannot keep me forever in jail without my having committed any crime. Soon the whole world will know. Most probably tomorrow morning all the television channels and all the newspapers will know.”
While I had been going from the airport to the jail, there was also a girl who was going to be released that night. So I had told her, “You just listen to whatsoever happens between me and the Marshal. You are going to be released, and outside there will be hundreds of news media people. Simply go out and tell them everything that you have heard. Just be alert and listen carefully to what transpires between me and the US Marshal.”
And she did a perfect job. As she went out she immediately told the news media people, and the next morning at six o’clock it was all over America. By seven they had to change my jail again.
I asked the US Marshal, “What happened? Why are you changing jails so soon? Now you are afraid that news people will start coming to see the form that you have filled in in your own handwriting, and which you have forced me to sign. But I have signed my own name – it is not David Washington. And my signature is known all over the world, so there is no way of deceiving.
“And what was the reason that you wanted me to sign under a false name? The only reason could be that, even if you killed me, there would be no trace left of where I disappeared – my name would not be in your registers, in your forms: I have never entered the jail; David Washington entered the jail. Nobody would suspect that I could be David Washington, and you can release David Washington tomorrow.”
Those twelve days were a great experience for many reasons. I could see that what America pretends to the whole world – that it is a democracy – is all nonsense, it is a hypocrisy. It is as fascist as any fascist country has been; just the mask is of democracy.
They moved me into five jails in twelve days, and I was surprised to see that there was not a single white man in five jails. Each jail had five hundred people, six hundred people…all black. It was a strange thing. I asked people en masse, “What is the matter? Looking at the jails it seems as if America is a black country, or perhaps no white man commits any crime. Why are all the jails full of black people?”
All are young, and the strangest thing is that they were all arrested just like me, without trial, without any arrest warrant, without being told why they were being arrested. There were people who told me that they had been waiting for nine months in the jails. And they went on being told, “Your trial is coming, your trial is coming” – and the trial never comes.
This is absolutely against any democratic principles – punishing a person without proving his crime before a court. Now, for nine months you have already punished a person, and perhaps the court will release him; he has not committed any crime. He is not even aware that he has done anything. I figured out that the reason is not crime, the reason is that young, black people are rebellious, and they have become a danger. So in the name of crime, fill all the jails with all the young people and keep them there.
After twelve days I was brought to the court. That was the last fascist strategy to be seen, because there was no case. So the US Attorney was worried: now what were they going to put before the court? So they asked my attorneys for negotiations – before the trial began, for negotiation.
For twelve days they harassed me in every possible way: they did not let me sleep for twelve days; I could not eat anything – I lost eight pounds in weight. Just before the trial began, they asked my attorneys for a negotiation. And the proposal that they brought was really cunning and absolutely inhuman.
The proposal was: “We know that Rajneesh will say he is not guilty, that perhaps finally he will win the case, but we are not going to give him bail; the whole government is bent upon not giving him bail. If he says he is not guilty then we will not give him bail. And you can understand that if the government wants, it can prolong the trial for ten years, and he will have to remain in jail for ten years.
“He may win, but then you have to understand that it can take any amount of time. We will go on changing courts, we will go on postponing, we will go on changing judges. We can do anything” – they said it clearly. “The only way is for Rajneesh to agree to plead guilty. Then we will not go for a trial, we will release him.”
My attorneys came back with tears in their eyes – and they were not our sannyasins, they were the best attorneys in America. But during these twelve days they became very much involved with me. One of the best attorneys perhaps in the whole world, the head of the law department in a California university, Peter Schey, started loving me so much that he came to see me in jail. He said, “I cannot sit on a chair in front of you. I will sit down just as your sannyasins sit down.”
They came with tears in their eyes saying, “The Attorney General’s people have made such a proposal that we will have to choose a jail for you for ten years to twelve years. And who knows what they will do? We cannot know. They may kill you. And your sannyasins all over the world will suffer, your whole movement will suffer. And they know perfectly well that they have no way to win.
“So now they are trying this strategy, that if you agree to plead guilty they will withdraw the case, and you will be released. Perhaps for five years you will not be allowed to enter into America.” They said, “It hurts us to ask you to agree to plead guilty, because you are not guilty. We were here to help you and we have come with a proposal that you have to accept. But it is better to accept and get rid of it; otherwise we will be helpless, and we don’t know what they will do.”
Seeing the whole situation – my sannyasins were fasting, not eating, and they were in immense misery and anguish – I said to them, “Don’t be worried, I will agree to plead guilty. My agreement does not mean that I am guilty. Once I am out of the court I will say to the press and to the whole world that this is the way they forced my attorneys: by asking me to agree to plead guilty.”
I agreed to plead guilty, and I was released. The judge was perfectly aware of all the negotiations, because on two points they wanted me to accept I was guilty. They had a list of twenty points, but only on two points, specifically, did they want me to say I was guilty. And the judge asked only about those two points, “Are you guilty or not?” So that means he was clearly aware of the negotiations and the whole process and the whole strategy.
And because I agreed to plead guilty, he imposed a fine of four hundred thousand dollars – which was not part of the negotiations. So all the way lying…! It must have been in their minds. With the judge it must have been settled, that once I accepted the guilty plea then of course the judge was capable of fining me. They never brought it up in the negotiations. All that was said was that for five years I would not be able to enter America. But this half a million dollars, now the judge was capable…
The whole thing was so absurd. First you ask me to take the oath that I will not speak anything but the truth. Then you force me to lie and say that I am guilty. And then on that lie you fine me four hundred thousand dollars and five years expulsion from America.
And still this was not enough for them. When I arrived back at the jail to take my clothes and other things, the ground floor was absolutely empty. I inquired of the sheriff, “What is the matter? It was always occupied with all kinds of departmental people.”
He said, “Perhaps it is a change of shift.”
I said, “But this is not the way. It happens every day that first the people come and take charge, then the other people leave. But nobody is here; everybody is gone. It looks a little strange.” I could see perspiration on his forehead. I said, “You look a little nervous.”
He said, “No, I am not nervous.” He left me inside the prison. There was only one man in the room, and he immediately went out, leaving me there. That one man gave me the box with my clothes and told me that he had to look for his boss for a signature on the form. Later on I came to know that there was no need for any boss or any signature; only my signature was needed to prove that I had received my things.
He locked the door, went out, and came back after fifteen minutes – he was also almost trembling. I took my clothes out, and they opened the doors – there were three electric doors – one by one. And as I reached the hotel, the news came that a bomb had been found exactly in the same room where I had been left alone for fifteen minutes. Perhaps they could not manage the timing, because it was not certain when the court would release me; I came a little earlier.
Because there was no trial and no argument, I simply agreed to plead guilty. The judge fined me and the case was finished within two minutes. So perhaps their timing was according to the court, and the court was to close at five o’clock. They must have reached the room nearabout three o’clock, two hours earlier, and they could not manage to have me sit there for two hours.
The bomb in the waiting room could not have been put there by anybody except the authorities. And that was the reason the ground floor was empty. That was the reason the man who had brought me there immediately left. That was the reason that the other man who had given me my clothes immediately went to look for his boss – which was a lie because there was no need of any signature, just my signature was needed. And that was the reason they were all nervous and perspiring – they were afraid for their lives. And this is a democracy!
But still I say forgive them, for the simple reason that whatever they are doing is going to destroy them. They are bringing their own death closer to them.
And they are repenting. In all five jails, without exception, every jailer told me, “We have never had such a person in our jail!” – because from all over the world there were calls, twenty-four hours a day. Telegrams in thousands, and flowers were coming from all over the world. They had no place in the jail to put so many thousands of flowers, so from the first jail I made it a point to send the flowers to the schools, colleges, universities, to the students – in my name, from me, with my blessings.
The first sheriff told me, “You are absolutely safe, for the simple reason that the whole world’s eyes are fixed on you. And no harm can be done to you; otherwise America will lose all its credibility. They cannot even touch your body.” And that was true – they could not touch my body.
They started repenting that they had created an unnecessarily stupid thing because the whole of the news media turned in my favor, the whole of America turned in my favor. People who had never known me, who heard my name for the first time, were sympathetic towards me and against the government. Inmates who had seen me on the television – and they were criminals – they were all for me. They loved me immensely.
So there is no need to be angry, there is no need to carry any complaint. Whatever they have done, they will have to reap the crop also. They have exposed themselves. And this is the way all these vested interests have been behaving with people who stand for truth. So it is not new. They have put me in the same category as Socrates and al-Hillaj and Sarmad…and that is a great credit.
And now they are trying in every possible way, pressurizing the Indian government – because they help with money so they have power over all these poor countries – that no Western media should be allowed to reach me. That’s why the Italian television crew were refused – because all the Indian embassies have been informed by the Indian government that no news media should reach to me, no sannyasin from outside India should reach to me.
Their whole effort is to isolate me so that the movement suffers and I cannot expose them. To prevent the news media reaching me means I cannot expose them. They are wrong. If the news media cannot reach me, I can reach the news media. I am going around the world. And wherever they can pressurize…
Here, immediately, the American ambassador protested to the king that I should not be allowed to remain in Nepal. In Germany, they pressurized the government to make sure that I could not enter Germany. And they have made a law that I cannot enter Germany. I have never been in Germany! I have not committed any crime in Germany. This is just unprecedented – that you prevent a person, who has not done anything on your land, from entering your country.
They had to give some reason, and the reason they have shown is so stupid. The reason is because I am not of any help to Germany why should I be allowed to enter? But that should be the case with everybody who enters Germany: whether he is a help to Germany or not. Only for me a special category – that I am not a help to Germany, so why should I be allowed? Then no tourist should be allowed unless he is a help to Germany.
But one thing that makes me glad is that a single man without any power can frighten the greatest power in the world, can shake it from its very roots.
I will be going around the world. If I cannot enter Germany I will be outside Germany, and my people can come to me. They cannot prevent German sannyasins from coming to me.
I will manage to expose them. There is no need to be angry with them. Just expose them, bring their true face before the world – that’s enough.

============================================================

Osho,
Sir Thomas Moore's perfect society, “Utopia,” originates from the unexplained presence and insight of a man named Utopias. Why do such visions for a harmonious society among men derive from such mysterious individuals? And why has the idea of a perfect society always fired man's imagination yet averted his grasp?
Man finds himself utterly empty, meaningless, accidental. The awareness of all these things hurts him. He wants to improve things simply to feel some meaning in life, some joy in life. Ordinarily he is just a wound, and from birth onwards the wound goes on growing bigger and bigger, and the pain goes on increasing.
If he looks ahead there is nothing but death and darkness. If he looks behind – before birth – nothing is known.
He lives between two unknown realities – birth and death. And the small span of his life is just a continuous pain. To avoid this pain, to change this situation, to heal the wound, he has done many things.
He invented a God so that he can say he is not accidental, he is a creation of a perfect God. And when a perfect God creates, he creates perfect beings. It is simple logic: to make himself feel perfect, significant, needed by the universe, he swallows the greatest lie – the concept of God. It is a desperate effort, but you cannot befool yourself. You may postpone your misery a little bit but again it is there.
To satisfy God and make him a reality, man has created all kinds of rituals, priesthoods. Of course he cannot create God but he can create temples, synagogues, mosques, churches. He cannot create God but he can create prophets, messiahs, saviors – representatives of God. He can create holy books written by God. Man writes them, but even the most intelligent people do not want to disturb the illusion; it is such a consolation that there is a God who cares about you. And God is perfect in every way so his creation cannot be imperfect.
All that you have to do is to go on praying to God so he remains happy with you and allows you all the possible treasures of existence. For centuries man has lived in that dream, but nothing has happened and everything has been done…
You will be surprised. We have sacrificed human beings to an empty concept of God! We have sacrificed the most beautiful women – because God would be very happy to have a beautiful woman. We have made every effort, but the sky remains silent, no answer ever comes, no response. Slowly, slowly the intelligentsia started looking somewhere else – “Perhaps that is not the right direction…” That’s where people like Thomas Moore come in.
It is a sheer waste of time to look towards an abstract God no one has seen. It is better to improve the society, make the society perfect so that the people who are members of the society have the chance to flower to their perfection. That is another illusion, far closer to reality, but it doesn’t matter whether the illusion is farther away or closer, an illusion is an illusion.
You cannot create a perfect society for the simple reason…just take a few examples: there are poor people, there are rich people. Naturally, in a perfect society nobody should be poor, nobody should be rich, there should not be any division of classes. It will be a classless society. But it is impossible because it is against the very psychology of man. No two men are equal, and you are thinking of making the whole human society equal; it cannot happen. And it is not only a question of being rich and poor, the question is multidimensional.
One of the characters in an existentialist novel says, “I cannot be satisfied with one woman. I want all the women of the earth.”
Now how are you going to satisfy these people? And he is saying something which is hidden in every man and in every woman. How can you manage?
There are people who will not be satisfied unless they have great power over millions of people in their hands. These politicians cannot be satisfied without power. They are addicted to power, but if they have power then millions are reduced to slavery.
One Adolf Hitler – and millions of people are in danger. But you cannot prevent Adolf Hitlers from being born, and as long as they exist, wars will continue. As long as they exist there will be religions.
The question is not at all concerned with America, it is a question of forgiveness – and I am going to be persecuted from one land to another land. If you cannot forgive the people who will be persecuting me, then your whole emptiness will become just wounds and wounds and wounds.
So it is not a question of being kind to America. All the religions have told you, “Forgive the enemy.” Jesus on the cross asked God, “Father forgive these people, because they know not what they are doing.”
I am not saying that. My concern is not those people, because I know perfectly well that they know exactly what they are doing. But forgiveness has something to do with your inner health. I am concerned with you!
If you cannot forgive you will carry a wound.
Forgive.
Remove the wound.
Be healed.
Don’t sow wrong seeds.

Man can become a beautiful phenomenon. I cannot say that he can become perfect for the simple reason perfection smells of death. Whenever something is perfect there is no way to grow more. You have come to a full stop; now there is no future. Except death, nothing can happen to perfection. So I am not a perfectionist. I believe in open growth.
You will come closer and closer to perfection, but you will never be perfect.
Perfection is not the way of existence.
Growth is the way.
So perfection is always like the horizon. It looks maybe just a few miles away; you can reach it within hours, but by the time you have reached there, it has moved ahead. The distance between you and the horizon always remains the same.
Perfection is a horizon; it is a beautiful idea. It helps you to go on growing; it helps you to go on trying to touch the stars….

(The remainder of this discourse was lost due to a fault in the recording system.)

============================================================

Osho,
Atomic war is on the horizon, the deadly disease AIDS is spreading fast, and scientists say the earth will change its axis by the end of this century. But why are the priests, politicians and governments not aware of these facts? And why are they not interested in making the public aware? Please comment.
It is one of the most significant questions that can be asked, but you will have to understand some deeper implications, which you may not be aware of.
The politicians and the priests have a vested interest in keeping the people of the world unaware of the future. The reason is very simple: if the people are aware of the future and the darkness ahead, the death that is coming every moment closer, there is going to be a tremendous upheaval in the consciousness of man all around the world. And the politicians and the priests, who have dominated humanity for millennia, know perfectly well they cannot solve any problem that is going to be faced by humanity in the future. They are absolutely impotent. The problems are too big and they are too small. The only way for them to save their faces is not to let the people become aware of what is happening tomorrow.
I have to make it clear also that politics attracts only the most mediocre minds in the world. It does not attract Albert Einsteins, Bertrand Russells, Jean-Paul Sartres, Rabindranath Tagores… No, it attracts a certain kind of people. Psychologists are aware of the fact that people who are suffering from some inferiority complex are the people to be attracted towards politics, because politics can give them power. And through power they can convince themselves and others that they are not inferior, that they are not mediocre.
But just attaining power makes no difference to their intelligence. So the whole world is ruled by mediocre people when we have a large number of intelligent people – scientists, artists, musicians, poets, dancers, painters – all kinds of sensitive, creative people, the very cream of humanity, but they are not in power. They can change the whole fabric of human history, they can change the darkness of the future into a beautiful morning, a sunrise. But the misfortune is that power is in the hands of the wrong people, and the people of intelligence are devoid of power.
I will tell you a small story to make it clear….

A great mystic heard that one of his friends, a childhood friend – they had played together, studied together – had become the prime minister of the country. Just to congratulate him, the mystic came down from the mountains. It was a long journey, tiring. By the time he reached the prime minister’s palace, the prime minister was getting ready to go somewhere.
He recognized the mystic, but he said, “I’m sorry, I have some appointments. I have to go to three places, and I would love it if you can come with me. On the way we can talk and remember the golden old days.”
The mystic said, “I would love to come with you, but you can see my rags are full of dust. It would not look right to sit by your side on a golden chariot.”
The prime minister said, “Don’t be worried. The king has presented me with a very costly overcoat. I have never used it; I have been keeping it for some special occasion. I will give you the coat. You just put it on; it will cover your clothes, the dust and everything.”
The coat was given to him. They reached the first house. They entered the house. The prime minister introduced his friend: “He is a great mystic. He lives in the mountains. Everything that he has is his own, except the coat – that is mine.”
The mystic could not believe it: “What kind of stupidity is this?”
Even the family was shocked, to insult the mystic in such a way.
Outside the house the mystic said, “It is better I do not accompany you. You insulted me. What was the need to say that it is your coat? They were not asking.”
He said, “I am sorry, forgive me. And if you don’t come with me to the next appointment, I will think you have not forgiven me.”
The mystic was a simple-hearted man. He said, “Then it is okay, I am coming.”
Entering the second house, the prime minister introduced him: “He is a great mystic who lives in the mountains. Everything is his – even the coat is his!”
The mystic could not believe that this man had any intelligence at all. Outside he simply refused: “I cannot go to your third appointment. This is too much.”
But the politician said, “I have said that the coat is yours!”
The mystic said, “It is unbelievable how unintelligent a man can be. Your assertion, emphasis, that the coat is mine, creates suspicion: there is something you are hiding. What is the need to mention the coat at all? I don’t see the point that in any introduction coats need to be introduced.”
And the politician said, “Forgive me, but if you don’t come to the third appointment I will never forget that I have hurt you. Please, there is only one more appointment, and I will not say that the coat is yours or the coat is mine. Don’t be worried about it.”
The simple mystic, innocent, agreed to go with him. At the third house he introduced the mystic in the same way, “He is a great mystic from the mountains. All the clothes are his, but as far as the coat is concerned, it is better not to say anything!”

The politician is not the most intelligent part of humanity. Otherwise there would not have been five thousand wars in three thousand years. The politician has destroyed, but has not created anything. It is the politician who is creating the atomic weapons, the nuclear missiles. With what face can he make the people of the world aware that the future is dark, dismal? Perhaps there is no future anymore, perhaps we are sitting on a volcano which can erupt any moment. Already we have so many nuclear weapons that we can destroy seven hundred planets of the size of our earth. In other words, we can kill every man seven hundred times over.
Can you think of the stupidity of it? A poor man simply dies one time. There is no need to kill him seven hundred times. For what is all this nuclear arrangement being made?
There is a certain madness behind it. The madness is that the politician can live only if there is war. In his autobiography, Adolf Hitler has made many significant statements. One of the statements is that if a politician wants to be a great hero, a great historical figure, then the only way is to create a great war. Without war you don’t have heroes.
Just think of all your heroes, they have been created by war: Alexander the Great, Napoleon Bonaparte, Nadirshah, Tamerlane, Genghis Khan, Joseph Stalin, Benito Mussolini, Adolf Hitler, Winston Churchill…And what have these people got, except that they lived at the time of a great war? The war brings them to the pinnacle of their glory. And your whole history is full of these idiots.
If we have any sense we should completely stop studying this kind of history in the schools and universities.
Can’t you study beautiful people, creative people? We have produced great musicians. We have produced great scientists. We have produced great poets. We have produced great painters. Our history should remember them. Our history should remind us that they are our real forefathers, not Genghis Khan, not Tamerlane, not Nadirshah. These are accidents, and they should not even have a place in the footnotes of history books. They should be simply ignored. They were mad people and there is no need to go on studying them and creating the same kind of desire in the new generation.
The priests are also in a deep conspiracy with the politicians. It is a thousands-of-years-old conspiracy: the priest protects the politician; the politician protects the priest. It has to be understood.
For example, in the East the priest has been telling the people, “You are poor because in your past life you have been doing evil acts.” He has convinced people. When you go on saying the same thing again and again for thousands of years, it leaves an impression deep in the minds of people. Not only does it impress the people, it even impresses the priest himself!
It is a very strange psychological phenomenon.
I am reminded of an anecdote….

A journalist died. He reached directly to the door of paradise and knocked on the door. A small window opened and the doorkeeper said, “Forgive me, we have a certain quota for journalists which is complete. We need only one dozen journalists in paradise. In fact, even they are useless, because nothing happens here – no news.”
Just remember the definition of news: when a dog bites a man, it is not news; when a man bites a dog, it is news. And naturally in paradise there is no news.
“Even the twelve journalists are getting bored, so you, please, go to the other door, in front.”
But journalists are stubborn people, you cannot get rid of them so easily….
He said, “Just listen to this one thing. I will go to the other door after twenty-four hours, but not now.”
The doorkeeper said, “What will you do for twenty-four hours, standing here?”
He said, “I am not going to stand here, you let me in. If I can convince one of the twelve journalists to go to hell, then you can give me his place. The quota will remain complete.”
Even the doorkeeper thought that was sensible. He said, “Okay, come in. Have a try.”
After twenty-four hours he managed to tell everybody, journalists, non-journalists, “In hell there is going to be a new newspaper published which will be the largest and the most important. They need editors, subeditors, reporters, all kinds of journalists – with great salaries!”
After twenty-four hours he went back to the gate. The gatekeeper said, “You cannot get out.”
He said, “What do you mean?”
He said, “All the twelve have escaped. You convinced them, and they were creating so much fuss that I finally allowed them to go. Now you cannot leave, at least we should have one journalist.”
But the journalist said, “I cannot stay.”
The doorkeeper said, “You created the lie. There is no newspaper. There are no great salaries.”
He said, “Yes, I created the lie, but if twelve people have believed it there must be something to it! I don’t want to be here. You open the door, otherwise I am going to complain. I don’t belong here, I’m not supposed to be here.”
Seeing the point that it was true, the doorkeeper allowed him to go without permission from any higher authority.

What had happened to the journalist? He had invented a lie, and he succeeded in convincing twelve people. Whenever you convince somebody, you are also being convinced simultaneously.
For centuries in the East the priesthood has been convincing people that it is your past evil acts which have made you poor. All you need to do is to remain contented with your poverty, with your sickness, with your death. This is a test of your trust. And if you can pass through this fire test, in the next life, after death, you will be rewarded enormously.
This is the reason that in the East science has not progressed, technology has not been born. If poor people are contented, if the poor people don’t want to be anything other than poor, then what is the need of technology, of science, of progress, of evolution, of creating more wealth, of creating a better society, of distributing the wealth in a more human way? There is no need.
The politician is happy, because there is no possibility of revolution. The priest protects the politician against the revolution. And the politician, on his part, goes on praising the priest, that he is a great saint. He touches the feet of the priest, particularly at the time of elections. He gives respect; he goes to all kinds of saints, shankaracharyas, imams, popes….
Soon the pope is going to come to India, and you will see all the politicians running to welcome him – now in India, Christianity is the third greatest religion. Now the pope has to be persuaded.
Mohammedan saints, dead or alive, have to be worshipped. Hindu saints, whether saints or simply idiots, have to be raised to the highest spirituality.
This is a conspiracy to exploit the people. The priests cannot say what is going to happen in the future, for the simple reason that the priest lives out of the past. He lives out of the Shrimad Bhagavadgita, which happened five thousand years ago. He lives by the Koran Sharif, he lives by The Holy Bible. His whole world is in the past; he is a worshipper of the dead. He has no eyes for the future, and no intelligence either. I don’t think any man of intelligence can be a priest, because the priest is continuously lying, and no man of integrity can do that.
The priest is lying on every count. He knows nothing of God. He has not experienced, he has not encountered, but he goes on lying to the people – pretending to be a representative of God, a mediator between you and God. He does not allow you to be in direct contact with existence. He always wants you to write your love letters “care of” the priest. Your prayers can reach to God only through the priest. Strange, on what authority…?
Just a few days ago, the head of the Christians, the pope, declared that one of the greatest sins is to confess directly to God – confession has to be to the priest. Do you understand this cunning strategy? The Catholic priest is always there to listen to your confession, and you have to tell him everything about your sins, your private life. That gives him power. Do you understand? He has a file on you. You cannot leave the Catholic fold.
He can expose you. He can destroy your respectability. He knows that you have had a love affair with your neighbor’s wife…. You can hide from everybody but not from the priest, because he is the only one who can manage forgiveness from God for your sins. But strange, why can you not confess to God directly? This is politics; this is not religion.
I have come across priests of all the religions, and I have never seen any one of them that has any intelligence. If they had any intelligence they would compose music, they would create some beauty, they would invent something to enhance humanity. They would find some way to destroy poverty in the world.
But the priest goes on doing just the contrary. All the priests of all the religions, without exception, are against birth control, they are against abortion. I was talking to a bishop and I told him that if there are abortions, he was responsible for them.
He said, “What are you saying? We are against abortions.”
I said, “Yes, I know it, but you are also against birth control. If you were in favor of birth control there would be no need for abortions.”
Seeing the whole world growing in population and poverty, these priests go on teaching that children are produced by God, and that to prevent more births by any scientific method is against religion.
I cannot think that these people are intelligent. They want to turn the whole earth into an Ethiopia. Millions of people will die by the end of this century without any nuclear weapons being used. Almost half of the earth will die out of starvation. And when fifty percent of the people are dying in the streets and you cannot do anything to help – no medicine, no food, you cannot even arrange for their bodies to be carried to the graveyard or to the funeral pyre – the people who are left alive will be in a far more miserable condition than those who are dead. The dead will be the fortunate ones. Who will be responsible for all this? All these priests.
I have been saying to all these priests, “You just look! If God, according to you, according to all religions, is omnipotent, all powerful, he can do anything. He can create the world, he can destroy the world. So what is the problem? The woman has just taken a pill – he cannot destroy a pill! If he wants the child to be born, the pill will be destroyed. The pill seems to be more powerful than your omnipotent God. You should go to your churches and temples and mosques and synagogues, and pray to God to destroy all the pills. You trust and believe in prayer – why are you harassing the poor people and telling them to continue to produce children?”
Religions are interested in increasing their population, because population is power. They are not worried about the death that is coming closer every moment. Politicians are interested in having more and more powerful weapons, because without nuclear weapons they are not going to be historical heroes.
Even poor countries who need food are trying to make atomic plants, nuclear plants. It seems to be an utterly insane state of affairs.
Your question has raised many things: nuclear weapons, the most dangerous disease that man has ever encountered, AIDS. But you are not aware that the disease AIDS is created by your religions. You will be surprised and shocked.
AIDS is the most dangerous disease ever because it has no cure. And scientists are coming to an agreement that there is no possibility of finding a cure. This is not a disease, but a slow death. Once you have got it, at the most you can live for two years. Mostly you will not live more than six months; your death is certain.
And the disease is really ugly, because even your family will reject you. Your wife will reject you, your husband will reject you, your children will close the doors to you. Your parents will say, “Forgive us. Don’t come this way.” Your friends will turn into enemies. You will not be allowed into any restaurant because the disease is such that it spreads not only by sexual contact. It is a sexual disease but it spreads in many other ways: by your saliva…
If you kiss a woman, your wife, you can give her the disease – just by kissing. Even your tears carry the virus. A small child is crying, and just out of compassion you wipe his tears with your hands…. You may not know the child, he may be just a stranger, but you don’t know what you have done to yourself. The child may be carrying the virus in his tears. Now it is a known fact that children can be born with the disease. If their parents have it, the children are already born with the disease. And if there are tears on your hands and you eat something, you have fallen into the trap.
But the most surprising and shocking thing will be that this disease, AIDS, is created by homosexuality. And who has created homosexuality? In the forests, in the wild, no animal is found to be homosexual. But in zoos, where females are not available, then male animals start making love to other male animals. That is just an emergency measure.
Who has converted humanity into a zoo? It is not a natural thing. And I want to say to you emphatically that homosexuality first appeared in the religious monasteries. It is the religions who separated men from women. They put the monks into one monastery and the nuns into another monastery. Even today, in Europe, there is a thousand-year-old monastery in Athos, where no woman has ever entered. Three thousand monks live in the monastery, and any monk who enters the monastery enters forever. Only his dead body will come out.
I have inquired about all the details of the monastery and I have found that even a six-month-old baby girl cannot be allowed into it. I could not believe it: a six-month-old baby girl cannot be allowed into the monastery? What does it mean? In the monastery are there monks living or monsters?
But sexual repression, homosexuality, happen because religions have insisted on celibacy as something spiritual – it is not spiritual. Celibacy is unnatural, and anything against nature is going to take its revenge sooner or later.
AIDS is the revenge of nature, and all the priests and all the religions are responsible for it. There is still time. Celibacy should be made a crime in every land, in every country. Man should be allowed to be natural, man should be allowed to accept himself without rejecting any part of his being. AIDS will disappear, but homosexuality has to disappear first. But as I said to you, we are living in an insane world.
In Texas, in America, they have passed a law against homosexuality – that it is a crime. Nobody ever dreamed that in Texas there would be one million homosexuals, but one million homosexuals protested to the legislature of Texas against the law. If this is the situation in Texas – which is just a desert – what will be the situation in California? Perhaps everybody is homosexual. Perhaps not permanently, but once in a while…
To make homosexuality a crime is simply stupid because now homosexuals will go underground. No law can prevent them, it can only make them say that they are not homosexuals. That is very dangerous. That means they can spread the disease to people who are absolutely unaware, unconscious.
If we want a sane world, if we want to save the world, my humble suggestion is that there should be a world academy of scientists, of painters, of poets, of dancers, of sculptors, of architects, of professors, of mystics, and they should create public opinion. The intelligentsia of the world, from all dimensions and all sections, together should create a great public opinion: “We want to know exactly the truth. What is our future? What are the politicians going to do about changing it? What are the priests going to do? And if they are impotent, then they should simply say that, because there are people of merit who can do something.”
Just a few days ago, twenty American scientists, their best nuclear experts, protested to the government saying, “If you don’t listen to us, we are going to stop working. We cannot work against the whole of humanity.”
Now this is a good beginning. The same should be done in every country. The same should be done in every part of the world, and why should you do it separately? It should be done together. All the intelligent scientists and creative people of the world should be together, because the question is very big. And unless every intelligent person is standing up to save humanity it seems to be an impossible task. But I am not a pessimist, I hope even against hope. I feel that in times of challenge there is always a possibility of the best coming up, of people joining hands together across the foolish boundaries of politics which do not exist on the earth, against the boundaries of religions which are not religious at all.
To be religious you need not be a Christian, you need not be a Hindu, you need not be a Mohammedan. To be a scientist, do you need to be a Hindu? Do you need to be a Christian?
Religion is the science of the inner soul. There is no need for any adjective. Just as science explores the objective existence, religion explores the interiority of man, his subjectivity. A man can be religious without being in any fold, and this is the time to declare, “I do not belong to any religion and yet I am religious. I do not belong to any nation and yet I am a human being. The whole earth is mine.”
It is time that the whole humanity stands together against all conspiracies of the priests and the politicians. And I guarantee you that we can save humanity – not only save it, we can transform it into a higher form, into a better consciousness.
We can give birth to a new man.
The old man is finished.

Osho,
Will you please give some message to the people of Nepal and India? Also, you say that you are not teaching a doctrine and that knowledge can merely be a vehicle to express the experience one has had. Is it not true that the experience itself will communicate itself?
The experience of truth happens in the absolute silence of your being, where there is no ripple of thought, where no word can enter, where there is absolute silence and nothing else. The problem is that you can experience the truth in silence, but you cannot express it in silence. Expression will need words, and the moment you use words something of the truth is lost. Some beauty of it, some fragrance of it, is destroyed. The experience of truth is vast, and the words are very small.

One father was teaching his son, “There is nothing impossible, my son, in the world.”
The son said, “Wait.” He ran into the bathroom.
The father said, “What are you doing?”
He said, “I am going to prove that there is something which is impossible.”
The father followed him. The son squeezed out some toothpaste and said to his father, “Please put it back! And if you need any advice you can go to Alexander the Great or Napoleon Bonaparte, the people who have said that there is nothing in the world which is impossible. This is impossible, I have tried it.”

You can see light, but how can you explain it to a blind man? There seems to be no way. Whatever you say about light, will not be light. Whatever you say about light, will not be meaningful to the blind man.
Hence, always remember, truth cannot be said, it can be shown. It is a finger pointing to the moon. All words are just fingers pointing to the moon, but don’t accept the fingers as the moon. The moment you start clinging to the fingers – that’s where doctrines, cults, creeds, dogmas, are born – then you have missed the whole point. The fingers were not the point; the point was the moon.
That’s why I say, don’t get lost in words, don’t get lost in doctrines. Rather, find a living master whose very being is a finger pointing to the moon. In his presence maybe something transpires in you. Not in his words, but perhaps in his silence. Not in his theories, but perhaps in his eyes. There you may find a certain inspiration, a glimpse, a door opening into the mysteries of life.
Books cannot do that; only a living master can. And this is the misery, that people go on carrying dead books, dead words. Perhaps those words were once alive when the master who had spoken them was there.
When I am speaking to you, do you think it is only the words that reach to you? No, my tone, my emphasis on certain words, my silence between two words, my gestures of the hands, my eyes – which I forget completely to blink! My doctors are after me to continue to blink – but I forget! When I am really speaking to you, then it is not only my words, but my whole being that is involved in it. It is a total expression…and one never knows what will reach to your heart.
You can write these words. They will be the same – but yet not the same, because the living reality behind them will be missing. My emphasis has always been – while I’m alive do not bother about what I say. Don’t listen to what I say, listen to what I am! And when I am gone, just say a good-bye to me. Don’t cling to the memories, don’t cling to that which is no more. Find another living master – the earth is never empty.
Existence is very compassionate. I don’t want you to cling to me. That is one of the faults all the old religions have committed, and I don’t want you to do it. They have all seen to it that after the master is dead there is a succession. Now the pope is not enlightened. Now your eight shankaracharyas have nothing to do with the original shankaracharya; they are not enlightened people. You are unnecessarily wasting your time and their time.
Search and you will always find, because the earth is not barren, it always produces. Whoever is thirsty will find the well somewhere.
Rather than getting lost into words, use your time in finding a charismatic personality, a living mystery, a man who has become a legend while he is alive. And when he is gone, be grateful for those moments that you lived with him. Be grateful for all that you have learned from him, but don’t get stuck there. Find out, and now it will be easier for you to find out because you have tasted one mystic, you know the taste, you know the vibe. You will be easily pulled towards the direction where you will find another awakened being. Only bodies differ, the experience of awakening is the same.
So I don’t want anybody to remember me, even when I am gone. If you have really loved me, I would like you to find someone of the same quality, so that your love goes on growing, your being goes on maturing, so that one day you are also in a state where you can help thirsty people to quench their thirst.

Osho,
What are the characteristics of an enlightened being? What is the phenomenon of self-realization, god-realization and no-realization?
There are no outside characteristics of an enlightened man. People have been searching for them for centuries. If you go to a Jaina temple, you will see statues of the twenty-four tirthankaras. The most striking thing about them is that their earlobes are touching their shoulders. According to Jainism, a characteristic of an enlightened man is that his earlobes touch his shoulders – a very strange kind of characteristic.
Then Krishna is not enlightened, Jesus is not enlightened. And unless you try some plastic surgery, you cannot hope to be enlightened. But this is sheer nonsense, because what does the earlobe have to do with enlightenment? Have you seen Rama, Krishna, Buddha, Mahavira? – all are clean-shaven. That is strange. All twenty-four tirthankaras are clean-shaven. They were far more Western than you are! Far ahead of their times!
But the idea is that the hairs of their beard and their mustache don’t grow, that that is a characteristic of an enlightened being – very strange, because that means you are missing some hormones. This is not good! This is not healthy! And if this is so, then all the Vedic seers and the people who wrote the most beautiful literature in the world, the Upanishads, were not enlightened because they all had long beards.
Don’t try to find out from the outside, otherwise you will fall into some stupidity or other. I will try to describe it to you from within, as an insider. Enlightenment simply means a man who has no longer any questions left in his life, everything is solved. Enlightenment means a man who is constantly in the same state of silence, peace and contentment whatsoever happens on the outside, success or failure, pain or pleasure, life or death.
Enlightenment means a man who has experienced something that you are also capable of, but you have not tried it. He is full of light, full of joy, full of ecstasy, twenty-four hours a day. He is almost a drunkard, drunk with the divine. His life is a song, his life is a dance, his life is a rejoicing. His presence is a blessing.
And if you want to know him, you have to be with him. You cannot watch him from the outside, you have to come close. You have to come in a state of intimacy. You have to join his caravan, you have to hold his hand. You have to feed on him, and you have to allow, to let him enter your heart. But from the outside, please don’t try to find any characteristic; these are all inner experiences.
But some indications can always be given. In the proximity of the enlightened being you will feel a certain magnetic force, a tremendous attraction, a charismatic center. Out of your fear you may not come close. It is dangerous to come close to an enlightened man, because you can come close but then you cannot go away. Coming close is risky. It is only for gamblers, not for businessmen.

Osho,
Are will and surrender two names of the same path? Kindly comment.
There is only one path. What you decide to call it does not matter. The word surrender and the word will appear to be diametrically opposite, but in reality they are complementary. They are not contradictory. It is a little subtle.
Only a man of will can surrender, because surrender needs tremendous courage. Never think that surrender is for those who are weak. Surrender is for those who are tremendously strong, so strong that they can even surrender their ego to the master. It needs tremendous courage, guts. It needs will, will to surrender. If you don’t have a will you cannot surrender. Who will surrender?
But will alone will not help. Will alone will enhance your ego and will take you away from the path. Will as a master is dangerous, harmful; will as a servant to surrender is beautiful. Use will to serve surrender and you will be on the right path. They appear to be two, but they can help each other.
You have heard the story….

A forest was on fire, and in the forest lived two beggars. One was blind, he could not see. The other was lame, he could not walk. And because they were both in the same business, competitors, they were enemies. But this was not a time for enmity or competition. The blind man could walk, but could not see where to go; the whole forest was on fire. The lame man could see that there was still a possibility to get out, but he could not move because he had no legs.
Finally, they compromised. They said, “For the time being let us forget our differences and help each other.” The blind man said, “I will take you on my shoulders. You watch and I will walk.” And they both came out of the forest alive, without being burned.

This is the situation with will and surrender. Will is blind, but it can walk fast. It is very speedy, it has tremendous power. Surrender has eyes and no legs, but it can see. If you can manage a friendship between will and surrender, and if surrender sits on the shoulders of your will, you have managed one of the greatest things in life. Then the path is very easy and the home is very close.

There were a few questions that I rejected. I would like to answer those questions briefly.
One was: Why am I condemned all around the world, and condemned especially for my teachings as far as sex is concerned? It is simple. Sex does not have much place in my teachings. Hearing me for so many days, even you can witness that sex is a very unimportant thing in my teachings. But the yellow journalist and the repressed mind of the whole of humanity takes anything I say about sex out of context – makes it into a big thing.
I have four hundred books in my name, translated into all the major languages of the world, and there is only one book on sex. But nobody talks about the three hundred and ninety-nine books. They only talk about one book – that too without understanding it! The name of the book is From Sex To Super-Consciousness. It is not about sex, it is about the transformation of sexual energy into consciousness. I am the only man who is against sex. But this whole world is full of repressed sexuality.
I am reminded of a story….

Three old men used to meet in a garden every evening. One was seventy, the other was eighty and the third was ninety. They were really ancient people.
It was Sunday evening. They met on their bench – it had become their bench. They had been meeting on that bench for as long as anybody could remember. The first old man, seventy years old, said, “I am feeling very embarrassed. The very memory makes me feel like committing suicide.”
The other two were very much shocked. They said, “What happened?”
He said, “What happened? The memory is haunting me. I cannot forget it. It was a beautiful morning and a beautiful lady was a guest in our house and I could not contain my temptation. When she was taking a bath, I went to the bathroom door, looked through the keyhole, and was caught red-handed by my mother. She created so much fuss that the whole neighborhood gathered. Everybody was lecturing me and everybody was being wise, and they all forced me to go to church and confess to the priest the sin I had committed. It was all so embarrassing. I don’t want to remember it, but it keeps on coming up again and again.”
The other two men giggled. They said, “You are stupid. This happens to everybody in childhood. I don’t think there is a single boy who has not looked through the keyhole of the bathroom.”
The seventy-year-old man said, “My God, it is not a question of childhood, it happened today!”
There was silence. The second old man, eighty years old, said, “Something has happened to me too. You have started the subject and I have to tell it, to be honest. For three days I have not made love to my wife.”
Both the old men said, “What happened?”
He said, “What happened? Whenever I started making love to her, she stopped. She said she had a headache, she turned to the other side…and this is insulting.”
The seventy-year-old man said, “But you told me you have stopped making love.”
The man said, “Yes, I have said that to you, but I have simply changed the technique. Now my technique is that for three seconds I hold my wife’s hand and press it as hard as I can, and then say good night to her and then we go to sleep. This is my love. This is all the sex that is left – three seconds pressing her hand. But for three days continuously, she has been pretending to have a headache and I have not made love.”
The third old man, the most ancient of them all, giggled. He said, “You are an idiot. You don’t know what a real problem is. Now the subject has come up, I have to tell you what my problem is. This morning when I started making love to my wife, she said, ‘Oh, you idiot, what are you doing?’ I said, ‘I am trying to make love.’ She said, ‘But you have made love twice in the night!’ I said, ‘It seems I am losing my memory…’
“I am in a real mess. You are talking about stupid things – peeping in the bathroom, not being able to press your wife’s hand. Just think of me, I have lost my memory.”

Even at the time of death, sexual repression is such that people go on thinking about it. And that is the reason why they enter again into another womb – that is, another sexual body.
I am not teaching sex. I am teaching you not to repress it so that you can transform it, not to repress it so that you can get free of it. Anything repressed will remain with you in your unconscious as a bondage. Don’t repress anything, and you will feel a tremendous freedom.
Experience everything, and you will start becoming more and more mature, you will not have to wait until the age of ninety. My own experience with my sannyasins is that just as a man becomes sexually mature at the age of fourteen, if he lives his sexual life without any guilt, without any idea of sin but simply as a natural phenomenon, by the age of forty-two he will have gone beyond it.
Every seven years there comes a change. Just as fourteen is the time when you become ripe for sexual experience, able to produce children, at the age of forty-two you start a new phase of your life. At fourteen you were entering into the world of living. At forty-two you are entering into the world of death. Just as at fourteen life needed reproduction, at forty-two life needs not sexuality but meditation.
And if you have lived your sex, you have had enough time to see that it is a child’s game. There is no question of repressing it, it simply drops of its own accord, the way it came on its own accord. You did not produce it; it was not your creation at the age of fourteen. In the same way as the breeze came at the age of fourteen, the breeze passes you by at the age of forty-two. That is the time when something more significant, something more valuable, has to be experienced. You have loved, you have seen the reality of the world, experienced all kinds of relationships – now is the time to know yourself, to be yourself, because death will be coming soon. Before death you have to be ready to meet it.
The last story….

A king dreamed in the night that a big, very ferocious shadow was standing in front of him. He asked, “Who are you and what is the purpose of your coming into my dream?”
The shadow said, “I am your death, and I am coming tomorrow evening at sunset. Remember, at the time of sunset meet me at the right place.”
And before he could ask, “Where is the right place?” – not that he was going to be at the right place, he wanted to know so that he could avoid the right place – the shadow disappeared, and out of fear the dream was broken.
It was the middle of the night. Immediately he asked all the wise men, astrologers, palmists, prophets, to gather because they had to decipher the meaning of the dream. They discussed, and as are the ways of the so-called knowledgeable, they couldn’t agree. They were all talking, discussing, everybody had his own explanation – and the king was more and more confused.
The king’s old servant was watching all this, and the sun was rising; half the night had passed. He whispered to the king, “Sir, these people are never going to come to any conclusion. All they know is fighting, quarreling, arguing. You don’t have time for that, the sun has already risen, and how long will it take for it to set? There is not much time. My suggestion is, let them discuss. You take your fastest horse and escape far away from this capital and this palace.”
The advice appeared to be very relevant. The king picked the best horse he had, and by the evening he had moved hundreds of miles away from the palace.
To rest for the night, he entered into a mango grove. He stroked the horse and said to the horse, “You really proved your mettle. I had no idea that you could run so fast. You risked everything, as if you understood my problem that death is close and you have to risk all your energy. I am thankful to you.”
At that very time the sun was setting, and suddenly he became aware of a hand on his shoulder. He looked back. The old shadow that he had seen in the dream was standing there and said, “I have also to thank your horse, because without him I was worried how you were going to manage to reach the right place at the right time. But you managed. The whole credit goes to your horse.”

Whether death is a few hours away, or a few days or few years, it makes no difference. Just as one prepares for life, one has to prepare for death too. And the preparation for death I call religiousness.
The art of religiousness is the art of preparing for death and dying in such a way that nothing dies – only the body is left behind and you move into eternity.

============================================================

Osho,
What is the meaning of sannyas in the world today?
The word sannyas is one of the most significant in the human language. In the past it was given a wrong meaning. That wrong meaning destroyed its beauty, its joy, its laughter. The wrong meaning was renunciation. Renunciation of what? Renunciation of the body. Renunciation of all the pleasures of the body, the mind, the heart. Renunciation of the world, of the people, of those you love, of those you are grateful to. Renunciation of your parents who have given birth to you, who have sacrificed everything for you. Renunciation of your wives and your husbands who live for you and who die for you. Renunciation of small children who without you will not have a shelter in the world, without you will be orphans, beggars.
That was the old meaning of the word sannyas. It has destroyed humanity from its very roots.
On the one hand all the old religions say that God created the world, God created you, God created everything. And at the same time they say, renounce what God has created. It seems your priests are more wise than God. It seems that what God creates, your priests are against.
Let me summarize it in a single statement: all the religions and their priests are against God. If God is the creator of the world, then to renounce it or to teach renunciation is an act of sabotage. It cannot be called religious, it is not spiritual.
My sannyas gives it the right meaning it deserves. My sannyas does not mean renunciation, it means rejoicing – rejoicing in this beautiful world, rejoicing with totality, intensity, awareness, compassion, love, of all that existence has provided for you without any guilt, without any sin. All ideas about guilt and sin are created to exploit you.
Yes, man commits mistakes, but mistakes are not sin. It is human to err. Mistakes can be corrected, just a little intelligence is needed. You need not ask to be forgiven for your mistakes. You need not go to the Ganges, to take a bath to get rid of your sins – that is simply stupid. You need not go to Kaaba or to Jerusalem. All your mistakes need a little understanding so that you can avoid them.
I am reminded of a story….

A man used to sell Gandhi caps. And particularly at election times he earned enough to rest for five years. The elections were coming nearer, but the man was getting old. He was sick. He had prepared thousands of caps. He said to his young son, “I will not be able to go to the market” – which was a few miles away from his village – “you will have to go, but it is not a difficult thing. There is great demand for the caps, as the elections come closer.
“Just remember one thing: going to the market, the road is tremendously beautiful, very scenic. On both sides it has great, beautiful trees, with thick shadow, and one wants to rest, to sit for a while. I want you to be warned about what happened to me once when I was resting under a banyan tree.
“It was so calm, so quiet, that I fell asleep. When I woke up I was surprised. My bag of caps was empty – all the caps were gone. I looked all around, and then I heard monkeys giggling above me on the tree. They all had the Gandhi caps on. Just the way I was wearing one cap, they had imitated me. Although I was in great misery that they had destroyed my whole business, still I enjoyed. They looked so beautiful, as if all the great leaders from New Delhi had come on the tree! Then I remembered the advice my father had given to me, because the same thing had happened to him. History repeats. He had told me that if something like this happens, just throw your own cap. I threw my cap, and all the monkeys threw their caps. I collected the caps and went to the market….
“So you remember! In the first place, don’t stay under a tree where monkeys are. And in case you have to rest, and something like this happens, remember the advice.”
The son went, and the father was right – there was a beautiful, big banyan tree. Hundreds of bullock carts could have rested in its shadow. It was so calm and so quiet, so far away from all villages that he could not resist the temptation to rest for a while. He was tired too, it was a hot day.
He rested, and when he woke up, he found the bag was empty. He looked up. The monkeys were sitting on the tree with the caps on their heads. But he was not puzzled, because he knew the secret. He threw his cap. One monkey came down, took the cap, went up the tree. He could not believe what had happened. The monkeys had learned! And this was the only monkey who had not got a cap! They were waiting for when this idiot would throw his cap…and they had a great rejoicing.

Even monkeys learn.
It seems only man does not learn.
Your old sannyas has in every way destroyed your life. It has made everything condemned. Your love is sin, your being comfortable is sin, your being rich is sin…Jesus says, “Blessed are the poor, for they shall inherit the kingdom of God.” Can anybody who has a little sense, agree with Jesus that “blessed are the poor”? If the poor are blessed, then why is everybody trying to remove the poverty from the world? Then let the poverty grow because it is a blessing! The more poor you are, the more blessed you are.
Nepal is one of the poorest countries in the world. You are blessed according to Jesus. You should be happy. You will enter into the kingdom of God before any American.
In fact, the American cannot enter at all, because another statement of Jesus is: “A camel can pass through the eye of a needle, but the rich man cannot pass through the gates of paradise.”
These people have helped you to be poor. And I don’t see that poverty has any spirituality in it. I don’t see that you cannot meditate living in a comfortable house – that you have to meditate only when you are uncomfortable, that you have to stand on your head, that only then can you reach paradise.
It is very strange, because I have seen thousands of descriptions of God, but I have not come across a single description in which he is standing on his head. If God is not doing shirshasana, then why should you be bothered? Why should you torture your body? I have not come across a single description where God goes on fasts. Then why should you fast?
But the whole old idea of sannyas was that to attain to paradise you have to live in misery, you have to go through suffering. I don’t see that there is any need. I say to you: you can go singing, you can go dancing, you can go rejoicing. And this is my absolute trust – that God, or existence, cannot be against laughter, cannot be against rejoicing, cannot be against joy.
I don’t think that in suffering, poverty, torturing yourself, torturing others because of your renunciation, you are becoming beloved of existence. You are going farther away from the source of life; you are coming closer to death, and death is not the goal of religion. The goal of religion is eternal life, and life includes rejoicing.
Hence I teach a sannyas which is just the opposite of the old sannyas – diametrically opposite. I want my people to go to heaven, to paradise – all the way dancing, singing songs of joy. And I think they will be the first to enter into the kingdom of God, not the people who are basically sick.
I would like you to remember what the old religions have been teaching to people. They have been making them schizophrenic. They have been creating a split in their personality. They are making them divided against themselves. There have been saints, whose only quality and contribution is that they were very efficient in torturing themselves. You know perfectly well they will lie down on a bed of thorns. This is tapascharya, this is austerity. But do you think existence wants you to lie down on a bed of thorns? Is existence a sadist that it wants you to be tortured?
There have been Christian sects – they are still in existence – which wear shoes with nails inside protruding into their feet, so when they walk they are continuously hurting, wounding their feet; continuously blood is flowing. They have belts around their waists with the same device – nails reaching deep into their skin. The wounds remain for their whole life, because those belts cannot be removed. They are locked, and their keys are thrown away. They have taken that austerity for their whole life. Do you think this is something healthy, something sane?

In Soviet Russia, before the revolution, there was a great Christian sect – the most prominent and the most respected. But you will be surprised when you come to know the reason for their respectability. They used to cut off their genitals. They were real celibates, because a man can take the vow of being a celibate but his genitals are there intact. Who knows? He may be deceiving…!
Thousands of Christian monks would cut off their genitals publicly. The women were at a loss, but they came up with an idea – they started cutting off their breasts. This was thought to be a great spiritual act. And the same kind of thing, more or less, has prevailed all over the world in the name of sannyas.
I want the beautiful word sannyas to be taken away from all its old associations, and I want to give it a new meaning, a new fragrance, a new health, a new wholeness. I want you to remember a simple fact: that what is natural is divine, and what is unnatural is evil.
Celibacy is evil because it is unnatural. To follow the course of nature, to remain in a deep contact with all that is natural, not fighting it but in a deep friendship, in a let-go – that is my definition of sannyas.
You can swim against the river, against the current – that was the old sannyas. I don’t say to you even to swim. I want you to float and go with the river in a deep let-go, in a deep trust, wherever it leads. Existence cannot deceive you. We are born of it, we are its children. How can it deceive us? It does not deceive the rosebushes; it brings them beautiful roses. It does not deceive the lotuses. It does not deceive the birds. It does not deceive the sun, the moon, the stars. Why should it deceive its greatest creation, human consciousness – its highest peak? No, it is impossible.
Existence is with you.
You just have to learn how to be with it.
And to be with it totally, without any conditions, is what I mean by sannyas.

Osho,
Is there any possibility for enlightenment for a nonserious meditator?
There is only possibility of enlightenment if you are a nonserious meditator because seriousness is sickness, seriousness is not health. Seriousness is a tense state of mind, it is sadness; it is not overflowing joy. Yes, the old traditions will tell you, “Be serious.” I cannot say that to you. Why be serious? The birds singing in the morning are not serious. The stars in the night are not serious. The flowers in their different colors and fragrances are not serious. Except man, have you anything else in existence which is serious? The oceans, the rivers, the mountains…nothing is serious, except man.
Who has made man serious? It is your old traditions which have created the idea that life is not a rejoicing, that life is not playfulness; that life has to be serious, only then can you enter into paradise, only then can you meet God. But I want to tell you, even God will not give you an audience if you reach there with a serious, long face. You have to go there like an innocent child, playful, joyous. You have to learn something of the sense of humor. All your old religions are lacking in that dimension – a sense of humor. They are all serious.

In my village, as happens all over the East, every year Ramleela was played – the life of Rama.
The man who used to play the part of Ravana, the enemy of Rama who steals Rama’s wife, was a great wrestler. He was the champion of the whole district, and the next year he was going to stand for the championship of the whole state. We used to take a bath in the river almost simultaneously in the morning, so we became friends. I told him, “Every year you become Ravana, every year you are being deceived. Just the moment that you are going to break Shiva’s bow so that you can get married to Sita, the daughter of Janak, a messenger comes running in and informs you that your capital of Sri Lanka is on fire. So you have to go, rush back to your country. And meanwhile, Rama manages to break the bow and marry the girl. Don’t you get bored every year with the same thing?”
He said, “But this is how the story goes.”
I said, “The story is in our hands if you listen to my suggestion. You must have seen that most of the people are asleep because they have seen the same thing year after year, generation after generation – make it a little juicy.”
He said, “What do you mean?”
I said, “This time you do one thing I say.”
And he did it!
When the messenger came with the message: “Your capital, the golden Sri Lanka, is on fire, you have to get there soon,” he said, “You shut up, idiot” – he spoke in English!
That’s what I had told him! All the people who were asleep woke up: “Who is speaking English in the Ramleela?”
And Ramana said, “You go away. I don’t care. You have deceived me every year. This time I am going to marry Sita.”
And he went and broke the bow of Shiva to pieces, and threw it into the mountains – it was just a bamboo bow. And he asked Janak, “Bring…where is your daughter? My jumbo-jet is waiting!”

It was so hilarious. Even after forty years, whenever I meet somebody from my village, they remember that Ramleela. They said, “Nothing like that has ever happened.”
The manager had to drop the curtains. And the man was a great wrestler, and at least twelve people had to carry him out.
That day the Ramleela could not be played. And next day they had to change Ravana; they found another person.
By the river, Ravana met me. He said, “You disturbed my whole thing.”
I said, “But did you see the people clapping, enjoying, laughing? For years you have been playing the part and nobody has clapped, nobody has laughed. It was worth it!”

Religion needs a religious quality. A few qualities are missing. One of the most important is a sense of humor.

They stopped me meeting their actors. They made it clear to every actor that if anybody listened to me or met me, he would not be allowed to act. But they forgot to tell one man who was not an actor….
He was a carpenter. He used to come to do some work in my house also. So I said to him, “I cannot approach the actors this year. Last year was enough! Although I did no harm to anybody – everybody loved it, the whole city appreciated it. But now they are guarding every actor and they don’t allow me close to them. But you are not an actor. Your function is some other work. But you can help me.”
He said, “Whatever I can do, I will do, because last year it was really great. Can I be of some help?”
I said, “Certainly.”
And he did it….
In the war, Lakshmana, Rama’s younger brother, gets wounded by a poisonous arrow. It is fatal. The physicians say that unless a certain herbal plant from the mountain Arunachal is brought, he cannot be saved, by the morning he will be dead. He is lying down on the stage unconscious. Rama is crying.
Hanuman, his most devoted follower, says, “Don’t be worried. I will go immediately to Arunachal, find the herb, bring it before the morning. I just want some indications from the physician how to find it, how it looks. There may be so many herbs on the Arunachal, and the time is short, soon it is night.”
The physician said, “There is no difficulty. That special herb has a unique quality. In the night it radiates and is full of light so you can see it. So anywhere you see a luminous herb you can bring it.”
Hanuman goes to Sri Arunachal, but he is puzzled because the whole of Arunachal is full of luminous herbs. It is not the only herb that has that special quality. There are many other herbs which have the same quality of being luminous in the night.
Now the poor Hanuman – he is just a monkey – is at a loss what to do. So he decides to take the whole mountain, and put the mountain there in front of the physician to find the herb.
The carpenter was on top of the roof. He had to pull the rope on which Hanuman comes with a cardboard mountain with lighted candles. And I had told him, “Stop exactly in the middle. Let him hang there, with the mountain and everything!”
And he managed it!
The manager rushed out. The whole crowd was agog with excitement at what was happening. And Hanuman was perspiring, because he was hanging on the ropes with the mountain also in the other hand. Something had got stuck in the wheel on which the rope was going to be rolled. The manager rushed up. He asked the carpenter…and the carpenter said, “I don’t know what has gone wrong. The rope has got stuck somewhere.”
In a hurry, finding nothing, the manager cut the ropes, and Hanuman with his mountain fell on the stage. And naturally he was angry. But the thousands of people were immensely happy. That made him even more angry.
Rama continued repeating the lines he had been told to say. He said, “Hanuman, my devoted friend…”
And Hanuman said, “To hell with your friends! Perhaps I have fractures.”
Rama went on saying, “My brother is dying.”
Hanuman said, “He can die any moment. What I want to know is, who cut the rope? I will kill him.”
Again the curtain had to be dropped, the Ramleela postponed. And the manager and the people who were organizing all approached my father saying, “Your son is destroying everything. He’s making a mockery of our religion.”
I said, “I’m not making a mockery of your religion. I’m simply giving it a little sense of humor.”

I would like people to laugh. What is the point of repeating an old story every year? Then everybody is asleep because they know the story, they know every word of it. It is absolutely pointless.
But it is very difficult for the old traditionalists, the orthodox people to accept laughter. You cannot laugh in a church. Have you seen any picture or statue of Jesus in which he is even smiling? Laughter is miles away. He cannot even smile. Have you seen Buddha or Mahavira laughing? No, they are all serious people, very serious. Even if you are laughing, when you come across Mahavira you will stop. He carries an atmosphere of seriousness around himself.
My approach is to create a world where laughter is good, is healthy, is supported not condemned. I would like our temples to be full of laughter, singing, dancing. I would like our churches to be full of music. I would like all our religious places to be playful.
How strange it is that you continuously go on saying that the world is God’s leela, and you never understand the meaning of the word leela. Leela means playfulness. If God is playful, then who are your saints not to be playful? If the whole of existence is divine play, then our lives should also be a part of it, a divine play.
So don’t be worried about meditating nonseriously; in fact, that is the right way to meditate. Meditate playfully, nonseriously, because whenever you meditate seriously you become tense. Meditation needs relaxation. Meditation needs a joyful heart. It is not work, it is play.
So you can meditate anywhere – taking a shower you can meditate, sleeping in your bed you can meditate, making love to your wife or your husband you can meditate – because meditation has no barriers, no conditions.
Meditation simply means a silent state of mind. You can do anything with the silent state of mind. And whatever you do will become more graceful, will become more creative, will bring better flowers, better fruits. Your life will become in every dimension richer. I am all for richness, in all the dimensions of life. Money alone is not richness.
There are so many greater things than money. If you can meditate in the different areas of your activities you will be making different dimensions richer, deeper. But don’t be serious. If a serious person is disturbed, he is angry.
I remember, my grandfather was a very serious meditator….

I was always watching. Whenever he meditated I would disturb him. Anything was enough. Just pulling the lobe of his ear – and he is meditating – or closing his nose…And he would be furious. I would say, “A meditator is not supposed to be so angry and so furious. And I know perfectly that when there is a customer in the shop, even meditating, you tell him to wait. This is strange. You don’t get angry about that. Then you forget all your seriousness. A dog enters in the house, and you are meditating and you start pointing to the dog saying, ‘Throw him out.’ What kind of meditation is this?
“The best will be: don’t pretend to be serious, be human, and there is no problem. You can continue to be silent and take care of the customer. You can remain silent and take care of the dog. You can remain silent and take care of me.”

But all the so-called religious people are very angry people. They think they have earned so much virtue that they can afford to be angry. On small matters they are ready to burst and freak out. This is because of their seriousness.

“Otherwise,” I told my grandfather, “if you are really in meditation, and I come to you, you can hold my hand, you can dance with me. You can play with me and still your inner world remains silent, watchful.”

Meditation is totally an undercurrent activity, so nothing touches it. There is no need to be serious. In fact, seriousness is dangerous. It won’t allow you to be meditative.

I am reminded of a man who was a very angry type, so much so that once he burned his own house. He was so angry with the architect that he burned his own house. Another time he was so angry with his wife, that he pushed her into the well and she died. That was too much!
At that very time there was staying in the village a famous Jaina monk, and this man was also a Jaina. The house was burned, the wife was dead; he had no children, no parents, all was finished. And this is how your old sannyasins used to be: when everything was finished, they would become sannyasins, they would renounce the world. The reality was that the world had renounced them!
He went to the Jaina monk and he said, “I want to renounce the world” – now there was no world left – “but I am a very angry man. I have destroyed my whole life because of my anger, and I have come to your feet, to be initiated. All I want is you to somehow help me to get rid of my anger.”
In Jainism there are five stages of initiation. At the fifth stage the sannyasin has to become naked. Slowly, slowly he has to drop things: some clothes, less clothes, then one cloth, and then finally he becomes naked.
The master asked him, “At what stage do you want to be initiated?” He said, “Is that a question to ask me? At the final stage.”
This is the same man who had burned the house, who had killed his wife – the same angry man.
But the Jaina monk was very happy. He said, “So many have come to me, but they always start from the first stage. You are really courageous.”
He was not courageous, he was simply an angry man, revengeful. Now he was taking revenge with himself. He had been angry to his wife, he had been angry to the architect, he had destroyed everything in anger. Now he wanted to destroy himself. The anger was turning upon himself.
But the Jaina monk misunderstood; he was not a master. He initiated him and because of his anger he gave him a new name, Muni Shantinath. Shantinath means master of peace. And Shantinath started great austerities – very soon he had defeated his master. It was a question of his old ego and his anger. He started torturing himself as much as possible. It was the same anger. If there had been a master with eyes to see, he would have seen that the man was not changing, he was the same man. The actions were different, but the approach, the attitude, the energy was the same.
Shantinath became very famous. After twenty years, when he had become famous all over the country, one of his friends came to see him. He was staying in the capital. There were thousands of followers and they said they had seen many monks, but they had never seen such austerity, such asceticism, such sacrifice, such devotion, such utter renunciation of all comforts.
The friend went to see. He looked at the face; he could not see any difference. Those eyes were still burning with anger. It was not the fire of self-realization, it was the fire of anger. He came close to the stage where the great master, Shantinath, was sitting. He asked him, “Master?”
Shantinath had seen him, had recognized him, but it was below him to recognize that he had recognized him. He was a great master, and the friend was an ordinary human being.
The friend could see that he had recognized him, but that he did not want to accept it. He came closer and said, “I’m very much impressed by Your Holiness. Just one thing I want to know: what is your name?”
And Shantinath was already angry. He said, “You don’t listen to the radio? You don’t watch the television? You don’t read newspapers?”
He said, “I’m a poor villager, uneducated. It will be great kindness of you if you can tell me your name.”
Shantinath said, “My name is Muni Shantinath Maharaj.”
The man said, “Many, many thanks.”
After a few minutes he asked again, “Sir, I have forgotten your name. Just once more.”
And Shantinath was afire. He said, “You idiot. I have just told you my name and you have forgotten within two minutes. The whole world knows my name. My name is Muni Shantinath Maharaj. And this is the last time, remember. If you forget again, then nobody can be worse than me. I will teach you a lesson.”
The man said, “No, I will not forget. I am continuously repeating it to remember.”
Within two minutes he came even closer and he said, “Your Holiness?”
And Shantinath took his staff into his hand. He said, “Yes?”
The man said, “Please don’t be annoyed with me, I’m a poor villager. I simply want to know what your name is.”
And Shantinath hit him on his head and said, “This will make you remember my name. My name is Muni Shantinath Maharaj.”
The man said, “I’m from your village, your friend. I simply wanted to know whether you had changed or not. Twenty years have gone down the Ganges without any change in you. You are the same person. You can deceive the whole world, but how are you managing to deceive yourself?”

Please don’t think of meditation as seriousness. It is a very playful activity. Make it as light as possible. It should not be a burden on your heart.
It should give you wings to fly in the sky.
It should not become a Himalayan weight on your soul.

Osho,
First, what happens to the body, mind and soul when enlightenment happens?
Second, why is one enlightened person different from another enlightened person?
Third, what is satori and what is its impact on the body?
First, satori is simply the Japanese name for samadhi. It is the same as enlightenment.
Second, why do enlightened people differ from each other? They differ because existence does not like duplication.
Existence does not believe in carbon copies, it loves originals – and how can they be the same? Their circumstances are different, their times are different, their own past lives are different, their talents are different. Everything is different.
For example, how can I be Rama? Even if it were possible, I would refuse. It is good that it is not possible.
Rama’s wife is stolen. I don’t have a wife – of course, I could manage! If you all can manage it, why can I not manage? But I cannot do what Rama did. I cannot collect all the monkeys, and all the wolves, and all the squirrels, and all kinds of animals to fight with me to get my wife back. I think you will not do it either!
I have heard about a man whose wife had escaped with one of his friends….

After three days he reported, “Please write the report: My wife is missing for three days. My friend is missing also. The possibility is that she has escaped with him.”
The man on the register said, “I’m sorry for you. I have all the sympathy for you, but I am the wrong person. This is a post office. You should go to the police station. In the first place, where have you been for three days? And in the second place, even when you come after three days, you come to a post office to report it! Don’t you know where the police station is? It is just across the road!”
The man said, “I know where it is, but my wife has escaped before. I reported it to the police and those idiots brought her back! I’m not going to report to the police. That much is certain. If you want to take the report, take it, otherwise I am going home.”

Rama also did not treat Sita, his wife, in a very gentlemanly way. You will be surprised that when Sita came back after the war – Rama had won the war and Sita came to his camp – his first words were utterly ugly. He could not say anything loving to her. He could not even say anything nice to her. What he said is very disrespectful of womanhood. He said, “Listen, woman. I have not fought the war for you. I can have as many women like you as I want. I have fought the war for the glory of my own family, my heritage, my forefathers, their name, their respectability. That is the cause of the war. You are just a superficial excuse.”
Do you want me to say such a thing? I cannot conceive….
And then he forced her to go through a fire test to see whether she was still chaste or not.
If he had really been a man, he would have gone together with Sita through the fire test. He also was three years away from the wife. And it is a known psychological fact that women can remain celibate longer than men, because women’s sexuality is negative and men’s sexuality is positive.
It was beautiful of Sita that she did not ask him to come along with her into the fire test. That woman has proved something higher, something superior, something spiritual in her. Rama failed utterly.
He had some nerve to ask her to go through the fire test. You should not have double standards. You should have a single standard for both. At least that much should be expected from a man who is being worshipped by millions of people as an incarnation of God.
There are so many things, but one particularly I would like to emphasize. One fourth of the Hindus are sudras, untouchables. For centuries the Hindu religion, the Hindu priesthood has deprived one fourth of their brothers and sisters of all the rights of being human. They have been treated like cattle…even worse. They have not been allowed to read the Vedas or even to listen. They have been deprived of all spiritual evolution.
A brahmin brought one untouchable to Rama’s court and told Rama, “This untouchable was listening to the Vedas we were reciting. He was hiding behind the trees. It needs your judgment.”
And what was Rama’s judgment? – so inhuman that you cannot believe. He ordered that lead should be melted on the fire and poured into both of his ears. That was his punishment!
Do you want me to do such things?
Even this single instance is enough for me, that Rama has no claim on enlightenment. He is simply in the hands of the priests – a puppet and nothing else.
So one thing: the enlightened people that you think are enlightened, are not necessarily enlightened. It may be just a traditional idea that you have never thought about, you have never bothered about. Or perhaps you are afraid to think about such things because they will shake your faith. Most of your enlightened people are not enlightened. Those who are enlightened are bound to be different, for the simple reason that each enlightened person has a unique quality to his being.
Buddha cannot be Mahavira; Mahavira cannot be Bodhidharma; Bodhidharma cannot be Basho. Basho cannot be Baal Shem, for the simple reason that Basho is a poet, a poet of the highest quality. Before he becomes enlightened he is already at the height of his poetic creativity. And when he becomes enlightened, naturally his enlightenment flows through his poetry.
Mahavira has no poetry in his life. You cannot expect that when he becomes enlightened he will write poetry – that is impossible. That is not his preparation, that is not his talent, and that is not his genius.
Basho writes the smallest poems. In Japan, they are called haikus – just a few words. Nowhere in the world have such small poems existed, and with so much meaning – so profound, so deep. One of his haikus will help you to understand what my sannyas is – let-go.
Basho’s haiku is:
Sitting silently,
Doing nothing –
And the grass grows by itself.
That’s all, but it has been proclaimed by the great geniuses of the world as one of the greatest expressions of religiousness. “Sitting silently, doing nothing – and the grass grows by itself.” All that you have to do, is not to do anything. You have just to sit silently and wait. You need not pull the grass for its growth, it will grow by itself. In silence, in absolute inaction your spirituality grows by itself.
He has written another haiku which will explain the meaning of meditation – and nonserious meditation:
An ancient pond…
Just visualize, because he has few words. If you miss…and the only way to miss is if you don’t visualize, if you get stuck in the words. The words are very few, but by the time you figure out what they mean, they are gone.
The ancient pond,
A frog jumps in –
P-l-o-p!
This is the whole poem. Just let me help you to visualize: an ancient pond, absolute silence everywhere – not even a ripple in the pond. And a frog suddenly jumps in. His jumping in the pond, and there is sound: plop!
But the sound deepens the silence of the ancient pond. That is what he is wanting to say without saying it. That sound of the frog deepens the silence when it disappears. Perhaps you were not aware of the silence. It was so much there, you may have taken it for granted. You may have forgotten it, but the frog has reminded you. By jumping and creating a little sound, and then suddenly the whole silence, you will feel grateful to the frog. It is not a disturbance; you will not feel angry. If you were a serious meditator you would like to kill the frog.
You came so far away to the ancient pond to meditate – and this frog seems to be some enemy out of your past life. And is this the point, the time…to disturb? If you are serious you have missed. If you are nonserious, playful, you will enjoy the frog. You will be grateful to the frog because it has deepened the silence.
And there is nothing more than that – a deepening silence, which goes on and on and on….
I am all for this life, and I want this life of yours to be a beautiful experience, a tremendous journey into ecstasy, moment to moment.
To me, spirituality is something not connected with holy books, not connected with religions. It is something that grows within you if you can manage a little sense of humor, a little sense of playfulness, and a little time for being near the ancient pond.
Allowing silence to be…Silence is the only secret there is.

============================================================

Osho,
Would you please explain what the real differences between men and women are?
The psychology movement is basically male chauvinist, and strangely, it has exploited women more than men.
Most of the differences between men and women are because of thousands of years of conditioning. They are not fundamental to nature, but there are a few differences which give them unique beauty, individuality. Those differences can be counted very easily.
One is that the woman is capable of producing life; man is not. In that way he is inferior, and that inferiority has played a great role in the domination of women by men. The inferiority complex works in this way: it pretends to be superior –to deceive oneself and to deceive the whole world. So man down the ages has been destroying the woman’s genius, talents, capacities, so that he can prove himself superior –to himself and to the world.
Because the woman gives birth, she remains for nine months or more absolutely vulnerable, dependent on a man. Men have exploited this in a very ugly way. And that is a physiological difference; it makes no difference at all.
The psychology of the woman is corrupted by the man telling her things which are not true, making her a slave to man, reducing her to a secondary citizen of the world. And the reason for that was that he is muscularly more powerful. But the muscular power is part of animality. If that is going to decide the superiority, then any animal is more muscular than a man.
But the real differences are certainly there, and we have to search for them behind the pile of invented differences. One difference I see is that a woman is more capable of love than a man is. A man’s love is more or less a physical necessity; a woman’s love is not. It is something greater and higher; it is a spiritual experience. That’s why the woman is monogamous and man is polygamous. The man would like to have all the world’s women and still he would not be satisfied. His discontent is infinite.
The woman can be satisfied with one love, utterly fulfilled, because she does not look at the body of the man, she looks at the innermost qualities. She does not fall in love with a man who has a beautiful muscular body, she falls in love with a man who has a charisma –something indefinable but immensely attractive –who has a mystery to be explored. She wants her man not to be just a man, but an adventure in discovering consciousness.
The man is very weak as far as sexuality is concerned –he can have only one orgasm. The woman is infinitely superior –she can have multiple orgasms. And this has been one of the most troublesome matters. The man’s orgasm is local, confined to his genitals. The woman’s orgasm is total, not confined to the genitals. Her whole body is sexual, and she can have a beautiful orgasmic experience a thousandfold bigger, deeper, more enriching, more nourishing than a man can have.
But the tragedy is that her whole body has to be aroused, and the man is not interested in it, he has never been interested in it. He has used the woman as a sex machine just to relieve his own sexual tensions. Within seconds he is finished. And by the time he is finished the woman has not even begun.
The moment a man is finished making love he turns and goes to sleep. The sexual act helps him to have a good sleep –more relaxed, with all the tensions released in the sexual activity. And every woman has cried and wept when she has seen this. She had not even started, she had not moved. She has been used, and that is the ugliest thing in life: when you are used as a thing, as a mechanism, as an object. She cannot forgive the man for using her.
To make the woman also an orgasmic partner the man has to learn foreplay, to be in no hurry to go to bed. He has to make love something of an art. They can have a place, a love temple where incense is burning, no glaring lights, just candles…and he should approach the woman when he is in a beautiful mood, joyous, so he can share. What happens ordinarily is that men and women fight before they make love. That poisons love. Love is a kind of treaty that the fight is finished –at least for tonight. It is a bribe, it is cheating.
A man should make love the way a painter paints –when he feels the urge filling his heart –or the way the poet composes poetry, or a musician plays music. The woman’s body should be taken as a musical instrument; it is. When the man is feeling joy, then sex is not just a release, a relaxation, a sleeping method. Then there is foreplay. He dances with the woman, he sings with the woman –with beautiful music vibrating the love temple, with the incense that they love. It should be something of the sacred, because there is nothing sacred in ordinary life unless you make love sacred. And that will be the beginning of opening the door to the whole phenomenon of super-consciousness.
Love never should be forced, love never should be an attempt. It should not be in the mind at all –you are playing, dancing, singing, enjoying…part of this long joy. If it happens, then it is beautiful.
When love happens it has beauty. When it is made to happen, it is ugly.
And while you are making love with the man on top of the woman…it is known as the missionary posture. The East became aware of this ugliness that the man was heavier, taller and more muscular and was crushing a delicate being.
In the East, the way has always been just the opposite: the woman on top. Crushed under the weight of the man, the woman has no mobility. Only the man moves, so he comes to orgasm within seconds and the woman is simply in tears. She has been a partner, but she was not involved in it –she has been used.
When the woman is on top she has more mobility, the man has less mobility, and that will bring their orgasms closer to each other. And when both go into orgasmic experience, it is something of the other world. It is the first glimpse of samadhi; it is the first glimpse that man is not the body. He forgets the body, he forgets the world. Both the man and the woman move into a new dimension they have never explored.
The woman has the capacity for multiple orgasms, so the man has to be as slow as possible. But the reality is, he is in such a hurry in everything that he destroys the whole relationship. He should be very relaxed so that the woman can have multiple orgasms. His orgasm should come at the end when the woman’s orgasm has reached to the peak. It is a simple question of understanding.
There are natural differences –they have nothing to do with conditioning. There are other differences. For example, a woman is more centered than a man; it starts happening even in the womb of the mother. An experienced mother who has given birth to two or three children can tell you after a few months of pregnancy whether the newcomer is going to be a girl or a boy, because the boy starts making a fuss, kicking in her womb, moving –he is on the way. But the girl remains absolutely silent. So that is not a question of conditioning.
The female is more serene, more silent, more patient, is capable of waiting. Perhaps because of these qualities she has more resistance to diseases and she lives longer than a man. Because of her serenity, her delicateness, she can fulfill a man’s life immensely. She can surround man’s life in a very soothing, cozy atmosphere. But the man is afraid –he does not want to be surrounded by the woman, he does not want to let her create a cozy warmth around him. He is afraid because that way he will become dependent. So for centuries he has been keeping her at a distance. And he is afraid because he knows deep down that the woman is more than he is. She can give birth to life. Nature has chosen her to reproduce, not man.
Man’s function in reproduction is almost nil. This inferiority has created the greatest problem –man started cutting the woman’s wings. He started in every way reducing her, condemning her, so that he could at least believe that he is superior. He has treated women as cattle –even worse.
In China, for thousands of years, the woman was not thought to have a soul, so the husband could kill her and the law would not interfere –she was his possession. If he wanted to destroy his furniture it was not illegal. If he wanted to destroy his woman it was not illegal. This is the ultimate insult –that the woman has no soul.
Man has deprived woman of education, of financial independence. He has deprived her of social mobility because he is afraid. He knows she is superior, he knows she is beautiful, he knows that giving her independence will create danger. So down the centuries there has been no independence for women.
The Mohammedan woman even has to keep her face covered, so that except her husband, nobody can see the beauty of her face, the depth of her eyes.
In Hinduism, the woman has to die when the husband dies –what a great jealousy. You possessed her your whole life, and even after death you want to possess her. You are afraid. She is beautiful, and when you are gone, who knows? She may find another partner, perhaps better than you.
So the system of sati has prevailed for thousands of years –the most ugly phenomenon you can imagine.
The husband dies. Maybe the woman is still young and at the prime of her youth so she has to be forced to jump on the funeral pyre. To make it possible, a special arrangement was made. Purified butter was poured in large quantities on the funeral pyre. It creates so much smoke that you cannot see what is happening. Almost like a dark cloud it covers the whole funeral pyre. Then surrounding it –and it is so hot that the musicians had to stand far away –great trumpets, drums, and all kinds of musical instruments are used with the excuse that this is a celebration, but they are just used to drown the screaming of the living woman who is being burned.
She would like to come out, and around the funeral pyre there are priests with burning torches in their hands so that if the woman tries to run out they will push her back into the funeral pyre. Behind the musicians there are a great number of priests shouting loudly and chanting mantras from the ancient Vedas.
This whole scene is arranged just to kill a woman and so that nobody should know that she was killed against her will. And the whole crowd outside is joyous and cheering because it is a great event –a woman has proven her love to the last moment of her husband’s life.
How many millions of women have been burned this way for the simple reason that the man is jealous that after he is gone, what guarantee is there…?
It was the British government’s rule in India that stopped it, because it was simply murder and nothing else. But then Hindus prevented the widow from marrying again. They shaved her head –that beautiful hair that was part of her personality. They took away all her ornaments and said that she could not use any color in her clothes, she had to wear only white. They tried in every way to make her ugly. She cannot join in any ceremony…she is abandoned. Even in her own house she cannot enter the kitchen, but has to sit outside. And she cannot ask for what she likes. Whatever is given to her, the leftovers, she has to live on. She cannot sleep on a bed, she has to just lie down on the floor.
This is worse than death. This way she may live fifty years, has to do all the menial work of the household, and she has to keep herself hidden from people’s eyes.
Man is very egoistic. That’s why I call him male chauvinistic. Man has created this society, and in this society there is no place for the woman –and she has tremendous qualities of her own.
For example, if man has the possibility of intelligence, the woman has the possibility of love. It does not mean she cannot have intelligence; she can have intelligence, she just has to be given the chance to develop it. But love she is born with –she has more compassion, more kindness, more understanding.
Man and woman are two strings of one harp, but both are in suffering separate from each other. And because they are suffering and do not know the reason, they start taking revenge on each other.
The woman can be of immense help in creating an organic society. She is different from man, but not unequal. She is as equal to a man as any other man. She has talents of her own which are absolutely needed.
It is not enough to earn money, it is not enough to become a success in the world; more necessary is a beautiful home, and the woman has the capacity to change any house into a home. She can fill it with love; she has that sensitivity. She can rejuvenate man, help him relax.
In the Upanishads there is a very strange blessing for new couples. A new couple comes to the seer of the Upanishads and he gives his blessing. He says to the girl specifically, “I hope you will become a mother of ten children, and finally, your husband will be your eleventh child. And unless you become a mother to your husband, you have not succeeded in being a true wife.” It is very strange but has immense psychological insight in it, because this is what the modern psychology finds, that every man is looking in the woman for his mother, and every woman is looking in the man for her father.
That’s why every marriage is a failure: you cannot find your mother. The woman you have married has not come to your house to be your mother, she wants to be your wife, a lover. But the Upanishadic blessing, almost five thousand or six thousand years old, gives an insight to the modern psychology. A woman, whatsoever she is, is basically a mother. A father is an invented institution, it is not natural. And soon the father may become out of date.
Once the science of genetics develops, the more scientific, more clinical, more hygienic way will be that fathers donate sperm to the hospital, and the medical experts choose the right living sperm that can be injected into the woman. Every man should not be allowed to be a father. Because of this accidental fatherhood, the earth is full of blind people, lame people, crazy people, mad people, retarded people…It cannot be left accidental.
The sperm may have come from somebody else; you have to be generous in favor of the children so they will not be blind, will not suffer their lives as cripples. And moreover, you will be able to ask the medical expert for the kind of child that you want.
The basic sperm shows all the qualities that will manifest later on. If you want a scientist it can be seen that this person is going to become one –or a great poet, or an engineer, or a doctor, or just a vagabond. So the accidental birth can disappear and a planned birth can take its place. It will just take a little time for stupid human minds to get accustomed to the new idea.
But the mother will remain indispensable. They have tried experiments: they have given children all the facilities, medication, all the food…every perfection from different branches of science, but strangely the children go on shrinking and will die within three months. Then they discovered that the mother’s body and her warmth is an absolute necessity for life to grow. That warmth in this vast cold universe is absolutely necessary in the beginning, otherwise the child will feel abandoned. He will shrink and die.
There is no need for man to feel inferior to woman. The whole idea arises because you take man and woman as two species. They belong to one humanity, and they both have complementary qualities. They both need each other, and only when they are together are they whole.
You will be surprised to know that all the Hindu gods have their consorts. That has happened only in Hinduism, and it happened before Gautam Buddha and Mahavira.
Shiva has his wife, Parvati; Vishnu has his wife, Laxmi…all the Hindu gods have their wives, and that seems to be natural. Mahavira and Buddha created the idea of celibacy. Before them it did not exist at all in the whole literature of India, but it appealed to the male chauvinist….
Then came Christianity, five hundred years after Buddha. Jesus visited India after Buddha’s death and he saw there monks living alone in total independence. But he could not see that they were hard, that something was missing, something very valuable was missing. These people became hard, devoid of all juice; these people became unloving. It was bound to happen, but this is how the human mind is impressed. People were interested in these monks rather than Vishnu and Shiva, because they said, “They have wives just like us, so what is the difference? These monks are real ascetics. They have renounced everything including wives, children, family, money. These people are far superior.” Hinduism was going down in favor of Jainism and Buddhism. Naturally, as a reaction, all these shankaracharyas introduced celibacy into Hinduism to compete with Jainism and Buddhism.
Life should be taken with ease. Differences are not contradictions. They can help each other and immensely enhance each other. The woman who loves you can enhance your creativity, can inspire you to heights you have never dreamed of. And she asks nothing. She simply wants your love, which is her basic right.
Most of the things that make men and women different are conditional. Differences should be maintained because they make men and women attractive to each other, but they should not be used as condemnation.
In the West, the women’s liberation movement is destroying women by forcing them to be equal to men. There is no question of equality or inequality. By becoming equal to men, women will lose some softness, some grace, some beauty –and I can see it happening.
In the East, you will find women in the highest strata of society such as you cannot find in the West. The Western woman is trying to become like a man. She may succeed –she is succeeding, but she will always be a second-class man. She should try to be a first-class woman.
I see the grace disappearing from the Western woman in every sphere. In their dress the grace is disappearing, in their behavior, in their language…grace is disappearing. Just to compete with men they are smoking. Now, no high-society, cultured woman in India will ever think of smoking unless she is westernized. She will not think of using clothes which men use, because it is not only the clothes –they will change your whole body. It is the mind that changes everything.
The Western woman is losing her breasts, they were something that gave her a beautiful roundness, something unique. The whole history of painting, poetry, literature, talks about the beautiful breasts of women, but the Western woman is losing them. What has happened?
It is a change in the mind. She is losing her buttocks. She is becoming a straight line with no curves. And those curves were making her body a beautiful phenomenon –they were really a tremendous art. She is losing proportion. Her face is becoming harsh, dry. Even the most beautiful woman in the West looks hard, ready to fight. That is neither going to help womanhood nor its liberation.
To become a secondhand man is not liberation. Liberation is to become a firsthand woman –and man and woman are equal because they are two halves of one whole. In the East you will be surprised to know that even though all the men have misbehaved with women, the women have managed to keep all that is beautiful.
There is an ancient story, a true story….

A man was continuously going to a prostitute. The woman knew it, but it was against her grace to raise the question, so she never mentioned it. She never asked the man, “Where have you been?”
She served the man, she took care of him. And when he was dying he asked his woman, “You are the only one, the only solace in my life. Knowing everything you have never asked me, ‘Where are you going? Why do you come so late in the night? Why do you come drunk in the night?’ And still, you continue your whole life serving me as if nothing wrong is happening. I can only ask you to please carry my body to the prostitute’s house –I want to see her one last time.”
And the wife carried the man’s body to the prostitute’s house. The prostitute could not believe it. She fell at the feet of the woman.
The woman said, “It is nothing; I love him. If he does not love me it is not within my powers –he is free. My love is not a bondage. He asked me to bring his body to your house, so I have brought it; let him die peacefully. The man was beautiful, he never harassed me. I have loved him and you have loved him, so we are sisters. We both love the same man. You are fortunate that he loves you; I am unfortunate that he does not love me, but he respects me.”
This is grace….
There is another story I am reminded of. You have heard of the great war of Mahabharata….

It was a family war. Two brothers each had sons, and it was a question of who was going to succeed. One of the brothers was blind; he had one hundred sons, he had many queens. But the queen, that he had married first, had never opened her eyes. She always wore an eye-cover, twenty-four hours, her whole life.
Her husband persuaded, her friends persuaded: “What kind of thing is this?”
She said, “If my husband cannot see, then I will not see. What is the use of seeing a sunset, what is the use of seeing beautiful flowers when my husband cannot see them?”
Her whole life she remained almost blind.
This is tremendous grace. Nobody has demanded it, and it brings a beauty of its own kind.

There are so many strong historical facts that prove the beauty, the grandeur, the spirituality, the height of the love of a woman. Man has failed, but the woman has not failed.
I would like both to become an organic whole, remaining at the same time absolutely free because love never creates bondage, it gives freedom. Then we can create a better world. Half of the world has been denied its contribution and that half, the women, had an immense capacity to contribute to the world. It would have made it a beautiful paradise.
So I don’t ask that they should be equal, that they should wear the same clothes, that they should behave like men, or use vulgar language because the man uses it.
The woman should search into her own soul for her own potential and develop it, and she will have a beautiful future.
Man and woman are neither equal nor unequal, they are unique. And the meeting of two unique beings brings something miraculous into existence.

Osho,
Why have you always emphasized that women are better than men in ruling and administration, taking care? Is that what you experience in your commune or is it only a theory?
I don’t deal in theories.
Whatever I say is a practical experience, and unless I have a practical observation I don’t make a theoretical statement about it. The theory comes later, the reality comes first.
Women have not been in power for millennia. Man has always been in power, and his power has only created wars and destruction. It has not caused humanity to evolve, it has been in the service of death.
I would like women to take power. For the time being there will be difficulties because so much is repressed in a woman that it will explode. She may move to the other extreme. It is just like a man who has been fasting for ten days and then you place delicious food before him. He is bound to eat more than is needed. He may fall sick. What fasting has not been able to do, the delicious food may be able to do –he may even die.
There is an interim period which we will have to accept because of millions of years of repressed power. But this will subside; it will take some time but it will disappear. When the woman is certain of her power she will not be revengeful, she will not hate men. This is only for a time until the whole past is erased from the consciousness of woman.
The woman is a better ruler for the simple reason that she has a more loving heart, is more human –she is more kind and more compassionate.
Then finally, there is no question of who rules. Whoever has the merit, man or woman, rules. And the basic quality of the ruler is that he should be the servant of the people, that his power to rule is not the power to torture.
So finally, it will be a mixed phenomenon. In every sphere – in the offices, in the home, in the government, in the fields – everywhere, man and woman should not be understood as separate species.
But we have to repent for the past and we have to compensate women for the past. The past has done so much harm to them –who is going to erase all that whole history from their consciousness?
In the beginning they will be suspicious. In the beginning they may burst out with all kinds of revengefulness, but that will settle soon. You cannot be revengeful to people who are compensating for the dead who have tortured you. We have not tortured them; they cannot be antagonistic to us.
It takes a little time to settle, perhaps a few years. Let men and women mix at every stage of life. From the kindergarten to the university they should be mixed, and they should be clear that they are complementary parts to each other. But they should not become similar, they should retain their individuality. They should search and find what makes them women, what makes them men, and where they are different –not in conditioning but by understanding.
We have to create a world where there is no question that somebody is superior and somebody is inferior, and that will be a far more natural world.
You can enter any house and you can immediately see whether any woman lives there or not. She has an aesthetic sense, she has a certain clarity about beauty. Man is crude; he has no aesthetic sense. He can go on living in a house without bothering how the house looks and he will be perfectly happy. Just that sensitivity is missing.

I was at the university studying –and I am a lazy man. I had my bed just beside the door so I could leave my shoes outside the door and jump into the bed. So I didn’t have to worry about the whole room. I never entered the other part of the room because so much dust was gathering there.
In my class there were two girls. One was very much interested in me. She used to come every Sunday to clean my room. I told her, “You are unnecessarily wasting your time because I never enter inside the room. You can see my bed is just by the door. I simply jump into the bed, close the door and go to sleep. Why should I bother about the whole room and cleaning? I cannot do such things!”
But she said that she thought for the whole week about my room that it should not look like this.
I could see the difference when she would come and clean the room, fix the pictures on the walls, clean my books, put them in the right place. I knew that there was a great difference. It was beautiful. But I told her, “You cannot teach me. I appreciate what you do. I love it but I cannot do it.”
For two years continuously she went on coming every Sunday to clean. And she was the daughter of the collector of the city so it became a great scandal in the university because she had so many servants in her house. The collector was the highest officer in the district. She was hoping that some day I would learn, but I told her it was too late. And in the night when it is dark everywhere, who bothers whether the books are dusted or not, whether the room is full of dust or not?

The woman has a sense of cleanliness, of beauty, of the right arrangement of things. In Japan the women have developed many arts. Flower arrangement…even drinking tea is a ceremony and is done in such a way as if you are meditating.
The woman can contribute immensely to making human society more delicate, more beautiful. And if women are part of society everywhere I don’t think we will go to war, because whenever man goes to war it is the woman who suffers. Either a mother suffers because her son has died, or a wife will live her whole life waiting for the husband who is never going to return.
Man fights; the woman suffers. And whenever there is an invasion of one country by another, it is strange…the invading soldiers rape women as if the real purpose was not to conquer the country but to rape the women.
The woman is the loser. Either the father dies, or the husband or the son…but it is always the woman who suffers, and then she is raped, brutally raped. Those soldiers cannot make love, they can only rape.
So my idea is for the woman to keep her uniqueness. We don’t want secondhand men; it is insulting.
The man also should keep himself unique. Men and women should melt and merge into each other, not as contradictories but as complementaries. That will change all the qualities that they had separately. The woman will become more strong, the man will become more sensitive, because now they will be functioning together as one unit.

============================================================

Osho,
Who are you?
I am not a messiah, nor a prophet, nor a savior. I am simply a human being, with a little difference that you are not awake and I am awake. You can call me the awakened one. I emphatically deny the role of the messiah, the prophet, the savior, for specific reasons.
My understanding is that nobody can save anybody else – the very idea is insulting. And if somebody can save somebody, he can also drown him, because both the capacities come together. I am not a prophet, representing God, his message. As far as I am concerned existence is divine, but there is no God as a person. It is a quality of creativity, but not a creator. So the people who are creative are more religious than the people who go on praying in the churches, in the temples, in the synagogues to a God above in the heaven which does not exist. They are simply befooling themselves.
I am not a messiah especially sent by God. In the first place there is no God to send anyone. In the second place, for the argument’s sake, if there is a God who can create the whole creation, he need not have these mediocre messiahs to change people. He can do it himself. All these people who have been trying to be messengers of God, incarnations of God, the only begotten son of God…may not be bad people. They may be good people; their intention may not be bad. I never suspect their intention, but they are utterly wrong. And because of these people, humanity has suffered tremendously.
I want human beings to understand that they have the capacity to fall in their consciousness to the lowest level or they can rise to the highest pinnacle of consciousness. They can have friends. Gautam Buddha, Hazrat Mohammed, Jesus Christ should be understood as great friends. Their advice may be of immense value, but the moment they become leaders, the moment Jesus becomes the shepherd and his followers become sheep, it is ugly; it is absolutely inhuman.
When Mohammed becomes a prophet of God, he raises himself above humanity. That is just an egoistic trip.
When Buddha allows himself to be worshipped, that his word has to be taken in deep faith, he is harming humanity. I don’t belong to their category at all.
I am a simple, ordinary human being just like you. But I am aware and you are not. This is not much of a difference – you can become aware.
I am conscious and you are not. I can show you the path just like a friend, but you have to follow the path. I cannot take you to paradise because there is none. These are all fictions created to exploit humanity – the paradise, the hell – because it is a simple psychology that man can be controlled by two things, fear and greed. For fear there is hell; for greed there is heaven.
It is very easy to manipulate human beings between these two poles. Nobody wants to be in hell for eternity – everybody wants to be in heaven and have all the pleasures eternally. Naturally, if you want heaven and you do not want hell, you have to follow these people who are proclaiming themselves to be the only son of God, the only prophet of God.
Humanity has suffered for thousands of years. No prophet, no messiah, no savior has been of any help; on the contrary, they have created every kind of trouble for man. They have created different religions, and this has to be emphatically noted – that truth cannot be organized. It is not something that a crowd attains; it is something absolutely individual.
One goes to his own innermost being alone, absolutely alone, and finds it. Everybody is born to become a fully conscious being. That is my term for religiousness. To me, whatever wrong you do, you do because you are unconscious. And whatever good you do, you can do only when you are conscious. So I reduce your whole religion and your whole morality to two simple principles: behave unconsciously and you will be doing some harm; behave consciously and you will be doing some good, beautifying life.
These people try to put themselves high above human beings for the simple reason that people have lived in a spiritual slavery. They don’t want to have freedom; they want a savior to save them. They want a prophet to bring a message from God to them. They are not at all interested in taking the pilgrimage themselves, so they are happy that somebody else is doing it for them on their behalf. And the people who are pretending to be all these things are enjoying great ego numbers. They may have been good people, but deep down there is a subtle current of ego which cannot be denied.
I don’t have any ego.
I just want to be in the crowd, in the people, just like them. And perhaps this is the only way to help them. When somebody is so high that you cannot reach even to his feet, you start thinking this is an experience for special people. You are not the only begotten son of God, you are not the last prophet, you are not an incarnation of God. But this distance gives them a chance. What can they do? You are crawling on the earth – the distance is too much, it will take lives for you to come close to them. It looks logical, and at the same time they can enjoy the specialty which even kings and emperors cannot enjoy.
The future of religiousness is the future of people like me who have no ego trip, who are not creating any distance; on the contrary, who are destroying all distances and becoming as simple and ordinary as everyone. Then I can take your hand in my hand. And if I know the way, we can walk on the way hand in hand.
And remember, finally, that you will not be obliged to me; on the contrary, I will be obliged to you that you allowed me to hold your hand, because I was so full of my experience, my ecstasy, my religiousness, my truth, that I wanted to share it. By sharing it grows.
The more you share your inner experiences, the more you find them. It is an inexhaustible source.

Osho,
How can a Christian best understand it? What is your understanding about who Jesus was and what he advocated?
The question has many implications. First, the Christian remaining a Christian cannot understand me. His Christianity will be the barrier in the same way as Hinduism will be the barrier for a Hindu, and Buddhism will be the barrier for a Buddhist, and Islam will be the barrier for a Mohammedan.
What is Christianity? It is a certain belief system, it is not an experience. It is a kind of prejudice. You have been brought up in such a way that you are conditioned to the Christian view of life. If you want to understand me, that conditioning of Christianity will prevent you. It will go against it, because I don’t believe that there are any religions. I know that there is only one religiousness. You are coming with set formulas, a catechism, with faith, with belief – and my whole approach is scientific not superstitious.
I would like you to doubt all your beliefs, because a belief is just to cover ignorance. And I would like you not to have faith. Faith comes, you don’t have to create it. It comes the moment you realize truth, the moment you come to self-realization. Then there is a totally different quality of faith. The ordinary faith is just a solace, a consolation.

I was given a Bible in America while I was in jail. The sheriff of the jail was a very nice person and he was concerned about what I would do for twenty-four hours there, so he thought it would be good to present me with a beautiful Bible. He brought me the Bible and he said, “You will enjoy it.”
I said, “What is it?”
He said, “It is the word of God.”
I asked him, “Can you make any distinction between the word of God and the word of man? – because all these words are man’s words. You are an intelligent and very gentle fellow, and I would like to remind you that Hindus think the Vedas are the word of God, Buddhists think the same about their scriptures, Mohammedans think the Koran is the word of God…There are so many contradictory scriptures claiming to be the words of God, how do you choose which is the right one?”
He said, “I have never thought about it.”
And I said, “Do you know that five hundred pages in your Christian Bible are full of pornography? Have you read it from the first page to the last page? And don’t tell a lie because you are holding in your hand the word of God, the Bible – you are under oath.”
He hesitated a little and then he said, “You are right. I have never read it from the first page to the last. I have read only a few pages which I hear each Sunday in the sermon of the priest.”
Then I said to him, “You go through it. There are not less than five hundred pages which are sheer pornography. And if they are read and understood, the Bible should be banned from every church, from every library, from every university. Every government should make a law that the Bible is one of the ugliest scriptures in existence.”
“But,” he said, “there is a God.”
I said, “Your very statement shows you are not certain of it, you have no experience of it. You have not encountered him, you have just been repeating like a parrot.”

Each generation goes on giving its own conditionings to the new children. And the children cannot doubt, cannot ask…and this whole circus goes on continuing.
Do you know that there are religions that don’t have any God? Buddhism and Jainism don’t have any God, and for a very logical reason, almost irrefutable. They say: If everything needs to be created…That is the argument of the theist, that everything has to be created. So this whole existence cannot come out of nowhere, it has to be created – we need a creator. Jainism and Buddhism say: We accept your premise, but then we ask if God is there, who created him? And if he can be without any creator, then your whole logic falls. Things can be there which are not created. So why go on unnecessarily from A-God to B-God to C-God? And this will lead to a regression. You will never reach to a point where you can say that this is the last God. The question will still be haunting: Who created?
Seeing this absurdity, we accept existence itself as eternal, uncreated – there is no God.
We experience that this existence is not material – it is conscious, fully conscious.
If a Christian wants to understand me, first he has to put his Christianity aside so that he can hear me directly without his Christianity interfering. Otherwise it is the same – Christian or communist, Hindu or fascist, they are full of their own ideas for which they have no foundation, for which they have never looked. They have simply believed. And all the religions teach belief. Religions call themselves faiths.
And my approach is scientific. Science says doubt, go on doubting until you have eliminated all that was not right and you have come to the last thing which you cannot doubt. Its very existence, its very experience, creates a rapport between you and it. That is faith – not something acquired, but something encountered.
So certainly a Christian can understand me, but he will have to unload himself of his Christianity.
As far as Jesus and his teachings are concerned, the first thing to be noted is he was never a Christian. He was born a Jew, he lived as a Jew, he died as a Jew. His whole life’s effort was to be accepted by the Jews as their long, long awaited messiah. He had never heard the words Christian or Christ.
It is a very strange phenomenon that Christians are worshipping a Jew who for his whole life was teaching only one thing – that he should be accepted as a Jewish messiah. It was only three hundred years after his death when the Hebrew statements of Jesus were translated into Greek, that messiah became Christ and the followers became Christians.
Jesus was never aware that he was creating a new religion. Certainly he has a few very beautiful sayings, but not many compared to people like Lao Tzu, Chuang Tzu, or the seers of the Upanishads. They are very small in number, but they only look beautiful. I will have to analyze a few sayings so that you can understand what I mean.
He says, “Blessed are the poor in spirit because they shall inherit the kingdom of God.” This is a kind of opium for the poor, because it promises them, “After death, you will be received with great rejoicings. Your only great spiritual quality is your poverty.” And against it he says, “A camel can pass through the eye of a needle, but a rich man cannot pass through the gates of heaven.” This is how the poor have been kept poor – hoping for something to happen after death. The rich have never bothered about all this nonsense – and I think they are right. If you can manage to be rich here – which is God’s world according to the Christians – then why can you not be rich in the other world which is also God’s world? There is no logic in it.
And the people who are beggars here, why should they be beggars here in God’s world? And why should they be called blessed? If they are blessed, then the whole earth should become poor, beggars. Perhaps that is happening today. The whole earth is becoming more and more poor. More and more population, hungry people, starving people dying in Ethiopia – almost one thousand people every day. The ordinary poor will be far back in the line; Ethiopians will be received first.
And this is a long history. How many poor people have lived here? So God’s paradise will be full of beggars and poor, uneducated, uncultured, uncivilized…And poverty is the root cause of all crime. It is not a blessing, it is a curse. But when Jesus says it to the poor people – and, in fact, he had no approach to the rich – he is giving them a great consolation. These consolations are dangerous.
Karl Marx is right that these messiahs and prophets have given opium to the people so they will not see the reality and remain in a hallucinatory world. No, the poor are not blessed! They are suffering. And you have some nerve to say that they are blessed.
We know perfectly well that the rich are making their way to success here. They know all the ways of how to succeed. They have lived all the luxuries, all the comforts, all that this world can provide. In fact they are perfectly trained. This life has been a school, and they are the right people to enjoy paradise. What will the poor do there? They will be absolutely unprepared. They will not be able to understand what has happened. If God is so compassionate, then why is he so cruel here?
Jesus says, “If somebody hits you on one cheek, give him the other cheek.” A beautiful saying, but just a saying.
I have heard about a Christian saint who was continuously talking about this beautiful maxim….

A man – a wrestler, very strong – one day stood up and hit the saint on one cheek. Naturally, according to his own philosophy, he gave him the other cheek. The wrestler hit him on the other cheek even harder.
This was not mentioned in the Bible – that when you give the other cheek what is going to happen? And immediately – the congregation could not believe it – the saint jumped over the wrestler and started beating him as hard as he could.
The wrestler said, “What are you doing? You are a Christian saint. Your whole teaching is to give the other cheek when you are hit upon one – and you are beating me…!”
He said, “Yes, because there is no third cheek. Now I am free. Jesus talked only of two cheeks. About the third he has said nothing – and there is no third cheek anyway. So now you have to take not only my philosophy but my anger, my violence too. I have been suppressing it for my whole life. You may be a wrestler, but my violence and my anger are far bigger. I will kill you.”

Friedrich Nietzsche has made a very significant comment. He said: “If somebody hits you on one cheek, hit him on his cheek as hard as possible. Don’t give him the other, because that is insulting.”
When somebody hits your cheek and you give him the other, you become superhuman. You reduce the person to a subhuman species. The maxim is beautiful, but the implications are very, very significant, that is true. I agree with Friedrich Nietzsche, not with Jesus Christ, on this point. Nietzsche says, “Hit him, so that you both remain human. Give him the respect of being a human being. Don’t pretend to be a god. That is ugly and egoistic.”
Jesus says, “Love your enemies just as you love yourself.” But Jesus has never told the people to love themselves. In fact, it is not only Jesus, but all the religions have told their people to hate themselves. That’s how austerities have come into the world. Torture yourself, fast, remain hungry, remain naked in the cold, move barefoot in the forest…All the religions have been teaching only one thing: hatred towards yourself. They have not said a single word about self-respect. And just look at what the Christians have done. They have done all kinds of cruelties to themselves.
In Russia, there was a big sect, the most respected. They cut off their genitals. And the women were not going to be defeated – they started cutting their breasts. They were respected highly because “they are really people who have gone beyond sex.”
There are Christian sects which use shoes with nails penetrating into their feet and keeping their feet continuously wounded, blood flowing…And those wounds cannot heal, because those nails are always there. They have belts of the same type and those belts are worn for their whole lives. You lock them and throw the key into the ocean or in the river. And they have nails, reaching to the belly, to the back, and they are continuously creating a fuss…and these people have been respected…!
If this is self-love, then what does the maxim, “Love your enemies the way you love yourself,” mean? You don’t love yourself. No religious person loves himself. He loves God – who does not exist – and he hates himself, because religions have conditioned his mind that everything you do is ugly. Sex is ugly, eating food with taste is ugly…even taking a bath is ugly because you are decorating your body. Washing your mouth, your teeth, is ugly…! If this is all that self-love means then please don’t do it to your enemies. Don’t do it to your neighbors – Jesus says, “Love your neighbors just the way you love yourself.”
The maxims on the surface look very beautiful, but the implications are not very beautiful. And his whole life Jesus pretends that he is the son of God – the only begotten son of God. Now this is crazy. Then what are all these people in the world who all call God, “Father”? You should not only call Jesus the begotten son.
I always wonder what happened, because before Jesus was born eternity had passed. And after Jesus also, two thousand years have passed…Has God started using birth control methods? Why not a second son? And if God is using birth control methods, then what are people like the Vatican pope, Mother Teresa and other missionaries doing? They are teaching people not to use birth control because these children are given by God. If he is satisfied with one, why should he burden his poor people…perhaps to make them more blessed with a dozen, two dozen children?
And see the point: in the Christian trinity, God is there, Jesus the son is there, and the Holy Ghost is there – but there is no woman. What kind of family is this? Why has the woman not been taken into the family? It would have been a beautiful unit. God the father, the woman mother, and the son – exactly a right family for today.
But what is this strange fellow the Holy Ghost doing there? And how does God manage to produce a son without a woman? Is this Holy Ghost bisexual? But just to avoid the woman, all the religions have done that to women.
God made man – according to Christianity – with mud, humus. That’s why he is called a human being. Why could he not make a woman also with mud? Was mud such a problem? So scarce? No, he created the woman by taking a rib out of the man. And out of the rib of the man he created the woman. This is really deeply disrespectful, and one cannot conceive that women should be made from the rib of a man.
It shows many things. It shows that the woman is just a small part of the human body; she cannot be equal. How can a rib be equal to the whole man? To reduce her completely, the strategy has been used in the story to make her out of a rib; otherwise there seems to be no reason. Why should she not be made equal?
Again…the Devil is in the story! He persuades Eve, not Adam. It is the woman, Eve, who is the source of Adam’s fall. She has to be condemned because she led Adam into a world of sin. But why did the snake not speak to Adam? Why choose Eve? These are small strategies to reduce women and make men great – to create in women an inferiority complex.
And what certificate has Jesus got to say that he is the son of God? What proof has he got? Christians say that his miracles are his proof. But if you look into the miracles, you can understand one thing very easily. He creates as much food as thousands of people need from a loaf of bread; he changes water into wine, he walks on water, he heals the sick just by his touch…he even raises a dead man, Lazarus, back to life. If any man was doing all these things, do you think no contemporary book would mention it? No contemporary Jewish literature has any mention of Jesus or of his miracles.
And do you think a man who can do such things will have only a small following of idiots? Someone is a fisherman, someone is a farmer, someone is a woodcutter, uneducated, uncultured…. These are his twelve apostles. Not a single rabbi, not a single scholar, not a single professor, not a single man of any integrity is his follower – and he is doing all these things…! If somebody was doing it here in Kathmandu, the whole of Kathmandu would be there – even the king would be there. It would become the event, the most important in the whole of history.
No, all those miracles were invented by the disciples after Jesus’ death. The man who was doing all these good things was a Jew. Can you conceive that the Jews would ask for him to be crucified when they were given a chance that of the three men going to be crucified one could be pardoned, according to the convention? And even the Roman governor-general was thinking Jesus would be asked for, because he was a simple man, and only thirty-three. But the whole crowd shouted, “We want Barabbas” – and Barabbas was a born criminal. He had committed seven murders. He had committed every kind of crime, and the Jews asked that Barabbas should be released. Nobody asked for Jesus, not a single voice.
It is absolutely unimaginable that a man who was doing all these good things to the people had not impressed them. Raising the dead to life did not leave any impact on the populace. He had healed thousands just by touch, the blind had got eyes, the lame had got legs…Even in the twentieth century this man would have been most spectacular and would have been thought to be the man of the century – not only of the year. But not a single person asked that he should be saved, and instead they asked for Barabbas.
The whole thing is that Jesus was a nice man, but something was loose in his head, otherwise he would not have claimed to be the only son of God. Only mad people do that. A sane person will simply state what he is. Only insane people try anything…So unless a Christian puts his Christian conditioning aside I don’t think there can be a communication between me and him.

Osho,
Christianity in the United States today is moving towards more literal messianic thinking. Does this correlate with the Hindu expectation of the tenth incarnation of Vishnu? What is your place in this? Does your ministry in life have a messianic character?
No. I just want to be myself, not a mission. I hate to use borrowed clothes – how much I must hate to have borrowed souls?
What is happening in America is really not messianic Christianity. It is a fanatic movement headed by President Ronald Reagan who is a fundamentalist Christian. And the reason is, up to now communism had a message, communism had a philosophy, and capitalism had no message and no philosophy. On that point America was losing. Now the underground movement…
I have been five years in America, and what I have seen is that America is becoming more and more fanatically Christian to encounter the fanatical communists. It is just a hypocrisy to call it a democracy. It is a Christian kingdom, and it is better to name things exactly what they are – it helps immensely.
Now the fight is between communism and Christianity. That is a great turn, but it has nothing to do with the Hindu expectation of Vishnu’s incarnation.
All these expectations have been carried by all the races. Jews are still waiting for the messiah to come. And strange, when he comes they crucify him. And anybody after him has not made any claim, knowing well that they will crucify him. The psychology behind it is very clear: the messiah has always to be coming, but not to come. It has to be a hope in the future; it keeps people hoping. And if the messiah comes, it destroys the hope, it destroys the future.
Communism has a philosophy which is godless, soulless. It is absolute materialism. Now America is trying Christianity with God, with soul, with all kinds of spiritual garbage to encounter Russia. The whole of America is gripped by the Christian fanatic. I had to leave America because of this fanaticism. They could not tolerate me because I will say only what I can see, I can feel, I can experience. I accept Jesus as a nice man, but I cannot deny that he has a crazy mind. He was a crackpot.
The American situation right now is absolutely irreligious. It is a very strange phenomenon: eat, drink and be merry. Rather than giving it a Christian color, it will be good to call it an epicurean country. On the other hand, in Russia, seventy years after the revolution, they have been repressing religion, all search for truth, all search for something higher than ordinary life.
A great effort has emerged so that man cannot actualize his potential. But you cannot do it forever.
You will be surprised…I have my sannyasins in Russia, and their number is increasing every day, although the Russian government is persecuting them. But they are immensely excited by the adventure that meditation can bring you more consciousness, that the soul is not nonexistential, it can be experienced. So seventy years of repression is going to explode any day, and Russia can become one of the greatest religious countries in the world.
In America, just the opposite is happening: there is no religious repression, but people take Christianity just as a formality. Nobody reads, nobody goes to church except very old women who have nothing else to do. Churches are empty or are for sale. America is very materialistic. Philosophically it may pretend anything, but it lives with matter; its real life is materialistic. And as far as these messiahs of the Jews coming, and Jesus Christ who will come back again, and Krishna who says that he will come whenever you will be in misery…what more misery does he want?
These are all hopes to keep people going. Nobody comes again, particularly people who have become enlightened. Even if they want to come again, they cannot. Buddha cannot come back again. So his statement that he or anybody else who is awakened will be coming back can only be taken symbolically. The quality of awakeness is the same. It does not matter what body the awakening happens in.
Vishnu is a mythological figure. He is not a historical figure. But Hindus have been waiting that some day Vishnu will come and everything will be right. This is such a fraud. It is better to tell people, “Nobody is going to come to help you. If you want anything to happen, do it. Except you, the whole existence is silent.”
But it hurts. The hope is very sweet. My whole effort is to bring you down to the reality. And the reality is that nobody is going to solve your problems, nobody is going to give you a utopia, nobody is going to change your misery and suffering and anguish. It is you – if you want and decide to, you can change it. Each individual has to take the responsibility on himself.
Up to now, we have been shifting the responsibility onto messiahs, onto saviors, onto prophets. No longer.

Osho,
What is the main purpose of your life?
There is no purpose. The whole idea of purpose is mundane and illogical. You will have to come to a point where you will have to say there is no purpose. Life is a perfect point. Life is an overflowing of bliss, truth, love, but not purposeful; it is not a commodity.
If I speak to you, I enjoy it. If I help you, I am grateful to you that you accepted my help; you could have rejected it. As far as I am concerned, I am fulfilled, I am utterly contented.
Purpose is when you are discontented, when you need something, when you want something, when you want to reach somewhere.
I don’t want to reach somewhere.
I am already there and so full of joy and so full of love and so full of song that I want to share it. This wanting is not a purpose, because I don’t want anything in return. It is simply like when a roseflower opens and releases its fragrance.
I am reminded of Picasso….

He was painting by the sea beach. A man watched him for a long time, and then he approached him and said, “Sir, I don’t want to disturb you. I just want to know one thing: what is the purpose of your painting?”
Picasso said, “It is strange. You don’t ask the flowers, ‘What is your purpose?’ You don’t ask the sun, ‘Why do you rise every morning?’ You don’t ask the stars, ‘What is your purpose?’ You don’t ask the ocean, ‘What is your purpose?’ Then why do you torture a poor man like me? I am not doing any harm. I am simply playing with colors on this canvas. I don’t have any purpose. Just enjoying myself…this salty breeze, this beautiful morning…. I have so much sensitivity for beauty that I want to bring it out so that others can share it. There is no purpose.”

All the religions have been teaching that life should have a purpose. They are reducing life as a means to some end – which is ugly. Life is an end unto itself. To be alive, to be fully alive is enough. There is no goal, there is no purpose. Just here and now, all is. Nothing is missing.
I don’t have any purpose, because life has no purpose. Those who have purposes in life, are going against life. Life is a let-go. You are not swimming against the current, you are simply floating with the river wherever it leads. So wherever I reach, I am fulfilled. Or even if I am drowned, I am fulfilled. The purposeful mind is a very mundane mind.

In my childhood I had a beautiful river by my village. And my tailor was in great difficulty, because I had to force him to make as many pockets on my dress as possible. He said, “But you go on telling everyone that I am your tailor, and if they see all these pockets they will think I have gone mad. So if you promise me that you will say that the tailor across the street is your tailor, I am ready. But don’t mention my name to anybody.” He said, “And for what do you need so many pockets?”
I said, “You will not understand. You can ask my father.”
The need was that around the river there were such beautiful colored stones, so shining in the sun, that I would collect them and fill all my pockets. I would come home, and my mother would be very angry: “You spoil your dress. You make a mockery of all of us having so many pockets. Nobody has ever heard…your dress is just pockets and pockets. And then you come with all kinds of useless stones. What is the purpose of these stones?”
I said, “I have never thought about the purpose – I love them.” And that was enough.

I love life, but there is no purpose.
I love people, but there is no purpose.
I do everything that my love wants me to do, but there is no purpose. It is sheer joy being shared. And the moment you start sharing, purpose disappears.
Purpose is a business world.
Sharing takes you to a different world. And my sannyasins particularly should remember that their life has to be a sharing, not a purpose.

============================================================

Osho,
What is shaktipat, the transmission of spiritual energy?
The most fundamental thing to understand is that materialism is dead, that matter no longer exists. All that exists is energy.
The energy in a rock is the lowest form, the most dormant, the most closed, most asleep. Then there is the world of plants, trees. They have opened up a little. They are available to existence more than a rock. They communicate with the sun, with the moon, with the stars – and this communication is communication of energy. They take energy; they give energy. And this is the whole ecology of existence – a tremendous interdependence. In every possible way, there is a delicate transference of energy happening everywhere.
Man breathes out, and he is breathing out a certain energy which we call carbon dioxide; it is not matter. He breathes in – again another form of energy, oxygen. The trees do just the opposite: they exhale oxygen; they inhale carbon dioxide. This is how the balance is maintained.
In millions of ways energy is moving through different organisms. And higher than plants are the animals which have the capacity of movement. There is a link: there are plants which cannot move, and there are plants which can move a few feet; there are animals which can move miles, and there are birds which can move thousands of miles. This movement makes their energy dynamic.
These are developments of energy. Above all are the human beings, who have energy which has life, movement. But few of them can attain to consciousness, which is the most developed form of energy. And the way of consciousness is exactly the way of a river. It goes downwards following the path of gravitation.
The device you are asking about is an ancient device. I have used it, but not for six years because I have refined the device to better forms, to more invisible transformations. The device is absolutely dependent on the disciple, and in that discipleship you cannot use the word friend. The word friend can be used only with my refined techniques.
The old device has to use the master and the disciple. The disciple had to surrender totally, had to become vulnerable, had to be open – risk all and have faith. If the master is an authentic master then his touch, particularly on the forehead between the two eyes where mythologically in the East we have visualized a third eye…If he puts his bodily contact on the third eye, and the disciple is absolutely available, surrendered, ready to receive, then the energy from the master’s being starts flowing. The master loses nothing because the more he gives, the more energy is poured by the cosmos itself into his being. He is rewarded immensely. But he cannot do anything if the disciple is just a little bit reluctant, a little bit closed, a little bit afraid, not surrendered totally. Then nothing will happen.

============================================================

Osho,
Why are you so widely misunderstood?
It is the way of human progress. Whenever there is someone who says something against the tradition, against the establishment – political or religious – he is bound to be misunderstood. But that is not something new.
You can look as far back as possible and you will always find a few people being misunderstood. But those are the few people who have brought you to civilization, to culture; you owe all your consciousness and growth to that small group of people.
Socrates was misunderstood. We do not know the people who misunderstood him. We do not know the judges who pronounced his death sentence; they have all been forgotten. But Socrates’ name will remain till the last human being remains on the earth, for the simple reason he stood against the whole mob, the whole old traditional, superstitious mind, single-handed.
It is easy to kill a man like Socrates but it is difficult to kill his spirit; it is absolutely impossible to destroy his argument.
Socrates was poisoned, but his argument, his statement about truth, still remains and has been adopted. Slowly, slowly truth gets into the hearts of man. It takes time – traditions are very deep. They have long roots in the past; moreover, our vested interests are with the political power, with the religious institutions, and we are naturally afraid they can destroy us. It is better to be with them; it is dangerous to be with a man like Socrates or Gautam Buddha.
I am widely misunderstood. I don’t think that it is in any way disrespectful to me. This is a compliment. The more widely I am misunderstood, the better. Certainly, Socrates was not so widely misunderstood – he was misunderstood only in Athens. Gautam Buddha was not so widely misunderstood – he was misunderstood only in Bihar.
They were not so fortunate as I am. I am misunderstood all over the world! With me starts a new era of the misunderstanding becoming so wide. But with it there is a great hope too. If there are so many people who misunderstand me, there are millions of people who love me too.
Those millions who love me, who understand me, may be silent – that’s why you hear only the voices which are against me. This has to be understood; it is part of human psychology.
Love is always silent.
The more you love, the more difficult it is to say anything. Maybe the positive people simply feel the sympathy but cannot find the words to express it. The negative people are very loud; they make much noise. That is the nature of negativity – that it is loud, noisy, and it creates a situation that one negative person feels as if there are thousands of negative people.
Here you are listening to me – can I ask who misunderstands me? Just raise your hands so I can see the percentage….
It is simply a confusion that there are more people who misunderstand me than people who love me and understand. It is just that lovers are always silent; they need not say anything. Slowly the noise of the negativity will die and slowly the truth is going to win.
If what I am saying is true, then there is no need to be worried; it is going to win.
If I am saying something which is untrue, then too there is no need to worry; it is going to fail by itself.
In any case there is no need to be worried. I am perhaps the only person in the whole history of humanity who has been fighting with so many traditions – Christian, Hindu, Mohammedan, Buddhist, Jaina, communist, socialist, fascist…Nobody has been against all these. Naturally, I have created a tremendous amount of antagonism in those people whose power is at risk; they are afraid. They understand what I am saying; they do not misunderstand.
The situation is quite different. When Jesus was crucified he said to God, “Father, forgive these people who are crucifying me because they know not what they are doing.”
With me the situation is different. Naturally, in two thousand years man has become more intelligent. I cannot say, “Forgive them because they do not know what they are doing.” I will say, “Forgive them, but they know what they are doing. They absolutely understand; there is no question of misunderstanding.”
One Christian bishop came to see me saying, “Why are you against Christianity?”
I said, “There is no question of why. I am against everybody. You are not any exception; I am against all that is old and rotten. You are two thousand years old, it is time to give place to something new.”
He brought a Bible as a present for me. I said, “If you give me a present, thankfully I receive it. But I would like to say to you that this is perhaps the only book which has more lies than any other book – not only lies, but five hundred pages are complete pornography. If I show you the pages you will not be able to read those pages in front of your daughter or your son. And still you go on calling it the holy Bible. I cannot call it the holy Bible – if this is holy, then there is nothing unholy in the world.”
Naturally he was offended. He had no answer to it. He could not give me the answer. I said, “You can show me that there is no pornography. You know perfectly well that there is pornography, because each bishop, each priest avoids those pages when they go on reading sermons in their churches. They all know those pages – and they are not a small number, five hundred pages. So you cannot deny it. But I can see anger in your face. So now you will go and try to create some lie against me to create misconception in people’s minds. You will not say the truth, but how long can you hide it? I am going to publish the Unholy Bible – just five hundred pages of pornography, illustrated, so that the whole world can know that this book needs to be banned in every country, in every church, in every library, in every university, and that this is not the book to be considered even religious. But this is the book which is being freely distributed all over the world, and nobody raises a voice.”
So whenever you say something it hurts people’s conceptions, it destroys their illusions, or hits at the very root of their vested interests, because if the Bible is not holy, then all the churches are meaningless. Then the pope does not represent God, then the whole edifice of Christianity falls down. Naturally, they are going to do everything to protect their interests.
Just yesterday I received information from Italy – because I was going to go from Nepal directly to Rome. I have challenged the pope many times, but he is such a coward. I finally thought it is better to go to Rome and challenge him to a public debate so that he could prove that this book is holy. And if he could not prove it then we would make a bonfire of this Bible in Vatican City itself – “You should resign from your post and dissolve this whole nonsense of Christianity which is based on this book.”
Just yesterday I got information that the pope had instructed all the newspapers, magazines, radios, that are under his power or under some other Christian influence, that nothing should be said about me if I come to Italy – neither positive nor negative – “because this man takes advantage of both.” Whether you are for or against does not matter.
Now I can see this man understands; he does not misunderstand me. He has understood one thing: that even the negative publicity against me finally helps me, because finally the truth is with me.
His instruction is neither negative nor positive: no publicity should be given. But he does not understand that the first thing I am going to do in Italy is to proclaim to the press: “Any press who does not write about me – positive or negative – is just a puppet in the hands of the pope. You have sold even your intelligence. Just for a few rupees you have become a slave. You cannot even report. And I am not saying report for me, I am saying report whatever you want to report – let it be against me, nothing harms me.”
Even if somebody reads something against me, he starts thinking about me. He starts thinking, “Why are so many people writing against one man?” He goes to the library, he looks into the bookstore, he finds some book, he tries to understand….
I have called myself the man who influences people and creates enemies – but those enemies are of great help.
Existence has a certain balance. If I can create millions of enemies, then it is bound to be that millions of friends will be created. Existence can never go out of balance, it always keeps the balance. And there are things which have to be said. The time is ripe. We cannot go on hiding lies behind beautiful theories. They have to be exposed – that is the only way to create one humanity.
If Hinduism, Christianity, Judaism, Buddhism and all these religions can be exposed clearly to you – that perhaps Buddha was right, perhaps Patanjali was right…. But the people who have followed them have corrupted their whole tradition to the point that it has almost gone against them.
Gautam Buddha said before he died, “Don’t make statues of me; don’t worship me. Just follow the path that I have shown to you.” But nobody follows the path. There are more statues of Buddha than of anybody else. This is a strange world – the man who said, “Don’t make my statues,” has more statues in the world than anybody else.
In China, there is one temple which has ten thousand statues of Buddha. Just one temple…and there are thousands of temples all over Asia. Nobody is bothering to follow the path; everybody is worshipping, and worshipping a man who has prohibited it – that was his last message.
If we can bring to the people’s intelligence the truth…all these traditions that have developed and have become parasites exploiting man in every possible way. They cannot be stopped. The only way to stop them is to take the very earth below their feet. This way truth will not suffer, and this way we may come closer. Hindu and Mohammedan, Christian and Buddhist may find that their basic truth is one, and they were unnecessarily quarreling because the priesthood wanted them to quarrel, to fight, to kill each other. It was in their favor to keep people apart and divided.
Religion can become a tremendously beautiful phenomenon if priests disappear. In fact, the priest is such an ugly phenomenon. In one of the existentialist novels set in the twenty-first century, a super-rich man sends his servant to make love to his wife. A friend is present who is shocked by it. He says, “What are you doing?”
He said, “I am so rich I can afford a servant to do such things.”
When I read this I remembered the priests: that’s what they are doing; they are making prayers for you because you can afford it. What is prayer except love, love towards the ultimate – and you have accepted an agent between you and the ultimate reality. It seems cheaper. You can go on doing your work, and somebody else comes and worships on your behalf. And you have never thought what an ugly thing it is…?

I used to stay in a very rich man’s house in Jaipur. He had a small temple in his house. I never saw him going into the temple. I asked him, “Why have you made this beautiful temple?”
He said, “I have made it to worship God.”
“But,” I said, “you never go there.”
He said, “I don’t have to, I have a priest. I give him one hundred rupees per month just to worship for one hour. He is doing my job, I cannot waste one hour in worshipping; one hour is too much for me. In one hour I can make millions here and there.”
And this man felt that he had fulfilled his religious needs. I told him, “You are even trying to deceive reality. It is better to destroy this temple. At least you will not be deceiving anybody. If you cannot worship, don’t worship, but at least don’t bring servants to do it.”
He was shocked; he was a little angry at me. But next time when I went he was worshipping. He said, “I went through a great deal of anger against you, but finally I saw the truth. Forgive me that I was angry. I still give one hundred rupees to the priest because it was not his fault. He should not suffer for it, but I will worship one hour every day. And these few months I have worshipped have been of such great peace and silence to me as I have never felt.
“It was good of you not to let things remain as they were. So many friends stay here, but nobody has ever said it. Everybody said, ‘This is a beautiful arrangement’ – they appreciated me. You were the only person who criticized me and criticized me badly.”
It is true that people will feel for the first time when they encounter me that I am taking something valuable from them. But I am not taking anything valuable from you, I am taking only long-standing lies which you have believed in. And once those lies disappear, the truth is not far away.
The truth is within you.
Just drop all your lies and superstitions, and the truth will be a revelation – you have not to go anywhere to find it. Just stand in your sincerity and authenticity. Drop everything that you feel is not your own experience and you will be surprised what a treasure you have found within yourself, what a source of joy, what a freedom and what a great insight into the inner mysteries of life.
I will go on hitting you as hard as I can till my last breath, because I love you and I want you to know the truth. Without knowing it life is just a wastage.

Osho,
In your various discourses you have said that the divine is in everybody. If this is true, that we are divine in ourselves, then why should we need you?
It is a beautiful question, beautiful because it has the answer in itself. You have heard me say that the divine is in everyone, but you have only heard half the statement. I have been telling you again and again that whatever is in me is also present in you. There is just a little difference you have not heard: I am awake and you are asleep.
There is not much difference.
And your question itself gives proof to what I have been saying. You say, “If this is true…” Underline “if.”
It is not true for you, you have not experienced it – you have heard me making a statement. Unless it becomes a truth of your own experience, you will need me. I would like to get rid of you as soon as possible, but if you go on clinging to “ifs” and “buts” then it will be very difficult.
When I say anything, it is my experience, I am not quoting anybody else. If this becomes your experience, you will not need me. But it is not your experience, you have just heard me. You don’t feel that way, you are still the same old man. My statement cannot change you. You will have to do something for your transformation. Yes, the day you are transformed you will see with your own eyes your very being; you will know the truth of my statement that the divine is spread all over reality.
In fact, except the divine there is nothing else, but it has to be absolutely your experience. When I repeat it again and again, that simply means I am giving you the challenge to move, to do something to find out your real self.
I am reminded of a small story in Gautam Buddha’s life….

One of Gautam Buddha’s very close disciples, Sariputta, became enlightened, but he did not tell Gautam Buddha about it, as if you can hide it – and least from the master! An enlightened man has a different aura, a different fragrance. It cannot be hidden, particularly from another enlightened man, and least of all your own master.
But why was he hiding?
On the third day, Buddha said, “It is too much; I have been waiting for three days. Why are you not saying it to me?”
Sariputta had tears in his eyes. He said, “I am not saying it because the moment I say it you will send me away. You will say, ‘Now you don’t need me, you have attained. Now go and spread the message to those who are still asleep’ – and I don’t want to go anywhere.”
Buddha said, “But you don’t need me.”
He said, “That is true – I don’t need you, but you are the man who has brought me to this state: that I don’t need you. My gratefulness is such that I would like to live and die sitting at your feet.”

Yes, there is a relationship of need, but there is a greater relationship of gratitude.
So I can say to you that you can manage to drop the need, but you cannot manage to escape from it. The moment the need disappears, a tremendously powerful energy grips you, and that is of gratitude.
The master takes nothing from you and gives you everything. If he takes anything from you it is only the lies, falsities, with which you are surrounded. If he gives anything to you, it is what you have already but you are not aware of it. He gives you that which you had always, and he takes away that which you never had in reality – it was only an illusion.
Every master wants the disciple to get free from the need, because the relationship of need is not a very beautiful one. And particularly me – my insistence is that I want my disciples to become my friends. If you have a need you cannot become my friend, your need will become a prevention. I would like you to drop the need. And the moment you drop the need, you are as divine as anyone. And to be a friend of the master is the greatest glory possible.
In the past, no master has dared to say to his disciples, “you are my friends,” because human consciousness was not so developed. But we have come a long way. Now there are people in the world with immensely developed consciousness. Just one step more and they can shake hands with Gautam Buddha.
To be a friend is immensely beautiful, because friendship is nothing but pure love. When you need, then it is a very low kind of relationship. When you don’t need and still you love, there is no condition. When you are not hankering to get something, there is still love, gratitude, friendship. Then one comes to experience something of the ultimate – there is nothing beyond it.

Osho,
What are the difficulties on the path of meditation and how can we overcome them?
There are only two difficulties on the path of meditation: one is the ego. You are continuously prepared by the society, by the family, by the school, by the church, by everybody around you, to be egoistic.
Even modern psychology is based on strengthening the ego. The whole idea of modern psychology, modern education, is that unless a person has a very strong ego he will not be able to struggle in life, where there is so much competition that if you are a humble man anybody will be able to push you aside. You will always remain backward. You need a very strong steel ego to fight in this competitive world. Then only can you become a success in any field. It may be business, it may be politics, it may be any profession – you need a very assertive personality. Our whole society is geared to produce an assertive personality in the child.
From the very beginning we start telling him, “Come first in your class.” And when the child comes first in the class, everybody praises him. What are you doing? You are feeding his ego from the very beginning. You are giving him a certain ambition: “You can become the president of the country; you can become the prime minister of the country…” And he starts the journey with these ideas. His ego goes on becoming bigger and bigger as he succeeds.
In every way the ego is the greatest disease that can happen to man. If you succeed, your ego becomes big – that is a danger, because then you will have to remove a big rock which is blocking the path. Or if the ego is small – you have not been successful, you have proved to be a failure – then your ego will become a wound. Then it hurts, then it creates an inferiority complex. Then too it creates a problem: you are always afraid to enter into anything, even in meditation, because you know you are a failure, you are going to fail. That has become your mind because everywhere you have failed. And meditation is such a great thing, you cannot succeed.
If you enter into meditation with this idea that failure is bound to happen and that is your destiny, that is your fate, then of course you cannot succeed. So if the ego is big it prevents; if the ego is very small it becomes a wound, then too it prevents. In each case the ego is one of the problems.
The second problem…and after stating both the problems I will tell you how to get rid of them. It is not difficult, but first you have to understand the problem in all its complexity….
The second hindrance on the path of meditation is your constantly chattering mind. You cannot sit even for a single minute. The mind goes on chattering: relevant, irrelevant, meaningful, meaningless…thoughts go on. It is a constant traffic and it is always rush hour. Whenever you close your eyes there are so many thoughts running in all directions, that if you sit down for ten minutes and write down whatever is going on in your mind – without any editing, because you are not going to show this to anybody, so don’t be worried…! Close the door, lock it from inside so that nobody comes in, and just write exactly what goes on in the mind for ten minutes. And after ten minutes read it.
And you will be surprised: “Is it my mind or has somebody gone mad?” Just because you have never looked at it, you have never thought about what is going on.
And if you try, as many people try, because studying books on meditation they think that if you can stop the thoughts by chanting a mantra or the name of God then perhaps the mind can be vacated from thoughts…The books are mostly written by people who have never meditated. I know many people who have written books on meditation. They came to me to ask how to meditate, and I said, “But in my library I have your book.”
They said, “Yes, we studied a few books on meditation and wrote the book just to help others.”
I said, “But first you should have tried what you have written. If you cannot help yourself, on what grounds do you think you can help others? You may have destroyed many people’s peace of mind.”
And there are so-called teachers of meditation who will also give you a mantra, that chanted, chanted fast, or any name…Close your eyes, do a certain ritual, take a bath, sit in a lotus posture, start the meditation, and go on as fast as you can – faster and faster, repeating the same name, “Krishna, Krishna, Krishna…” Do it as quickly as possible. After five to seven minutes, you will be in a state of what is scientifically known as autohypnosis. It is not meditation, but it does no harm. After ten to twelve minutes, when you come out of it you will feel a certain peace, a certain well-being; you will feel good, but this is not meditation.
I am not against it if you are trying to do it only to feel good. You can do it, but don’t think that by doing it you are going to realize your godliness. That is not possible because this is simply a deliberately created sound sleep. When you repeat a certain word continuously, fast, the mind has no way to go on chattering. You don’t give it any gap to put its thoughts into. Your chanting is so fast that the mind has to remain almost in a situation of a crossroads where the policeman has stopped the whole traffic. Your continuous chanting creates the situation of a policeman stopping the whole traffic, but the traffic is still there, it has not gone; in fact, more traffic has gathered on all the roads. And the moment you come out of meditation your mind will have such a rush as it has never had – naturally, because all the traffic that you have stopped will have to pass. This is not meditation.
One more thing before I tell you what exactly is the problem with the mind. A few teachers of meditation – and particularly in this part of the world, in the East – are saying, “Keep your mind fixed on something. Start from something outer – a black dot on the wall – and then slowly, slowly close your eyes, and with closed eyes look at the black dot.”
And if you have been staring at the black dot for a few minutes, naturally with closed eyes you will see the black dot. Just the impression takes time to disappear. It is the negative of the positive black dot; it is part of the science of photography. It is the negative that you have created inside.
Now look at this negative black dot and if you can continue looking at it, the same thing will happen after five to seven minutes – autohypnosis. You will feel good, and that is the danger. Because you feel good, afterwards you feel a certain well-being, you think you are on the right path – not necessarily.
And these things are also not easy – chanting continuously for five to seven minutes is not easy. A few thoughts will enter in and disturb it.
Keeping your mind fixed on one dot is also not easy. Thoughts may come, move across and disturb you. And if you ask your teachers they will say, “This is your past karma; you will have to wait.” There is no question of past karma, your method is simply wrong.
If you are learning to ride a bicycle and you go on falling again and again, and you ask somebody and he says, “It is because of your past karma…” It is simply that you don’t know how to ride the bicycle. It has nothing to do with past karma or past life. You simply need the right technique.
I have heard of a story….

A man was very much interested to attain miraculous powers. Wherever he went they said, “First you have to learn meditation. Without meditation you cannot have miraculous powers.”
Finally, he found a very wise old man about whom he had heard, “He is the greatest meditator alive, but you will have to serve him and not to be in a hurry. You just serve him; whenever the time is right he will give you the meditation and his blessing. You should not ask for it.”
The poor man served the man for one year and he was getting tired: “This is too much. The second year has begun and the old man still says, ‘No sign.’” He was getting fed up and thinking of running from that temple. The day he was thinking to run, the old man said, “Listen. I was waiting for the right time, but you cannot wait. The time is not right, but because of your hurry I will give you the method. It is very simple and very suited to you.”
The man said, “My Lord, my God!” He touched his feet. He said, “I was waiting for this day. I am a fool for having such bad thoughts about you. Just forgive me.”
He said, “Don’t be worried about it. This is the method; you go home” – he had written on a small piece of paper just a small mantra and he gave him that. “This is the mantra. You have to chant it for ten minutes. Just remember one thing: while chanting, don’t let any monkey come into your mind.”
The man said, “You must be mad! Monkeys have never come into my mind. In my whole life not a single monkey has come into my mind – why should a monkey come into my mind?”
The old man said, “I don’t know, but this is the condition that goes with this mantra.”
The man said, “There is no problem.” But he was worried. As he was coming down the steps of the temple, he already started seeing monkeys. He would close his eyes – and there were the monkeys. He said, “My God! I have not even started!”
He went home. He took a good bath and sat in padmasana. But as he closed his eyes, and before he could start the mantra, the monkeys started coming – not one! In a line…giggling…!
The man said, “What happened?” He tried hard, but by the morning he was utterly tired. He went to the master. He said, “Take your mantra back. If this is the condition then I cannot fulfill it ever because of those monkeys. There is not one – you had said one – I don’t know how many there are. I have been counting – they go on coming! And I am going mad! I simply don’t want any miraculous power, and I don’t want any meditation. I simply want to go home. Just help me to get rid of the monkeys. I am giving your mantra back – but who knows about the monkeys?”

If you try forcibly to keep something out of your mind, it is bound to come. This is a universal law.
Seeing the false methods, understanding that the mind is a constant process of thought, I want to explain to you something very simple, without any conditions. All that you have to do…no special posture is needed; whether you have taken a bath or not does not matter. It does not mean that at a certain time, at a certain place you should do it. No, you can do it anywhere, any time. I want it to be so easily possible for you that it mixes with your ordinary life and you don’t have to take some time out of your life specially given to meditation.
The process is witnessing.
The thoughts are moving in the mind – you have nothing to do with those thoughts. You are not to prevent them, you are not to chant a mantra, you have just to be a watcher. You have just to see that thoughts are passing, and you are standing by the side of the road looking at the traffic, unconcerned. Whether a bullock cart passes or an elephant passes or a camel passes…it doesn’t matter. You don’t have to make any judgment. You are just sitting by the side watching the whole scene.
It takes a few days, because of your old habit to make judgments. Something comes, you say, “This is very good” – and you have lost your capacity of being a watcher, you have already given judgment.
Something comes and you say, “This should not come, this is evil” – you have already fallen back.
Good or evil, beautiful or ugly, you are separate. You are the witness, you are just a mirror. Anything that passes by does not affect the mirror at all. Something good – the mirror reflects. Something bad – the mirror reflects. When they have gone, the mirror is as empty as ever.
Your consciousness is a mirror, and your consciousness is neither good nor bad. Your consciousness may have lived thousands of years, but not even a scratch is possible on your consciousness. It only reflects; its function is reflection. That’s why I say the divine between you and me is the same – there is no difference at all. I just have recognized that the witnessing is a pure mirror, eternally pure – and you get identified, you forget.
It happened in Calcutta in the last century….

There was one very renowned scholar, Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar. He was world famous for his scholarship. There was going to be a play and they had asked Ishwar Chandra to come and inaugurate it. He came; he inaugurated it. He was sitting in front. He was the chief guest of the evening, and because he was invited, many scholars, many eminent people were present there, and the drama was enacted with tremendous beauty, with great articulateness.
In the middle of the drama there comes a scene where a man who has been after a beautiful woman, continuously harassing her – and she was not interested in him at all…but he finds her alone in the jungle. She had lost her way, and the man feels this is a moment not to be missed.
He wants to rape the woman, and just as he starts pulling her clothes off – there is pin-drop silence – suddenly Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar jumps onto the stage, takes one of his shoes in his hands and starts beating the man.
The man must have been of great intelligence. He took away the shoe and he said to Ishwar Chandra, “This is the greatest reward I have got in my whole life. My whole life I have been an actor – thousands of rewards I have got, but this is the most precious. That even a man like Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar forgot that it is a drama and he is only a spectator, he is not supposed to come into it…!” And he said, “I will be tremendously grateful if you give me the other shoe also, because what will you do with one? For me it will be a souvenir. I am going to keep it.”

I have seen those shoes. I have been to that man’s house. He is dead. His grandson took me to see the shoes.
This is our situation. Your mind is just a screen, a movie screen, a TV screen or a drama stage, and you are far away just looking at it. You are not supposed to act. You are not supposed to do anything.
Once you get the knack of witnessing without judgment you will be surprised: the moment you are utterly a witness all the thoughts disappear. There is simply a plain white screen and no thoughts.
This is the first experience, that you have come to the door of meditation. Just go on looking at the white screen. Don’t do anything. Consciousness has a nature – if it cannot find any object which prevents it, then it goes round and comes back to you.
In existence everything moves in a circle. Remember that: nothing moves in a straight line. If there is no obstacle, the consciousness comes back to its own source. And the consciousness coming back to one’s own source, for the first time sees who is there, who has always been there. That is your real being.
You can call it godliness, you can call it divineness, you can call it truth. Any name will do because it has no name; it is a nameless reality. But once it is realized then there is nothing else left. You have attained to the ultimate flowering of your being. This is enlightenment.
So put your ego aside – whether it is big or small, don’t be worried – and just be a witness to your mind. Wait and be patient. Don’t be in a hurry. It may take a few days for you to get the knack. It is a knack! It is not an art!
If it was an art, it would have been very simple to teach, but because it is a knack you have to try. Slowly you get it.
How do you learn to swim? It is not an art. If it was an art you could have learned it in your bedroom. Just on your bed you could have done all the exercises that are prescribed in the book. But it is not an art; you have to go to water. And you will have to face death a few times, but that is part of the progress. Each time you face death, each time you learn something – the knack slowly comes to you. Within two or three days you will be able to swim.
One Japanese professor of psychology is trying to teach six-month-old children to swim, and he has succeeded. Then he tried with three-month-old children, and he has succeeded. Now he is trying with the newly born, and I hope that he succeeds. There is every possibility because it is a knack. It does not need any other kind of experience, age, education…it is simply a knack.
And if a six-month-old or a three-month-old baby can swim, that means we are naturally endowed with the idea of how to swim. We just have to discover it. Just a little bit of effort and you will be able to discover it.
The same is true about meditation…more true, than swimming. You just have to make a little effort. And if you don’t succeed, don’t be worried. You are losing nothing – just a little rest.
And whenever you are going to sleep you can try – just lying in bed, or in the morning when you are awake, wait for a minute. Give it a try and then wake up.
While taking a shower you can try it, because it is a question of witnessing.
You can witness anything, and anywhere.
There are one hundred and twelve methods of meditation, exhaustive. No more methods can be added to them. And these one hundred and twelve methods are written by Shiva himself perhaps ten thousand years ago. The name of the book is Vigyan Bhairav Tantra. It simply describes one hundred and twelve methods, each method in two lines.
I have tried all the methods, and the most surprising experience was that the basic thing in each of the methods is witnessing. Their strategies differ, but their soul is just witnessing.
So I have reduced the one hundred and twelve methods of Shiva into a single method. I am giving you the essential method which no meditation can afford to drop – it is the most essential. You can add any other structure to it, but I have dropped the whole structure. I am giving you the very soul of meditation. You just try, give it a chance. And if I can succeed, I don’t see why you cannot succeed.
Millions have succeeded in the past. We have just forgotten completely the greatest science of discovering ourselves. It has to be rediscovered and it has to be again spread all over the earth if we want the world to be saved, if we want the world not to be destroyed.

One of my professors, Doctor S.K. Saxena, loved me very much. Most days I used to stay with him instead of in the hostel, because he would not allow me to go to the hostel.
I asked him, “Why do you insist…? Because I am of no use to you – I simply sit in the garden and meditate.”
He said, “That is the reason I want you to be here. I am getting old, I have never meditated. Most of my life I have been a professor in America. I have never given any thought to meditation.”
Despite this, he had written for his doctoral thesis a book, History Of The Evolution Of Consciousness. He said to me, “When you are here I feel something settling in me. When you sleep in my house” – he lived alone – “I have a better sleep. I don’t know why, but just your presence somehow helps me to be more together.”
I said, “I can tell you why. But rather than depending on me, why don’t you start meditating?”
And by chance, today it happens that his son is present in the audience. S.K. Saxena is dead.
I received a message that he wanted to see me before he died. He wanted that I should be present by his side when he died. But I received the message after he had died, months after. Perhaps he wanted to die in the same peaceful silent atmosphere that he had found around me.
I feel sad for him, sorry for him, that what he could have attained himself he unnecessarily depended on somebody else for.

Meditation is something that is your birthright. Claim it! Make it a decision, a commitment that whatever happens, you will not die before you have attained to a meditative state.
It is only a question of a firm determination. And if you can attain to meditation, your life will become real life, and your death will become a door to the divine.
It will no longer be a death, it will no longer be an end. It will just be freedom from the body and entering into the universal, unlimited, infinite.

============================================================

Osho,
Can a man start a journey in two boats – rejoicing the world, and cheering God?
Man has been doing that since the very beginning, and he is still doing it. He is riding in two boats, and the result is the misery, the suffering, the anguish all over the world. You cannot ride in two boats.
Firstly, being in two boats you become split, you become two – you are divided. A house divided against itself cannot stand long, and a man divided against himself is simply sick.
The psychoanalysts call that sickness schizophrenia: he is not one. He has two voices – always in conflict with himself. He wants to do one thing, but half of his being pulls him back: “Don’t do it.” If he wants to do something else, the other half pulls him back and says, “Don’t do that.” Caught between the conflict of his own inner rift, all man’s energy is wasted. He finds himself in a constant nightmare.
You are all doing it, because all your religions have been teaching you to do it – not clearly, not openly, but in a very subtle way.
Religions say that your body and your soul are separate, not only separate but antagonistic to each other; that the body is the enemy of the soul; that if you want to attain something of spirituality you will have to control your body, you will have to stop listening to its desires, you will have to curtail everything in which the body rejoices. In other words, you have to torture the body – torturing the body will be the way towards spirituality.
All the religions have been saying to the world that there are two worlds – this world, and that world beyond death which nobody has ever seen, which nobody has ever proved, for which no evidence, no argument exists. But all the religions have been telling you: sacrifice the world that you know for a world which no one knows whether it exists or not.
They are dividing you again between life and divine life. The divine life is always beyond death. And we have accepted these divisions. Of course, nobody can manage to be completely split, otherwise he will become two persons. The spirit remains always half-hearted; there is always a compromise.
You think, “Just today I can enjoy this, but I promise to God that from tomorrow I am going to start…” That tomorrow is never going to come. Tomorrows have a habit of not coming. That gives you a good space – it never comes, you need not fulfill the promise.
I have heard…

When Edmund Hillary reached to the highest peak of the Himalayas, Gourishankar, he was simply amazed, he could not believe it. He had made so many arrangements and he had put his and his friend’s life at risk. He was going to be the first man to reach Gourishankar, but what he saw there shocked him. A Hindu monk was just squatting on top of Gourishankar. Edmund Hillary could not believe how he managed to reach there. But perhaps some spiritual power…That could be the only explanation.
He fell at his feet to pay his respects. The old man opened his eyes and what he said was even more shocking. He looked at the beautiful wristwatch that Edmund Hillary had and asked, “How much for this watch?”

Man cannot cut himself in two absolutely.
I was in the hills of Parasnath and I came to know a strange thing. Two Jaina monks lived there naked. Naturally, they could not manage to have money with them – where would they keep it? How would they avoid people knowing about it? But man is really inventive; his ingenuity is superb. They would never have been caught, because the naked Jaina monk only carries a small bamboo with a piece of wool attached so that when he sits anywhere he can clean the place with the wool so that no ants or small insects are killed, the wool is so soft.
Those two monks were traveling together for years. In the morning, when they went outside to their toilet, there was a fight – they hit each other with those bamboos. Somebody brought them to the police station. When I heard the news, I immediately went to the police station to inquire what could be the cause between two naked people! People fight for greed, people fight for a thousand and one things, but these people had nothing to fight about.
In the police station I came to know that inside the bamboos they had hidden one hundred rupee notes – the bamboos are hollow – and one was the master and the other was the disciple.
The fight was because the disciple had more rupees than the master, and this was intolerable. The master was saying, “You simply give half of your money to me, otherwise leave me.”
Two persons who had left their families, who had left their houses, all the comforts of life, who were living naked in hot and cold…were still fighting for money…!

That’s why I say it is impossible to cut yourself absolutely in two separate parts. You will have to make some compromise. All over the world all the religious people have made compromises. That is one of the reasons you see so many religions, but you don’t see so many religious people. You see so many monks, missionaries, sadhus, saints, but if you look deep into their lives you will be surprised – it is hypocrisy. Deep inside there is continuously a compromise. I cannot condemn – let me repeat, I cannot condemn them. I condemn those religious doctrines which have been forcing them to do something unnatural, something impossible.
Riding in two boats, or riding on two horses, you are going to get into trouble. Everything is condemned.

In Mahatma Gandhi’s ashram you could not use a mosquito net. His son, Ramdas, was very friendly with me. He had invited me to the ashram, but I said to him, “I cannot stay here with all these mosquitoes. Any intelligent person can understand that a mosquito net is not a luxury, it is not something unspiritual.”
And what had Mahatma Gandhi substituted? He had substituted kerosene oil. You put kerosene oil on your face, on your hands, on whatever parts are exposed, put kerosene oil.
Naturally, the mosquitoes are more intelligent than you – they don’t come near you, because it stinks! But how can you sleep? You have to choose between mosquitoes or kerosene oil.
I said, “I am not going to choose, I am simply leaving. This seems to be some insane asylum – it is not an ashram.”

Gandhi had adopted five basic principles of life from Jainism. The first is: aswad, no-taste – you have to eat, but if you taste, you are a materialist.
I am just trying to show you how they are making it difficult and impossible and unnatural. If you eat, you are bound to taste because you have taste buds in your tongue. Those taste buds don’t know anything about your spirituality and the other world, they will simply function.
Now what are you going to do? You have to pretend that you eat but you don’t taste. And you know all the time that you taste. You are becoming a hypocrite to yourself. You are falling in your own eyes. You are deceiving no one but yourself.

One of the American writers, Louis Fischer, came to Gandhi’s ashram. He was writing a biography of Mahatma Gandhi. He was a special guest in the ashram, so Gandhi took him to lunch. He had seated him at his side, and he told the cooks, “Remember our special chutney.”
What was their special chutney? It was made from the leaves of the neem tree so as to destroy taste.
“So give generously to our friend.”
A big bowl full of chutney made from neem leaves, which are the bitterest, was placed on Louis Fisher’s plate.
If Gandhi is praising this chutney so much – that it is very healthy, keeps your blood pure, is the only thing in the whole vegetable world which has no bad effects…
“Just one thing is a little difficult, but by practice – you will be here for fifteen days – you will get accustomed. It tastes a little bitter.”
So much praise from such a great man! – Louis Fischer tasted the neem chutney first and he said, “My God, this is pure poison! I have never tasted anything like this!”
But to say that to Gandhi was not possible because all the inmates of the ashram were eating the chutney. Gandhi was eating it, and enjoying, and smiling. When thirty other people were eating the same thing and smiling you don’t have the nerve to say that this is poison.
Perhaps you are wrong. Thirty people cannot be wrong. And the great Mahatma Gandhi is not capable of being wrong. But to eat this chutney with food, continuously mixing it with food, will destroy the whole food. So he thought of a more scientific way – being a Western man. He simply drank the whole of the chutney in one gulp, to be finished with it and to then eat comfortably whatever was available. But Gandhi was not an easy man. He told the cook, “Look, Louis Fischer liked the chutney so much…fill his cup again!”

Even if you mix your food with neem leaves you cannot say you are not tasting. That bitterness is also taste, just as sweetness is taste. There is no difference. As far as the word taste is concerned, your buds are functioning.
Gandhi is simply befooling himself. Sweetness is taste, saltiness is taste, bitterness is taste. But the first principle is “no-taste,” and all those people are pretending that they are not tasting anything.
Now you are creating a division in man, you are giving him a false mask which smiles when his whole body wants to vomit. This is how you can ride in two boats. Your whole body wants to vomit – that is one boat. And you smile – that is another boat.
And if your whole life becomes like this, you will be the most miserable person in the world.
And the same division is created for this world and the other world. You are taught that this world has to be sacrificed, this world has to be destroyed completely as far as your interest, your attachment is concerned if you want to gain the other world.
But just go a little deeper into the logic. Why should you want the other world in the first place? It is greed.
They say that here in this world to drink alcohol is a sin, but in the other world water is not available. There are rivers of wine, rivers of champagne, rivers of all kinds of alcoholic beverages – you choose; you can drink, you can swim, you can do anything you want.
But it is a very strange logic. Here just a little drinking is a great sin, and there it is a reward. Reward for what? A reward because you did not drink when you were in this world? But this is a strange reward.
Renounce your wife, renounce women, renounce sex, and in the other world you are to be greeted with beautiful upcharas who are always young, who are all beautiful.
You can enjoy all those women for eternity, just because you renounce a poor wife who will be starving because she was not educated by your society, she was not given financial freedom by your society. And before renouncing her, you have given her at least one dozen children to take care of. So she will be begging, or she may have to become a prostitute just to raise the children that you have left as a legacy.
And you are being rewarded in the other world…? You should be punished! You should be thrown into hell if there is any. You have committed a crime against humanity, but these crimes are being rewarded.
This division is very dangerous, and even if you have renounced the wife and escaped deep into the Himalayas – it is not so easy to renounce women, because the woman is within you, in your mind.
The woman outside was not so important. The real desire for women is hidden within you – it is a center in your mind. What will you do sitting in the Himalayan cave? Do you think you will encounter God…you will have enlightenment?
Most likely you will dream of women, good food, comfortable clothes…small things which you had never thought of before.
I have heard…

One American billionaire became fed up because he had everything that money could buy, and naturally, he wanted some more excitement. He had achieved everything and there was nothing else in this world, so he started thinking of the other world.
The other world is created by these fed up people whose ambition has come to an end. They have everything – now what to do? They are bored. They need some new desire, some new journey, some new adventure, but this world is finished for them. Your priest opened the door of a dreamland – the other world.
So the American billionaire came to the East in search of the right way to the other world. It was a long journey, and finally he came to the Himalayas. People said, “You will not return empty-handed. Here lives a great ancient seer, far away in the mountains. Very rarely have people been able to find him. If you are fortunate enough to find him just touch his feet, ask for his blessing…his blessing is enough.”
The man was so desperately in search, he found the old man, and he clung to his feet.
The old man said, “Not so hard, because I am too old. And first things first, have you got an American cigarette on you? I have been thinking about it for almost thirty years, since I left the marketplace.”
The American immediately pulled out a packet and gave it to the saint.
The saint said, “Now, my son, you can go back with all my blessings. And whenever this urge for the other world comes to you, come again, but bring as many cigarettes as possible.”
The billionaire was very much shocked: “This is not spirituality! The man is asking for cigarettes…”
He had come for the other world. He was a spiritual seeker, and this man was simply an addict, a smoker – mad!

But just think: leaving this world, what are you going to think about, what are you going to contemplate?
My approach is absolutely different. I don’t want you to ride in two boats because I am not your enemy. I would like you to be in one boat. One thing I can allow: you can paint one world on one side and on the other side the other world. Have both worlds together, but on one boat.
There is nothing wrong in enjoying this world and its joys. I don’t see there is anything wrong in enjoying food or clothes, or having a cozy house, or having a beautiful wife or husband. I don’t see anything unspiritual in it. All depends on you.
You can make it unspiritual, you can make it spiritual. When shivering cold, sitting in meditation, you cannot meditate – your teeth are chattering, your body is shivering and you are trying to be calm and quiet and collected.
Use the right clothes. They will help you in your meditation, and suddenly, they become your friends. They are not unspiritual. Good and right food will help you.
It has been found that no vegetarian has received a single Noble Prize up to now. Three Indians have received Noble Prizes, but all the three were non-vegetarians. Medical research shows that vegetarian food is not complete food. Some essential proteins are missing in it, and those are the proteins which help your intelligence. Your intelligence needs them absolutely, otherwise you will remain mediocre – you cannot become a genius.
I have told my sannyasins that I am a vegetarian and I would like the whole world to be vegetarian. But I would not like the whole world to become retarded, so I have made the vegetarian food complete. I have added the unfertilized egg to it. The unfertilized egg has no life, hence it is just vegetarian. Even a vegetable has some life, but the unfertilized egg is simply protein. Adding the unfertilized egg to vegetarian food, vegetarian food far exceeds the non-vegetarian food. Non-vegetarian food makes you insensitive.
If just for a momentary taste you can kill living beings, you are not yet human. Then what is wrong in killing human beings? Their meat is more tasteful….

There is a tribe in existence in South Africa which is still continuing to eat human flesh. It rarely happens that somebody passes that way. If somebody is caught accidentally, only then do they get food; otherwise they have to eat their own children, their own old people. In the beginning of this century there were almost thirty thousand in that tribe, and today there are only three hundred. They have eaten themselves. Once in a while a Christian missionary goes there just to convert these cannibals.
I have heard about the first Christian missionary who reached them – I don’t know whether anyone tried again….
As usual, he was a fat man. They caught him, they tied him to a tree and they were preparing the fire. The missionary was making every effort to persuade them that he had come to teach them the real religion: “Have you ever tasted Christianity?”
The chief of the tribe said, “Not yet. Just wait! When your soup is made, we will have our first taste of Christianity.”

These cannibals are known to unanimously say that the best, most tasteful thing in the world is a small baby’s meat. Just for the sake of taste should we start killing babies? And if you stop killing babies because they are human, then you have to understand that animals are even more helpless. And they have done no harm to you; they have served you in every possible way.
The question to me is not of religion. The question is of your aesthetic sense, of your sensibility.

I was a guest in Maharaj Bownara’s palace and he went to show me what a great hunter his father was. On all the walls were the heads of lions and other animals.
I told him, “Please remove these and don’t mention to anybody that your father did all this, because that means your father was absolutely insane.”

These poor animals are not “game,” as the hunters call them. It is strange that when a hunter kills a tiger it is “game,” and when a tiger kills the hunter, then it is “tragedy.” I don’t understand how the language changes – why is it not a game too?
Killing animals, destroying life just for food, while science is absolutely in a position to provide you with vegetarian food, with all the necessary ingredients for your health, for your mind, is simply stupid.
And I am not saying that it is religiously wrong, I am simply saying it is through insensitivity. It proves you don’t have a heart; it proves you don’t have any feeling. It proves that you are not alert to what you are doing. And when it can be done without being so stupid, there is no need to do it.
Right food which will be helpful to your meditations can be determined medically. There are foods which stimulate sexuality, and there are foods which create a calmness in you. No-taste is not a right principle. Have as much taste as you want. And to give taste, flavor, to any food of your choice is a simple affair.
The food can be arranged, the clothing can be arranged, the housing can be arranged so that you can enjoy this world with totality and with no guilt, and yet become more and more conscious, more and more spiritual. I will not say for the other world. My experience is that the other world is hidden in this world. This world is the circumference; the other world is the center. And if you renounce this world you will never find the other world. How can you get to the center when you have renounced the circumference? You have closed the doors yourself.
Enjoy deeply this world, so deeply that you start coming closer to the center. That world is contained in this world. There are not two worlds; there is only one world. There is only one existence, and all divisions are dangerous. Avoid them.
If you can understand that there is only one world, then it will create oneness in you. Then your body is just the visible part of your soul, and your soul is just the invisible part of your body. Then you can bring both into a communion. And that communion to me is the most important thing for a person to be religious – that all his faculties are functioning like an orchestra, together, complementary to each other.
Right now, renunciation is a very stupid thing that has been torturing humanity for centuries.

I used to know a Jaina monk, Muni Kanak Vijay. He loved me because I never condemned anything. He came to visit me; he stayed with me….
On the first day, he went to the bathroom and came out. After fifteen minutes I went in. I was surprised that there was a smell of cigarette smoke.
I was living with two friends – neither was a smoker. And then I found a piece of the cigarette on the floor. It was simple logic that Muni Kanak Vijay had been in the bathroom before me – he must have been smoking. But a Jaina muni, a Jaina monk smoking is never heard of.
I came out, I went to him, and I told him, “Be sincere. I have nothing against smoking. It may kill you two years earlier – it does not matter. What are you going to do living two years more? It may give you tuberculosis – that too does not matter. Millions of people get tuberculosis without smoking, so why not smoke? I have nothing against it, and I don’t think that it is some unspiritual activity. It is some stupid activity. When you can breathe in fresh air, instead you are breathing in carbon monoxide. You are falling from the state of man. I have no objection – it is your life. But I want you to know the truth. And you know that I never condemn. If you want to smoke you need not hide, you can go to the farthest corner of the garden and smoke there, but not in the house.”
He said, “I am sorry. I have been smoking. It is not right. It is against my whole spiritual training, and I am respected as a monk. It is not dignified for me to be caught smoking.”
And his age was nearabout seventy.
I said, “To me there is no problem. This is what happens when you drop out of the world and renounce the world without having any maturity.”
From the mature being, all that is wrong drops by itself; he does not drop it.
We have been told to renounce the world. I say unto you that if you are ripe, centered, whatever is wrong will renounce you, it cannot come close to you.
Allowing the man to smoke, he became courageous to tell me other things. He said, “This is my only wish and the only desire, and the only person who can help is you. I cannot say it to anyone else.”
I said, “You say it. If I can manage I will do it.”
He said, “I feel very embarrassed, but I have never seen a film because my father became a sannyasin when I was only thirteen. My mother died; my father became a Jaina sannyasin. For me there was no other way than to become a Jaina sannyasin with my father, otherwise I was just an orphan, a beggar on the street. So my mind has not developed from thirteen years of age – I am still there. Seventy years have passed; I know that I have childish desires but what can I do? Whenever I see queues in front of every cinema, I think there must be something great going on. I have been in the world and I will leave without knowing what is happening there.”
I said, “Don’t be worried. I will arrange it.”
I had a Jaina friend just living close by. I called him, and he was a reliable man. Whenever there was something to be done which was difficult he had always been of help. I told him, “This is a difficult job, but this Jaina monk has been suffering for years. You will gain great virtue; your paradise is certain. Simply take him to a film show.”
He said, “What? If Jainas come to know they will kill me for seducing their sadhus, their saints, and taking them to the pictures.” He said, “You have asked me to do so many things which were difficult. I have always done them, but this is too much.”
I said, “But somehow it has to be done.”
He said, “I can do only one thing.” The city where I was living was divided into two parts by the British government. And it has remained almost that way even now: the part where the army and the Britishers lived, and the part where the whole city was. The cantonment part had only English films.
He said, “I can do one thing: I can take him to the cantonment part, but there are only English films and he does not understand English.”
I said, “It does not matter. He simply wants to see what is happening there. You take him to the cantonment part. Understanding is not the question – and you can sit by his side.”
He said, “No! I cannot sit there. I will put him in his seat and run away. I cannot sit there. I will arrange for somebody else to pick him up after the show. I don’t want it to be known that I am doing such things.”
I asked Kanak Vijay, “Would you like to see an English film?”
He said, “It does not matter. I don’t understand English, but something is better than nothing.”
Can you see how we have made the human mind unnecessarily miserable? Now this man at the age of seventy still has a desire to go to see a film.
When he came back, I asked him, “Are you satisfied?”
He said, “That there was nothing, it was great of you that you helped me. I can now die without any desire. Otherwise I was afraid that this desire would continue even at the moment of death.”

If you forcibly renounce anything it will follow you. If your understanding, your meditation, your silence makes you grown up, anything that is stupid will simply fall away from your life, you will not have to renounce it.
And remember one thing: growing old and growing up do not mean the same thing. Everybody grows old, but very few people grow up. Growing up means you are becoming more mature every moment, you are learning, experiencing everything of life.
This life is a gift. It is a university to learn, to become aware of all possibilities, experiences. Go through them. Don’t escape.
Sannyas is not escapism, it is not for cowards – only cowards escape. It is for people who have courage to experience everything. And once you have experienced, you know what is worthwhile and what is not. That which is not of any value simply disappears from your life and slowly, slowly you become a treasure of wisdom.
By the time you leave this life you will not go empty-handed, you will be fully contented, utterly satisfied, grateful, thankful to existence. And this gratitude becomes the door into the second world. That second world is not far away, it is just deeper than this – it is the center of the circumference.
And if this world is so beautiful, if this world is so charming, so enchanting, so magical, how much more will be the center. This world is only the circumference. The center will be a millionfold more.
But never put this against that – that is fallacious. Don’t make two boats – one boat is enough.
The question is very significant because all down the centuries man has been tortured with these two boats, continually hesitating about what to do – whether it is right or wrong, whether it is spiritual or unspiritual. And you have been living with great fear.
The priests are creating as much fear as possible by inventing a hell which exists nowhere. Geographically, hell exists nowhere.
And they are simultaneously seducing you and your greed for a heaven which also does not exist geographically.
Hell is fear.
They make you afraid of hell so that there are a few things that you cannot do. They make you greedy for heaven so that you have to do things which you don’t want to do. And you are caught in a very deep tension.
I am reminded of a beautiful story….

A Japanese king had heard of a saint that had become enlightened. He went into the forest to see the saint, to be with him, to have some taste of his presence.
But as he touched the saint’s feet, the saint said, “Although you are a king you don’t have any manners.”
The king was a warrior. He could not tolerate such an insult in front of so many people. He said, “I only came to ask one question, but you have annoyed me.”
The saint said, “Ask your question.”
He said, “I want to know what the difference is between heaven and hell.”
The saint laughed. He said, “You must be an idiot.”
This was too much.
The king pulled out his sword and was going to strike the saint, and the saint said, “Wait, you are at the door of hell.”
A sudden insight, and the king pushed his sword back into the sheath and touched the feet of the saint. The saint said, “This is the door of heaven. Now you can measure the distance. I have shown you the doors of hell and heaven both.”

Hell and heaven are psychological states. When you are disturbed, in a turmoil, in anger – you are in hell.
Most people, most of their lives, are living in hell. Only very few people have lived in heaven, but that heaven is here on the earth. And the hell too is here on the earth. They are two ways of being – you can manage to be either.
But if you start your journey in two boats you will remain in hell forever, because you will remain in tension and continuously in a state of split.
I want you to be in one boat. I want you to be one integrated self – a single unit, a single voice, a single dimension. Then life is all flowers.

Osho,
What is anger? How can I remain cool and connected, but responsive in the crucial moment?
The psychology of anger is that you wanted something, and somebody prevented you from getting it. Somebody came as a block, as an obstacle. Your whole energy was going to get something and somebody blocked the energy. You could not get what you wanted.
Now this frustrated energy becomes anger – anger against the person who has destroyed the possibility of fulfilling your desire.
You cannot prevent anger, because anger is a by-product, but you can do something else so that the by-product does not happen at all.
In life, remember one thing: never desire anything so intensely as if it is a question of life and death. Be a little playful.
I am not saying, don’t desire – because that will become a repression in you.
I am saying, desire – but let your desire be playful.
If you can get it, good. If you cannot get it, perhaps it was not the right time – we will see next time. Learn something of the art of the player.
We become so much identified with the desire, then when it is blocked or prevented our own energy becomes fire; it burns you. And in that state of almost insanity you can do anything – for which you are going to repent. It can create a series of events that your whole life may get entangled with.
Because of this, for thousands of years, they have been saying, “Become desireless.” Now that is asking something inhuman. Even the people who have said, “Become desireless” have also given you a motive, a desire: if you become desireless you will attain to the ultimate freedom of moksha, nirvana. That too is a desire.
You can repress desire for some bigger desire, and you may even forget that you are still the same person. You have only changed the target. Certainly, there are not many people who are trying to get moksha, so you will not have any great competition. In fact, people will be very happy that you have started going towards moksha – one competitor less in life. But as far as you are concerned nothing has changed. And if anything can be created which disturbs your desire for moksha, again the anger will flare up. And this time it will be far bigger, because now the desire is far bigger. Anger is always proportionate to desire.
I have heard…

There were three monasteries – Christian monasteries – very close together in the forest.
One day three monks met at the crossroads. They were coming from the villages back to their monasteries – each belonged to a different monastery. They were tired. They sat down under the trees and started talking about something to pass the time.
One man said, “One thing you will have to accept is that as far as scholarship is concerned, learning is concerned, our monastery is the best.”
The other monk said, “I agree, it is true. Your people are far more scholarly, but as far as austerities are concerned, discipline is concerned, spiritual training is concerned, you don’t come anywhere near to our monastery. And remember, scholarship will not be able to help you realize the truth. It is only spiritual discipline, and we are the best as far as spiritual discipline is concerned.”
The third monk said, “You both are right. The first monastery is best in learning, scholarship. The second monastery is best in spiritual discipline, austerities, fasting. But as far as humbleness, egolessness is concerned, we are the tops.”

Humbleness, egolessness…but the man seemed to be absolutely unaware of what he was saying: “As far as humbleness, egolessness is concerned, we are the tops.”
Even humbleness can become an ego trip. Egolessness can become an ego trip. One has to be very much aware.
You should not try to stop anger. You should not, in any way, keep the anger controlled, otherwise it will burn you, it will destroy you. What I am saying is: you have to go to the roots. The root is always some desire which has been blocked, and the frustration has created the anger.
Don’t take desires very seriously.
Don’t take anything seriously.
It is unfortunate that no religion in the world has accepted the sense of humor as one of the basic qualities for the religious man. I want you to understand that sense of humor, playfulness, should be the fundamental qualities. You should not take things so seriously, then anger does not arise. You can simply laugh at the whole thing. You can start laughing at yourself. You can start laughing at situations in which you would have been angry and mad.
Use playfulness, a sense of humor, laughter. It is a big world, and there are millions of people. Everybody is trying to get to something. It is very natural that sometimes people may get into each other’s ways – not that they want to, it is just the situation, it is accidental.

I have heard about one Sufi mystic, Junnaid, who every day in the evening prayer used to thank existence for its compassion, for its love, for its care.
Once it happened that for three days they were traveling and they came across villages where people were very antagonistic against Junnaid, because they thought his teachings were not exactly the teachings of Mohammed. His teaching seemed to be his own, and, “He is corrupting people.”
So from three villages they had not got any food, not even water. On the third day they were really in bad shape. His disciples were thinking, “Now let us see what happens in the prayer. How can he now say to existence, ‘You are compassionate to us – your love is there. You care about us, and we are grateful to you.’?”
But when the prayer time came, Junnaid prayed the same way. After the prayer the followers said, “This is too much. For three days we have suffered hunger, thirst. We are tired, we have not slept, and still you are saying to existence, ‘You are compassionate, your love towards us is great, and you take so much care that we are grateful to you.’”
Junnaid said, “My prayer does not depend on any condition – those things are ordinary. Whether I get food or not I don’t want to bother existence about it – such a small thing in such a big universe. If I don’t get water…even if I die, it does not matter, my prayer will remain the same. Because this vast universe…it makes no difference whether Junnaid is alive or dead.”

This is what I mean when I say, don’t take anything seriously – not even yourself.
And then you will see anger simply has not happened. There is no possibility of anger. And anger is certainly one of the great leakages of your spiritual energy.
If you can manage to be playful about your desires, and still be the same whether you succeed or you fail…

I can never forget one instance, one incident….
There was a wrestling competition, a district competition; all the district schools were participating in it. The school where I was studying had no such great wrestler, but we somehow managed one young man who said, “I am not a wrestler.” But I said, “You see the thing – not to participate will look very bad.”
And he was a very simple man. He said, “If you say, and if you all think that it is good for me to join…but I don’t know anything at all. I have never been to the gymnasium, I have never done any exercises. You are putting me in such a situation. But if you want, and if you cannot find anyone else, it is okay.”
So he was to participate for our school. And the strange thing was that because he was not tense – he was prepared to be defeated any moment, with anyone; he was the most relaxed wrestler – he got into the semi-finals!
Our teachers, our principal, our students were simply…could not believe what had happened. Where had this man been hiding?
And in the last round, the man with whom he had to fight was really a very big man, very muscular; he was really a trained wrestler. We came to know later on that he was not a student, that some school had brought in a wrestler. We were all afraid for our poor man. He looked so small beside that man that we were worried what was going to happen.
But what happened was more than anyone could have even dreamed. Our wrestler jumped around the whole area – a dance before going into the fight! The wrestler was a little uneasy about what he was doing. And then he came and just fell flat in front of the wrestler and told him, “Please sit on my chest and be the winner. What is the point of unnecessary fighting?”
Almost everybody appreciated the sense of humor of the man. Even the wrestler laughed and he said, “I have been fighting but I have never come across such a situation. I cannot sit on your chest and I hope the judges declare us equal.”
This man is not to be defeated, at any cost – such a playful and such a humorous man, who falls flat on the ground and says, “Now you sit on my chest and let the judges declare that you are victorious and I am defeated.”
I cannot forget that incident for the simple reason that even at the moment of defeat that man changed it into a victory – he was almost the winner. There was no anger and there was no question of being frustrated. He simply accepted the situation that he was not a wrestler and it was better to be sincere and honest. Why unnecessarily fight and get defeated? It would simply have been wrong for the other man to sit on his chest. It would have looked really ugly, insensitive. He had to say to the judges, “Declare us equal. This man is not the one to be declared defeated. I have learned much more from him than I have learned in so many fights in which I have been victorious or defeated. This has not been a fight at all, but such a great experience that one can take things at ease.”

Just start thinking about yourself at ease – nothing special; not that you are meant to be victorious, not that you have to succeed always in every situation. This is a big world and we are small people.
Once this settles in your being then everything is acceptable. Anger disappears, and the disappearance will bring you a new surprise, because when anger disappears it leaves behind it tremendous energy of compassion, of love, of friendship.

============================================================

Osho,
The technique of self-remembering seems easier for me than witnessing. Do they both lead to the same goal?
They both lead to the same goal, but the technique of self-remembering is harder, longer and dangerous. Only very few people in the whole history of mankind have attained to enlightenment through the technique of self-remembering.
Many have tried, but utterly failed – it looks easy. The reason is that your self-remembering is not going to be your self remembering, it will be your ego remembering; that’s why it looks easy.
You don’t know the distinction between the self and the false self. The false self is our ego, and the ego is very subtle, very cunning, and tries in every way to pretend to be the real self. That’s why in the beginning it will look easier than witnessing, because in witnessing there is no place for the ego. From the very beginning the ego is avoided.
In witnessing, the ego cannot enter. But in self-remembering, there is every possibility of the ego pretending to be your self. Then the more you will practice, the more your ego will become stronger.
If somebody wants to travel on the path of self-remembering, he absolutely needs a master. He cannot move alone, because he cannot make a clear-cut distinction of what is false and what is true. He knows only the false, he is not acquainted with his true being. Unless he is under a very rigorous master it will be very difficult to create a separation between the ego and the self.
I will explain it to you by an ancient Chinese story….

A great master had a big monastery – five hundred monks – and they were all practicing the path of self-remembering. Self-remembering is one of the paths Buddha has recommended.
One man entered into the monastery – he wanted to become a disciple. The master accepted him, but he was a very simple man from a village, almost uneducated. The master told him, “Your job is cleaning the rice in the kitchen.”
It was a big kitchen – five hundred monks. The poor man was cleaning the rice before sunrise and late into the night. He had no time to go to the sermons, to go to the prayers; he had no time to read the scriptures or listen to the wise talks. Those five hundred monks were great scholars, and the monastery was known all over the country.
Twenty years passed and the man continued just cleaning the rice and doing nothing. He forgot even to count the years – what was the point? He forgot the days, the dates, and finally he became suspicious about his own name. For twenty years nobody had used it, nobody had called him by his name – perhaps it was his name, perhaps it was not. For twenty years continuously he was doing one small thing: cleaning the rice, from the moment he woke up until he went back to bed again.
The master declared that his time to depart from the body had come. He wanted to choose his successor, and the way he did it was this: “Anybody who thinks he has succeeded in self-remembering should write on the wall of my hut some insight which shows that he has seen the truth.”
One person, who was thought to be the greatest scholar in the commune, tried. But he was so afraid to write that sentence there, because it was not his insight. He knew – how could he not know it – he knew it was not his insight, it was just borrowed from scriptures. It was not his experience – and it was difficult to deceive the old man.
In the morning the old man came out, asked the servant to erase what had been written, and said, “Find out who this idiot is who has spoiled my wall.”
It is said that the great scholar had not even signed, out of fear that he would be caught. If the master appreciated that this was really a great insight, then he would come out and say, “I have written it.” Otherwise he would remain silent…who knows? Out of five hundred people anybody could have done it!
Almost one dozen great scholars tried, but none of them had the courage to sign his name. And the master behaved in the same way; he erased the line and said, “None of you has come to the point of self-remembering. You have all been feeding the ego in the name of self. I reminded you again and again, but having a big ego is such a joy. And a spiritual ego, the otherworldly ego, the divine ego, becomes even more delicious. Now I will have to find the person myself.”
In the middle of the night the master went to the man who had come twenty years ago. For twenty years the master had not seen him, he had simply been cleaning rice. He woke the man up. The man asked the master, “Who are you?” Because twenty years…he had just seen him once for a few seconds when he was initiated – “And what is the idea of disturbing my sleep?”
The master said, “I am your master. You have forgotten…? Do you remember your name?”
The man said, “That is the difficulty. The work you have given me is such that it needs no name, no fame, no scholarship, no austerities. It is so simple that I have forgotten everything. I cannot be certain that this is my name. A few names come to my mind and I cannot decide which one is mine, but I am grateful to you.” He touched the feet of the master. “Please don’t change my job. I have forgotten everything, but I have also achieved everything. I know a peace that I had never dreamed of, a silence that no word can express. I have known such moments of ecstasy that even if I had died there would not have been any complaint that life has not been fair to me. It has given me more than I was worthy of. Just don’t change my job. I am doing it perfectly well. Has somebody complained about my work?”
The master said, “No, nobody has complained, but your job has to be changed because I am choosing you as my successor.”
The man said, “I am only a rice cleaner. I don’t know anything about being a master or a disciple. I know nothing. Please forgive me, I don’t want to be your successor because I cannot handle such a big job, I can only handle this rice cleaning.”
The master still insisted, “You have achieved that which others have been trying to achieve but have failed. You have achieved it because you were not trying. You were simply doing your small work. Slowly, slowly there was no need for thinking, no need for emotions, no need for anger, no fight, no comparison, no ambition – your ego died. And with the ego died your name. You are not born with a name. It is the ego that is given a name – that is the beginning of the ego. With the death of the ego, you even forgot your own master, because it was the ego that brought you to me.
“Up to that moment you were on a spiritually ambitious trip. You are absolutely the right person, so take my robe, my hat, my sword, which have always been given by the master to the successor. But remember one thing: take them and escape from this monastery as far away as you can, because your life will be in danger. All these five hundred egoists will kill you. You are so simple and you have become so innocent that if they ask you for the robe, the sword, the cap, you will give them. You simply take them and go as far away as you can into the mountains.
“Soon people will start arriving to you just as bees start finding their way towards the flowers when the flowers blossom. You have blossomed. You need not bother about the disciples, you simply remain silently in a faraway place. People will come to you; you simply teach them whatever you have been doing.”
“But,” he said, “I have received no teaching and I don’t know what to teach them.”
The master said, “Just teach them to do small things, silently, peacefully, without any ambition, without any motivation to gain something in this world or in the other world, so that you can become innocent like a child. That innocence is real religiousness. Not being Hindu, not being Mohammedan, but being utterly innocent – just a tabula rasa, a clean sheet on which nothing is written. No Bhagavadgita, no Koran, no Bible…”

It is possible…a few people have attained through self-remembering. One of the great masters of this age, George Gurdjieff, used the method self-remembering, but you have to be aware that not a single person of his disciples became enlightened – and he was one of the most perfect masters.
But the problem is that the ego and the self are so close and so similar that whatever you think is your self is most probably, in ninety-nine percent of cases, just your ego. The master’s function is absolutely necessary for this method, because he has to destroy your ego. And he has to be hard, harsh. Unless he destroys your ego, self-remembering is going to lead you, not to enlightenment, but to darker spaces of being.
It will strengthen your ego more – you will become a very strong ego, very assertive. In any ordinary field of life you will be very successful. You can become an Adolf Hitler, you can become a Joseph Stalin…Stalin was not his real name, it was given to him because he was such a strong man. Stalin means man of steel.
But these people are not a benediction to humanity, they are a curse. If they had not been there man would have been in a far better space, in a far better consciousness.
So if you feel that it is easier for you, then be very careful. I will still suggest that though witnessing may be difficult in the beginning, it is the most safe method without any dangers. It cannot lead you anywhere other than towards enlightenment. So it can even be practiced without a master.
I would like to give you something in which you are not to be dependent on somebody else.
How long have you lived, how many lives? In all these lives you may have come across many saints, many masters, but where have you reached? Your darkness is the same, your unconsciousness is the same. Perhaps they all gave you methods, but the methods were such that they needed constant supervision. Those methods are called school methods. You have to enter into a monastery, live in a monastery, function under a strict discipline – then perhaps you may be able to achieve something from a school method. And there are such monasteries.
In Europe, there is a monastery in Mount Athos; it is one thousand years old. There are almost three thousand monks inside the monastery, and anybody who wants to become a monk in that monastery can decide to enter, but only his dead body will go out.
If there is such a commitment, only then is a person accepted. Once a person enters Mount Athos, you will never see him till he is dead. This is a school for absolute self-remembering, but you cannot put the whole world in monasteries. Who will take care of these monasteries? Hence my preference is to use a method which keeps you free from any commitment, from any dependence – which keeps you in the world and yet not of the world.
Witnessing is the most simple and the most infallible method; it is the essence of all meditations. Even self-remembering, finally, is witnessing – but at a later stage, when you have dropped the ego. And if you start looking inside yourself, you can understand what I am saying. Can you see your ego and self separately? You simply know one thing: that is I. You don’t know two things: that I is the ego, and that the ego is capable of nursing itself through anything.
I have heard…

A small child was passing by the side of a palace. He had failed his examination and was feeling very angry with the teachers. He was ready to do something, and suddenly, he found a pile of stones by the side of the road. He took one big stone from the pile and threw it at the palace. Now the palace had nothing to do with his failing, nor had the stone anything to do with it, but he was in such anger he wanted to do something; the energy was there, and it needed to be released. The boy went on his way, but what happened to the stone?
As the stone started rising up he looked down – his brothers and sisters and cousins were all there. And the stone said to them, “I am going on a pilgrimage. I have been thinking about it for a long time. God willing, I will succeed in my adventures and come back to you to relate all that I experience on the way.”
All the other stones looked at this stone with their mouths open: “What is happening? He has no wings.” He was just a stone like themselves. They also wanted to fly, but they knew that they could not. “But he is flying, you cannot deny it…” So they all said, “Okay, just remember us; don’t forget us. You are a hero. In the centuries of time sometimes one stone gets wings the way you have, and we are proud that you belong to us, to our family.”
They were even feeling great pride because one of the stones was flying towards the palace. The stone hit against a glass window, and naturally, when a stone hits glass it is the glass that is broken, not the stone – it is just the nature of things. But the stone said to the pieces of glass, “You idiots. I have always said, ‘Never come in my way. Whoever comes in my way will be shattered to death.’ Now look what happened to you. Let this be a lesson to everyone who is listening.”
At that very moment the guard on the gate heard the noise of the stone falling on the floor, the glass being broken…he rushed in. He took the stone in his hands, and the stone said – although the guard could not understand his language, because he talked in Nepalese…! He said, “Thank you my lord, you are the owner of this palace – I can see from your beautiful dress. I will never forget this honor that you have given to me – taken me in your own hands.”
The situation was totally different, but the ego goes on turning every situation in its favor.
The guard was afraid that if the king came to know then he would be caught: “What are you doing? Who has thrown the stone?” He threw the stone back out of the window.
And these are the ways of the ego: the stone said, “Thank you! You are not only a great host, you understand the hurts of other people too. You know I am longing to meet my friends. I want to tell them the whole story of my visiting the palace of the king – the meeting with the king, the conversation with the king, the destruction of the enemies who came in my way.” And as he was falling back into the pile of the stones, he said to them, “Brothers and sisters, I am back. You should all be proud. My name should go down in history, and with me, my family’s name. This pile of stones is no ordinary pile, it is something historical.”

The ego has its ways of fulfilling itself even in situations where it should be shattered. So beware of it.
Self-remembering can be done only in a school where you are devoting yourself to the discipline twenty-four hours a day, because it is the moment you remember yourself…While walking you remember, “I am walking” – then walking is no longer natural. It becomes divided: you are separate, and the walking is separate.
Walking is a simple process, but in life you are doing a thousand and one things which are very complex. If you are going to remember yourself while using a machine, while driving a car…it could be very dangerous because your whole focus is in remembering yourself. You could cause an accident which could be dangerous to you, which could be dangerous to others.
Life has its own wisdom. The body has its own wisdom. For example, try one thing and you will understand what I mean: you have been eating every day your whole life but you have never thought about what happens to the food when it goes down your throat – you forget about it. Don’t forget about it. Just for three days try to remember that the food has gone in. Remember that the food is being digested, that juices, chemicals and other things are coming in from different directions, that the food is being mixed with them and the food is being transformed into different things. It is becoming blood, it is becoming your flesh, it is becoming your bones.
In three days’ time you will have such a disturbed stomach, you cannot imagine. It will take at least three months to get it back to its normal state. You are not needed to remember it. It knows its function, and it does its function perfectly well without your remembering.
That’s why when you are sick it is better to rest, because the body needs you to sleep so it can work better without any disturbance from you.
You must have heard the famous story about a centipede….

A centipede has one hundred legs – that’s why it is called centipede. And for centuries, centipedes have been in the world, walking perfectly well – no problem. But one day a rabbit became curious. He saw the centipede, he tried to count his legs and said, “My God! One hundred legs! How does he manage to remember which one to put first, which one to put second?
“If I had one hundred legs,” the rabbit thought, “I would get entangled and I would fall immediately; I could not walk at all. This centipede is performing a miracle.”
He said, “Uncle, uncle, wait, wait! I have a question if you don’t mind…”
The centipede said, “There is no hurry. I was just going for a morning walk. You can ask your question.”
He said, “My question is simple: you have one hundred legs…?”
The centipede said, “One hundred? In fact, I have never counted. It would be too difficult for me to count them, but if you say so then perhaps I must have.”
The rabbit said, “My curiosity is: how do you manage to walk with such a trail of one hundred legs? How do you manage which one comes first, then second, then third, then fourth…?”
The centipede said, “I have never thought about it. I will try. Just now – I will try here.”
And then and there he fell on the ground. He called the rabbit and said, “You idiot! Never ask another centipede such a question, otherwise centipedes will die. We cannot live with this curiosity. I have been doing perfectly well up to now, and just as I started becoming alert about what leg is going when…as I started remembering one hundred legs, my mind got very much puzzled.”

Self-remembering is a school method. And school method means you are in a safe monastery, not doing work that could be dangerous. Otherwise your remembering…working in a factory, working in a carpentry shop and trying to remember, you are bound to get into the same position as the centipede.
I don’t want anybody to get into any trouble in the name of spirituality, hence my suggestion again is just pure witnessing – no question of I. And that too, very playfully, not seriously, with a sense of humor.
If you forget, there is no harm. Whenever you remember, again you start. You will forget many times, you will remember many times. There is no question of guilt; it is human.
Very slowly, bigger and bigger gaps of witnessing will arise in you, and as the gaps of witnessing become bigger, your thoughts will become smaller, less. The moment your witnessing comes to a peak – at certain times with a crystal clarity – the thoughts will simply disappear. You will be in an absolute silence. Whatever you are doing will not be disturbed by your silence, but on the contrary, your workmanship, your creative effort will be enhanced.
If you are making statues, or painting, or playing music…with such a mad mind, with all kinds of thoughts running around, and you can still manage to create beautiful music – just think of a silent mind, how much deeper and higher music you could create.
The same applies to every area of life. I make it a point to be remembered that if your meditation is right, everything in your life will start falling into better shape. That is the only criterion. No need to ask anybody else; you can see yourself.
Everything in your life will become better with your meditation. When your meditation is at its highest peak, all your efforts will have a beauty and a grace and a creativeness that you cannot imagine. That’s why I say, don’t divide spiritual life from the ordinary life. Don’t create any division at all. Let this life remain one single whole.
So if your consciousness changes, then everything that surrounds you also changes.
I cannot imagine a man of meditation renouncing his wife. No, a man of meditativeness will love his wife more. Perhaps his love will become more and more purified, less and less sexual, more and more prayerful. But he cannot renounce her, that is ugly.
Leaving a poor woman and escaping – that is not the work of a brave man. It fits to a coward, but not to a man who is meditating.

In my village I loved to sit in an old man’s small shop. He used to sell sweets. I was attracted, not by his sweets, but by the sweetness of the man. He would say, “The cost price of this many sweets is one rupee, and if you are willing, just for my labors and for my family, you can give me one anna more – that is my profit.”
First he would tell the cost price, and then he would tell his profit. And that too he would leave up to you: “If you don’t want to give it to me, you can take it at the cost price – of course, I am a poor man, I cannot give it to you below the cost price. I can give you my labor, I can give you my profit, but I cannot go below the cost price.”
And I inquired – because it was a sweet market and there were many shops, I inquired in other shops about what he was saying cost one rupee. And others were selling for two rupees, two and a half rupees – the same quantity, but not the same quality, not the same love.
While he was preparing his sweets, I used to sit. He even asked me, “You are the only one. Why do you come and sit here?”
I said, “I simply like it – to see you work. You work so lovingly, as if you were preparing these sweets for your beloved who is coming after many years – and you don’t know who the customer will be.”
And he laughed. He said, “As far as I know it is the same customer who always comes – different faces, but the customer is the same. That’s why I cannot deceive. I cannot cheat, I cannot exploit because it is the same customer with different faces. I have recognized him.”
His whole life I would describe as the life of a great saint, although nobody in the world would recognize him as a saint because we have this idea so deeply rooted in our minds that a saint should renounce life, get away from life. That anti-life attitude has proved so poisonous that it has destroyed the whole beauty of human existence. It has taken away the whole dignity of man.

Hence I still insist – even if you feel self-remembering is easier – that you try witnessing. Even though it is difficult in the beginning, it becomes very easy as you go ahead.
Gautam Buddha has said, “My teaching is bitter in the beginning but sweet in the end.”

Osho,
Although what you say seems to be the very truth, when I tell this to my friends who belong to the higher levels of society – doctors, professors, engineers and administrators in the city – they think I have been hypnotized or brainwashed. Every time I apply logic to this then they are at a loss. But why can't they accept you when they are unable to argue? Why are they so against you?
It is very simple. They think they are intellectuals, but to be an intellectual does not mean to be intelligent.
They are doctors, they are engineers – they may be civil servants, highly posted; their egos have become very big. When you tell them, “You can see for yourself,” they have no counter-argument. But still, they have to protect their egos, and the only way is to tell you that you are brainwashed, that you are hypnotized.
Next time you meet them tell them that to be brainwashed, first one needs a brain. If you have a brain, come to the meeting. And tell them that the latest psychological findings are that only the very intelligent can be hypnotized; idiots cannot be hypnotized!
You can try it. All the experiments on idiots have failed. It is almost like hypnotizing a buffalo. Now it is scientifically established that only thirty-three percent of the whole of humanity is capable of being hypnotized – only thirty-three percent. And this is the same thirty-three percent of the people who are the intelligent part. But perhaps they may not even be aware of the latest findings.
They are using “hypnotism” and “brainwashing” just to put you down.
Ask them, how much they know about brainwashing? Ask them can they brainwash you…how much they know about hypnotism? Ask them, “Can you hypnotize me? And if you don’t know anything about brainwashing and about hypnotism you do not have any right to talk about these things.”
And I am available here. You can tell them, “You can come, you can try to brainwash me or hypnotize me.”
I do not see any harm in either; both are good. A brainwash simply means cleaning all the rubbish that you are carrying in your mind. They are afraid of brainwashing because they don’t have anything other than rubbish. If it is washed away, they don’t have any brain; that is their fear. And why are you afraid of hypnosis? Hypnosis simply means a deliberately created state of sleep. It is a beautiful space, very healthy, and can be immensely helpful. And now, in the most modern hospitals, hypnotists are being employed, because under hypnosis even surgery can be done without any anesthesia. Under hypnosis many diseases can be cured simply because they were only in the mind. They were simply obsessed with certain diseases that were not really there. If through hypnosis you can put the idea in their minds that the disease is finished and they don’t have it anymore, when they wake up you will find a different man who is no longer sick.
Hypnosis can be such a great blessing.
In the Soviet Union they are using hypnosis for teaching. The child goes to sleep in his home, but he has earphones connected to the central system in the school. When he goes to sleep, very slowly they start teaching him things – so slowly that he feels as if he is dreaming and his sleep is not disturbed.
It is a great advantage. It means six hours of the night, eight hours of the night, can be used for teaching.
In the twenty-five years that we waste as far as the university, three times more education is possible. But your so-called intellectuals may not be aware of all these methods which are being used around the world.
Very soon hypnosis is going to be one of the most important sciences to be developed, because man’s mind is in such a tension, in so much misery, in so much anguish that he has to use alcohol, marijuana, hashish, opium and all kinds of drugs just to forget, just to get rid of all the anxieties although he knows it is only temporary. Tomorrow when he wakes up all those anxieties will be waiting at the door; they have not gone anywhere.
Hypnosis can transform you very easily without any drugs. There are people who are suffering from smoking – they don’t want to smoke but they are addicted. They go through a torture. They know perfectly well that it is harmful, they are killing themselves, but no wise counseling can be of any help. They know all that you are saying: that it will destroy your health, your lungs may go wrong, you may get tuberculosis, you may even get cancer, and certainly you will die at least two or three years earlier. Everybody knows it, but still the addiction is there. Hypnosis is so simple. In three weeks’ time, just a three-week course, one hour every day – and your smoking disappears. Just for three weeks, one hour a day, you have to be told, “You don’t need cigarettes, you don’t need smoking.”
There is no need for somebody to tell you, you can just keep a tape recorder by your side. Just record the first session with a hypnotist – and a hypnotist is not a magician, he is a scientist, and what he is doing is a simple method. So just record the first session, and then every time you want, every day, you simply use the recorded session. And within three weeks you will be free of all addiction to smoking or alcohol or anything else.
Hypnosis has not yet been used. It is a tremendously powerful instrument to improve man – his consciousness, his body – in every possible way.
These people don’t know anything at all about brainwashing, nor do they know anything about hypnosis, but because they are professors and they are doctors, they think they are intellectuals. Just invite those intellectuals, and I will do my best to brainwash them – I promise it!
These people are simply afraid – afraid, because on the one hand they try to pretend that they are intellectuals, and on the other hand all that they are doing is absolutely absurd.
I have seen professors behaving just like villagers – going to a certain saint to touch his feet because that has a curative power. Or if the saint blesses you, your promotion is certain. In those moments they don’t think about their being intellectuals.
I have been a professor myself so I know the whole lot….

I remember one professor who had this idea of being a great intellectual, and still, he was a fanatic Hindu. I said, “These things don’t go together. An intelligent man cannot be fanatic. An intelligent man is always open, always ready to listen to the other, and always ready to accept the truth even if it goes against his own old ideas.”
There was a conference, and I spoke in that conference. It was about the status of the Mohammedan women in the modern world. He was also in the audience.
I said, “Allowing a man to have four wives is degrading women into subhuman beings, reducing them to cattle – and Mohammed himself had nine wives. I can neither forgive nor can I forget. This is time for the women to revolt.”
He was very happy because he was a fanatic Hindu and against Mohammedans. He said, “You did a great job; the others were just lousy.”
I said, “But remember that Krishna had sixteen thousand wives. Mohammed is nothing. The five Pandavas had one wife. That is another extreme – five brothers with one wife. This is ugly. And one of the brothers, Yudhishthira, was known as Dharmaraj – as a king of spirituality. If this is the king of spirituality, what about ordinary people?
“And this man, Yudhishthira, was a gambler. Still he is the king of spirituality. He gambled everything. Only the wife was left – that too was a common property of the five brothers. He staked her also, and finally lost her. And still no Hindu criticizes him. At least we should stop calling him Dharmaraj. He is treating women like property, using them like a stake in gambling.”
The man said, “That’s why I never ask you for a lift.”
I said, “It has nothing to do with the lift. You would have to listen to me – you are in my car and I am going to stop when I am going to stop. And if you cannot answer then at least drop the idea of being an intellectual. When I criticized Mohammedans you were happy for the same reason. And with the Hindus – the same reason, on a vaster scale, and then it hurts. This is not intelligence, it is just fanaticism, it is just blind belief.”

These people may have passed examinations, they may have a good memory, but they don’t have intelligence. Intelligence is a totally different matter. An intelligent man in search of truth is always ready from wherever it comes; he is never adamant, never stubborn, never closed. His doors are always open for truth.
These people who are telling you that you are brainwashed – tell them that you are feeling very clean. I do dry washing – and it is absolutely invisible. Tell them, “Nobody will see that your brain has been washed, that it feels really clean.” You tell them, “And since I have been hypnotized I am living in absolute bliss. What are you doing by just being a professor or engineer? It is nothing. I am enjoying paradise.”

Osho,
You have said that without a master it is almost impossible to attain the truth. But how did you, Buddha, Jesus and many others attain to the truth without any help from a master?
I have said that you can attain to truth without a master, but the journey is going to be very long. With a master the journey can be very short; without a master you are groping in the dark. One never knows when you will find the right door. Existence is vast, and life is short. It may take many lives.
So I told you that a master simply helps you to eliminate the wrong doors, the wrong paths, and leaves only the right one. The necessity of the master is for eliminating the wrong paths. But there are people who love the whole journey through many lives. There is no harm; it is their individual decision.

I had a friend who was very rich and he loved me so much that he wanted to leave all his money, all his heritage, in my name, because he had only two daughters who were married and he had no son. So he loved me like a son, and he also loved me like a master. He was the age of my father.
His one hobby was to travel third class and in a passenger train, never express or mail. So it was very difficult. He wanted to travel with me; I wanted to travel with him – I was continuously traveling. But I said, “It is difficult – if from Calcutta to Bombay I can travel in one and a half hours, I am not going to waste five or six days in passenger trains in a third-class compartment – overcrowded, stopping at every station, arriving always at least one day late.”
I told him, “What is the problem? You come with me on the plane.”
And he said, “No. That is not the point. At least once travel with me.”
So once I traveled with him from Hyderabad to Jaipur. It took almost five days, but he was right in his own way. He knew every station master, he knew at which station you would get the best tea, he knew at which station you could get the best bananas…He had traveled his whole life – he knew everything about every place.
In one place he told me, “Come down and be quick!”
I said, “What is the matter?”
He said, “We have to go out of the train, outside the station.”
I said, “What is there?”
He said, “There are beautiful mango groves. And this is the season, and there are beautiful mangoes ripe on the trees.”
But I said, “The train may leave when we are climbing the trees.”
He said, “You don’t be worried. Everybody knows me.”
Hesitantly, I went with him. We climbed a tree – those mangoes I will never forget. They were the sweetest, but I was continuously telling him, “This is enough. We should get…”
He would say, “You don’t be worried. Look up!”
I looked up and there was a man that he said was the driver: “Unless he gets down, the train cannot move.”
It was a wastage of time…five days, but it was a real joy. People would not take money from him for the milk or the tea…they had become accustomed to him so much they would say, “We always wait for you. You are the only permanent customer. Otherwise on a station, a railway station, who is a permanent customer? Go on coming, don’t stop traveling third class on the passenger trains.”

You are right to ask about the people who have reached the truth without a master. It depends on the individual’s choice.
I had the opportunity to choose myself. But I always trusted that if truth was there, it may take a longer time but I would like to reach to it alone, without any help from anybody. It took me lives, and I have enjoyed all those lives.
The search for truth is as ecstatic as finding the truth. So it all depends on you. If you feel like going alone, go alone. Just remember that it may take lives or it may happen immediately; nobody can predict it. By chance you may knock on the right door immediately, but most probably you are going to knock on many doors. So you have to understand it: if you have courage enough, you will not be discouraged being a failure again and again. You will not go back, you will not start saying, “There is no truth, I have been searching for many lives and I have not found it.”

It happened in Colorado, when for the first time the gold mines were discovered, that many people sold everything they had and rushed towards Colorado and purchased as much land as possible, because people were becoming rich so quickly – within days, billionaires.
One man purchased a whole hill. He risked everything. He was a rich man. He risked everything and purchased the whole hill in order to have that much gold. And he brought the latest machinery to dig the gold….
They went on and on digging – no sign of gold. His money was finished, his courage was finished, his friends deserted him. His family started saying to him, “You are mad. Stop all this.”
Finally, he advertised that he wanted to sell the hill with all the machinery that he had brought for the digging. His friends, his family, everybody laughed: “Do you think people are mad? Who is going to purchase your hill?” Everybody laughed and roared.
He said, “The world is big enough. There may be somebody who is madder than me.” And certainly a man turned up and purchased it, and gave him the whole price for which he had purchased the hill and the machinery. Even the man was a little afraid of receiving all that money.
He said, “But do you know I have been trying hard and the gold has not been found yet?”
He said, “I have heard everything. You don’t be worried. If you can risk, I can also risk.”
And you will be surprised that just the first day he found gold. It was only one foot more; just one foot away – and he became a billionaire.

The problem is you may return just after one foot. One has to decide for oneself.
I have told you the safest way, the nearest way, because I know the human frailties. I understand how soon you can get discouraged, how soon you can turn against the whole adventure. You can start saying, “There is no truth, I have looked enough, now I’m not going to waste my time anymore.”
If you are ready to go on and on whatever happens, you will not stop until you discover the truth. Then you can go without a master. Otherwise, be more wise.
I have gone on a long journey and I am not saying that I chose a wrong path – it suited with me perfectly. With a master I may have found very easily but that was not my goal. I wanted to face truth alone. “If there is something like truth then I am ready to wait for eternity, but I will find it myself” – that was my intention. If that is your intention, you are welcome to go alone, otherwise it is simpler to have somebody as a guide who can keep you alert, encouraged, inspired, in spite of failures.
He can show you the same path through which he has reached – which will be the shortest. He knows he has wandered; now he knows what has to be avoided and what has to be chosen. But it is to be each individual’s own decision – nobody else can decide for you.

Osho,
When do I know if my sexual energy is transformed or just repressed?
It will not be difficult. It will be the simplest thing to know. When sexual energy is repressed you will have sexual dreams, you will have sexual fantasies – you cannot avoid them.
When sex energy is transformed, you will not have any sexual dreams, you will not have any sexual fantasies. This is the simple criterion.
I will end with a small story….

In Gautam Buddha’s time there was one beautiful woman – she was a prostitute, Amrapali.
One Buddhist monk was just going to beg when Amrapali saw him. She was simply amazed because kings have been at her door, princes, rich people, famous people from all walks of life. But she had never seen such a beautiful person – and he was a monk, a beggar with a begging bowl.
She was going on her golden chariot to her garden. She told the bhikkhu, “If you don’t mind, you can sit with me on the chariot and I will lead you wherever you want.”
She was not thinking that the bhikkhu would be ready to do it, because it was known that Buddha did not allow his bhikkhus to talk to women, or to touch any woman. And to ask him to sit on a golden chariot in the open street where there were thousands of people, hundreds of other bhikkhus, other monks…
She was not hoping that he would accept the invitation, but he said, “That’s good,” and he climbed on the chariot and sat by her side. It was a scene. She was one of the wealthiest women the world had known. The world knows only two women – one in the West, Cleopatra, and one in the East, Amrapali – who are thought to be the world’s most beautiful women. And a bhikkhu with a begging bowl…!
A crowd was following the chariot, “What is going on there? Nobody has ever heard…”
And then the bhikkhu said, “My camp has come. Thank you for your being so kind to a poor man. You can drop me here.”
But Amrapali said, “From tomorrow, the rainy season is going to be here.” In the rainy season the bhikkhus, the monks, don’t move. They stay in one place – only for the rainy season. The remaining months they are always on the move from one village to another village. “From tomorrow, the rainy season is going to begin. I invite you to stay with me. You can ask your master.”
He said, “Jolly good, I will ask the master. And I don’t see that he will object, because I know him – he knows me, and he knows me more than I know him.”
But before he reached, many others had reached and complained that the man had broken the discipline, the prestige, the respectability…that the man should be expelled immediately.
The bhikkhu came – Buddha asked him, “What happened?”
He told the whole thing and he said, “The woman has asked me to stay with her for the coming four months’ rainy season. And I have said to her, ‘As I know my master I don’t think there is any problem, and my master knows me better than I know him.’ So what do you say?”
There were ten thousand monks, and there was pin-drop silence. Gautam Buddha said, “You can accept her invitation.”
It was a shock. People were thinking he would be expelled, and he was being rewarded! But what could they do. They said, “Just wait. After four months Buddha will see that he has committed a grave mistake. That young man will be corrupted in that place, in a prostitute’s house. Have you ever heard of a monk staying for four months…?”
The man stayed for four months, and every day rumors were coming that “this is going wrong” and “that is going wrong.” And Buddha said, “Just wait, let him come. I know he is a man who can be trusted. Whatever happens he will tell himself. I don’t have to depend on rumors.”
And when the monk came, Amrapali was with him. He touched Buddha’s feet and said, “Amrapali wants to be initiated.”
Buddha said, “Look, about all these rumors…When a real meditator goes to a prostitute, the prostitute has to change into a meditator. When a repressed person who has all the sexuality and is sitting on a volcano goes to a prostitute, he falls down. He was already waiting for it – not even a prostitute was needed. Any woman would have done that.”

The question is saying that all the religions have taught you to repress your sexual energy, and they have created repressed people all around. And those repressed people are very angry with me for the simple reason that I am saying repression is not going to help you.
The energy has to be transformed, otherwise the energy will drag you down more into darkness than towards light.
Do not repress anything.
Whatever is natural is good. Whatever is natural is to be accepted with totality.
You have to do just one thing: don’t be against nature but just be a watcher. Just remain a witness in everything, whether it is eating, whether it is walking, whether it is making love…just remain a witness and you will be surprised. Witnessing is an absolute guarantee of transformation, and you will see the difference.
You won’t have any sexual dreams, you won’t have any sexual fantasies. And if you repress, then you are going to be in trouble. Even Mahatma Gandhi, who was repressing his sexuality, at the age of seventy years was having nocturnal emissions. It is ugly. But I am grateful to him because he was truthful. He at least accepted it. Your so-called saints will not accept it.
Repression will show itself – there is no doubt about it. Some day or other it will bring sex to your mind, either waking or sleeping. But if the energy is transformed then you will have a radiance, a glow, a certain light around you, a certain silence surrounding you; a blissfulness, a coolness that not only you will feel but those who are open also will feel. If you just pass by their side they will feel that not only a person has passed but a phenomenon has passed. Something of your inner core will have touched them. Some music is bound to be heard by those who have ears.
And as far as you are concerned there is an absolute distinction: you won’t have any ideas, waking or sleeping, about sex.