---
title: The New Dawn 01
series: The New Dawn 01-33
talk_number: 1
url: https://oshoworld.com/the-new-dawn-01
language: English
duration: 01:26:44
author: "OSHO'S VISION FOR THE WORLD"
scraped_at: 2026-01-03T09:31:11.733633+00:00
---
Osho,
I have tried, and cannot find the words that adequately convey the beauty of those moments when you enter the auditorium. I see the heads of my beloved friends bend down: their love and reverence for you is so poignant, and touches me so deeply. And when your eyes fall on mine, I feel as if I am drinking from a chalice full of golden light. This connection between you and us, your devotees, this is the real “holy communion,” isn't it?
Maneesha, the space, the connection, the merging and the melting that can be called communion, is one of the great secrets of religious life. We have to understand another word before we can comprehend the meaning and the fragrance of the word communion, and that word is communication. We all know what it means. When two persons are meeting without meeting, without any merging, without any melting – both are keeping a safe distance from each other – it is called communication.
They may be talking, but nobody is hearing. They are talking almost as if in sleep. Their talk may be apparently relevant, rational, but deep down, it is something totally different. When one is speaking, the other is pretending to listen, but he is really preparing what he is going to say after the other stops. He is not silent, he is not absorbing, he is not allowing the other to approach his heart.
In fact, when two persons are meeting, there are four persons, not two. Two are the real persons which are hidden behind two false personalities; both are pretending to be what they are not. Both are trying to show their best, both are on exhibition, both are showmen. The real persons are hidden behind; they are unapproachable. You can at the most have contact with the mask, with the personality.
And because the personality is false, all its promises are false, all its commitments are false – it says something, it does just the opposite. It says something, it means something else. To watch two persons, just as an observer, you will be surprised: nobody is hearing anybody, and yet both are pretending that they are not only hearing, they are understanding, they are responding. And what is their response? They just catch a word, and they jump in and start talking. It seems to be related, because they have caught a word from your talk. But they are not responding to you; they have been preparing what they are saying without hearing you.
I have heard…

An old man is sitting in a railway compartment and a young man in front of him asks, “Can I know the time?” The old man has a watch, but the old man thinks for a while. The young man thinks, “It is strange, I have just asked about the time – what is he thinking? Perhaps he is deaf, he is old.” So he shouts loudly, “I want to know, what is the time?”
The old man said, “Listen, young man, I am not deaf. I have heard that you want to know what the time is, but I was thinking whether to tell you the time or not, because life is such a puzzling affair, and I am so experienced.”
The young man said, “This is such a simple question. You have a watch, you can just tell me the time; there is no problem, no puzzle, nothing.”
He said, “You don’t understand. Once I tell you the time, one thing leads to another. I will ask you, ‘Where are you going?’ And you will say, ‘The next station,’ and I will say, ‘That’s strange, I am also going there. In fact I live there, so why don’t you come and have a cup of coffee with us?’ But I have a young girl, very beautiful, and it is absolutely certain that you will fall in love with each other. And I don’t want my daughter to be married to a man who does not have even a wristwatch. So I was thinking, ‘Now this young man is trying to create a trouble for me.’”

Life is certainly puzzling.
And these people are conversing with each other!

Two professors were in the same madhouse, and the superintendent wanted to know what would happen if they were both put in the same cell. Both were great intellectuals, well-known writers.
So he puts them both in one cell, and he has a small window from where he can watch but they cannot see him. And they immediately get into a very involved conversation. He is puzzled because one is talking about the earth and the other is talking about the sky, and the conversation is going perfectly well; there is no connection at all. It is impossible to find at what point they connect. They are like parallel lines which never meet, but go on running side by side.
Finally he opens the door. He cannot resist the temptation, and he tells them, “I cannot understand. You are both talking, and talking beautifully, but you are not relating with each other.” And they both say, “You need not be worried, we know the art of conversation: I wait while he talks; when he stops, I talk. He waits, he is a very polite fellow. When I stop, he starts – this is the art of conversation.”
But the superintendent said, “But you don’t connect with each other.” And both laughed; they said, “Who does connect with each other?”

In the whole world people are only pretending to connect; otherwise everybody is waiting for the other to stop, so he can start. He says what he wants to say; it has nothing to do with the other person and what he has said. You just watch yourself talking to people, and you will be surprised: those two mad professors were not wrong about everybody.

Paddy and Mick met in the street. “Have you seen Mulligan lately?” asked Paddy.
“Well,” answered Mick, “I have, and I haven’t.”
“And what do you mean by that?” asked Paddy.
“Well,” said Mick, “it’s like this: I saw a chap that he thought was me, and when we got up to one another, it was neither of us.”

It looks insane, but whenever you are meeting with people, neither you are you, nor the other person is himself. Both are wearing a facade, a mask. Both are hiding behind it; the realities don’t come in contact, only the hypocrisies communicate. And communication is the only thing we ordinarily know. Communion is possible when the personalities are dropped and instead of four there are only two – the real and authentic beings.
Communion is a silent meeting.
Just as a river disappears into the ocean, two beings disappear into each other, without holding anything back. Two flames come close to each other and suddenly become one flame. Neither loses anything, and both gain all the treasures of the other.
Maneesha, you are saying, “I have tried and cannot find the words that adequately convey the beauty of those moments when you enter the auditorium.” Words will always fail whenever something really beautiful, something existential, something of the beyond, something sacred is happening. Words simply fall short.
Always remember, when words fall short, it is a very blissful moment; when you cannot express it, then it has some significance. If you can express it, if it is possible to put it into words and language, then it is just something below mind.
Everything below mind is mundane.
Everything beyond mind is sacred.
But that which is beyond mind cannot be put into language, into words. So whenever you see a moment arising in you that is so big that no word can contain it, you are blessed; you are showered by flowers from the beyond.
You are saying, “I see the heads of my beloved friends bend down: their love and reverence for you is so poignant, and touches me so deeply. And when your eyes fall on mine, I feel as if I am drinking from a chalice full of golden light. This connection between you and us, your devotees, this is the real ‘holy communion,’ isn’t it?”
Yes, this is the holy communion, where the egos disappear in a great flood of love, where small minds are left far behind, and you are flying like eagles across the sun, in the infinity of the sky – where you are not bound by your bodies, by your minds; where suddenly, you have become a freedom, a spirit. And if there are many people together in the same space it certainly deepens the mystery, the glory, the magnificence, the divineness of the moment. Yes, Maneesha, this is what I call “holy communion.”
I am not.
I have not been there for a long time.
In certain moments you join me, and you are also no more. In this silence, in this nothingness, where neither I am nor you are, but only a silence prevails – this is the “holy communion.” This is the greatest beautitude, the highest benediction.
This is the door to the divine. This is the door invisible to the eyes, but perfectly visible to the inner being.
Those who enter this door are no more Hindus, no more Christians, no more Buddhists. They are simply pure spirits, just innocent beings – with a fragrance they have never known, which surrounds them with a light that dispels all darkness…with a music which is without any sound, and a feeling of dance, although there is not any movement.
This is the great secret of being religious.

Osho,
Many Germans think Martin Luther to be a great rebel. He toppled the absolute power of the pope, made the Latin Bible available to all by translating it, and married a nun. Yet he immediately joined other vested interests. And the whole event is called “The Reformation.” Can you please speak on the difference between rebellion and reformation, and whether real rebellion can turn into reformation.
I have never spoken on Martin Luther for a particular reason. He was neither rebellious, nor religious; he was a pure politician. He toppled the power of the pope, not because he was against power – he wanted to have it himself, he was jealous of it. Because he could not get it, he created a split in Christianity between those who followed the pope and those who followed him.
His desire for power was so great that as soon as he had created the split in Christianity, he immediately joined hands with the vested interests. This is not possible for a rebel.
A rebel is always a rebel. It does not matter who has the power, he is always against people having power; his whole philosophy is decentralization of power. Power should not be centralized in a few hands, either political or economic or religious. It should be decentralized. It should be given to everybody – to every individual, his own power. Nobody should be in possession of somebody else’s power.
Martin Luther was a cunning politician. It was because of his cunningness and political acumen that he managed to create a rift in Christianity, pretending to be a great rebel. Jealousy finds a thousand and one ways to hide its face.
His whole mind was bent upon becoming the pope, but if it was not possible, then he would not allow anybody else to remain in absolute power. The people who followed him are not accidentally called Protestants. Basically, he was protesting against the power of the pope, not so that the power should be distributed, but so that he should be given the power. And just to show that he does not care about the pope, he married a nun and he translated the Bible into the living languages.
The pope was against both: a monk should be a celibate, and the pope was not willing to have the Bible translated into the ordinary languages which people use. The reasons are clear – it is not only the pope, all the religions in the world have resisted having their holy scriptures translated into the living languages which people speak. The fear is that if they can understand what is written in the holy scripture, they will pass through a great shock – because there is nothing much holy in it.
And there is so much unholy in it…
These so-called holy scriptures cannot even be considered great literature. Their standard is so mundane, so mediocre that all the religions of the world have thought it is better that they should remain in languages which nobody understands anymore.
When you hear somebody chanting sutras in Sanskrit, it seems they must have meaning of tremendous significance – particularly all old languages are very musical. They had to be, because writing came into existence very late, and people had to remember. And it is easier to remember poetry than to remember prose. So all holy scriptures are poetic, and all old languages – Latin, Greek, Sanskrit, Arabic, Persian, Chinese – are all very musical. If you don’t understand them, they sound great. It feels like there must be a secret hidden meaning in these musical, beautiful words.
Translated, they fall flat on the ground; there is nothing much in them. They are so ordinary that sometimes one feels ashamed – this is my holy scripture? Many of the holy scriptures are full of obscenity, full of pornography. The Holy Bible has five hundred pages of sheer pornography. The pope was afraid because to bring the Bible into ordinary living languages, which people know and use, was dangerous. And celibacy was the fundamental attitude of all religions, not only of Christianity.
Martin Luther was so angry because he could not become the pope – and it was not in his hands to become the pope; a pope is elected by the cardinals.
They have a special way of electing a pope: there are perhaps two hundred topmost cardinals who gather in the Vatican whenever a pope dies. There is a special place in the Vatican where there are two hundred small cells. Those cardinals move into those cells for twenty-four hours, fasting, praying, finding the message of God within their hearts: who should be the pope? After twenty-four hours, they write the name of one of the cardinals from among those two hundred cardinals, and then all those pieces of paper are collected. Whoever gets more votes, whoever gets his name written by more cardinals than anybody else, is chosen as the pope.
It is a very strange election: you cannot campaign, you cannot ask somebody, “Please give your vote to me” – it is prohibited. And you cannot meet anybody else while you are deciding; you are closed in your small cell. It is hoped that, fasting and praying, you will do something which will be right, which will not come out of political considerations but which will come out of deeper feelings: who is really capable of being the head of the whole religion? – because he is going to be the representative of Jesus Christ.
Martin Luther had no hope…but he could create a protest, and he chose two particular points on which people would support him – this is simple politics – because many priests, bishops, and cardinals wanted to get married, but had not the courage to fight against the tradition. When Martin Luther married a nun, immediately so many other priests and bishops followed – not that they were convinced that Martin Luther’s ideology was right, but because he was giving them an opportunity to get married and yet remain a Christian. They were tired of suppressing.
And the masses supported him because he was bringing the Bible into the language of the people. People wanted to know what was in the Bible; it was a mystery to them.
Martin Luther could not become the pope of the whole of Christianity, but he became the head of the Protestant Church. He became a second pope of a sect which had broken away from the mainstream. I have never spoken on him consideredly, because I don’t count him, in any way, among the religious people – he was not rebellious at all. He was simply jealous, and that is the reason why, as he separated from the church and created a new sect, he immediately joined hands with the establishments of other vested interests. He needed power, he needed money, he needed new churches; he needed everything to create a whole religion – and he created it.
It is called in the books of history, Nirvano, The Reformation. In a very ordinary way, it can be called a reformation – nothing much to brag about. What is great in marrying a nun? Is there some great revolution happening? Millions of people are married. What is great in translating the Bible from Latin? It was translated from Hebrew into Greek, from Greek into Latin, so what was the problem? It had already been translated into different languages; now it could be translated into English, into German. Yes, there was some kind of reformation, but I don’t give any value to it.
One man came to me a few years ago with a letter of introduction from one of my old professors: “This man is very revolutionary, you will like him. I am sending him to you, he always wanted to meet you.”
I asked the man, “What kind of revolution have you made? Or what kind of revolutionary thoughts do you have?” He said, “I have married a widow.”
I said, “What revolution is this? Every widow should be allowed to be married. What? Is this all the revolution that you have done, or is there any other revolution?”
He said, “Up to now I have done only this revolution.”
I said, “This is not much of a revolution.”
In another place I met a man who was known in that area as very revolutionary – and what was he doing? He was doing collective marriages. Ordinarily, one man goes to marry a woman, but he would collect a dozen women and a dozen men to cut expenses – just one priest can do the whole process for one dozen couples, there is no need to do it one dozen times. And he was thought to be a great social revolutionary.
I said, “What kind of revolution are you doing?”
But these are the things that are thought to be revolutionary. What Martin Luther has done is just ordinary; it does not make any change in human consciousness. It has not raised the Protestant Christians, in any way, higher in consciousness than the Catholics. It does not in any way contribute to the betterment of humanity. It has just fulfilled the egoistic desire of Martin Luther to be a pope himself, the head of the Protestant religion; he claimed to be the real successor of Jesus Christ. I am not interested at all in these kinds of reformations; basically, they are stupid.
Just a few days ago, one of my sannyasins, whose husband had divorced her, was going to get married. She brought me the form for applying to the registry office to get married, and there was a section: “Are you married or not?” Her advocate had suggested, “You have to write that you are divorced.”
I said, “Don’t write that because the moment you write that you are divorced, it means a lot of paperwork: you have to prove it, find testimonials, certificates, divorce certificates from the magistrate. Just write ‘Unmarried,’ because the form is simply asking, ‘Married or unmarried?’ It is not asking, ‘Divorced or not?’ And once you are divorced you are simply unmarried; you are again ready for marriage. What does ‘divorced’ mean? – simply that you are no longer married; you are again a Miss.”
She said, “But my advocate says that…”
I said, “Forget all about that advocate. Simply write your name with a Miss, unmarried. You can get married as many times as you want, and you can get unmarried as many times as you want – but each time you get unmarried you are again a Miss.”
But people will start proclaiming such things to be revolution, social reformation. Revolution is a big word. It should change some foundations of life. Reformation is not that big, but still it should formulate better life systems.
What has Martin Luther done? He translated the Bible into German, and became himself a head and proclaimed, “I am the real representative of Jesus Christ” – because he did not have any hope or any possibility to be chosen as pope. He was so stubborn and so egoistic that nobody wanted him. He was not even a cardinal – the question of being chosen as pope does not arise.
So it was just ambition, and to fulfill his ambition he had to persuade the public mind that he was doing something good for their welfare. Of course nuns liked it, because many nuns were dying to get married; many monks liked it – they were dying to get married and they could not tell anyone. The people who followed him were the people who were cowards and could not take a stand on their own.
And the masses loved the idea that the Bible should be available in their own language, but it changes nothing. Instead of one pope, now there are two popes. Instead of one Christianity, now there are two Christianities. And what is the difference between them? – just these are the differences, not even worth calling differences.

Paddy was dawdling on the way to work, looking half asleep. Mick caught up with him. “What is wrong with you this fine morning?” asked Mick. “You look half asleep.”
“I am half asleep,” said Paddy. “I was up half the night.”
“What was the trouble?” pursued Mick.
“It was the cat,” replied Paddy. “I had to sit up till midnight waiting for her to come in so I could put her out for the night.”

Reformation, revolution, rebellion – we have to take these words out of the hands of those people who have destroyed their beauty and their meaning.

Osho,
Growth is my passion, transformation my first love. Because I hold the belief that growth comes through hard work, struggle, and agony, I am happiest when I am in pain, which I interpret as being useful for my growth. I keep this belief, because my experience is that many times after deep suffering, a breakthrough happens for me. Would you please explain the suffering I feel as a seeker and how it differs from my old neurotic misery?
Avirbhava, I think you have a certain point of significance: misery can certainly be different from suffering – it may not be, but there is a possibility of its being different. Misery is a state of mind when the night is dark and you don’t have even a hope of any dawn. When all hopes die, you shrink within yourself.
You want to die, but you cannot die either. You cannot live, you cannot die; you are crushed between the two. This kind of misery does not help growth; on the contrary, it destroys all the possibilities of growth. The night becomes longer and longer, and the dawn goes on receding farther and farther. Instead of having a breakthrough, you can only have a breakdown.
But there are states of mind when you are in suffering; misery is absolutely negative, suffering has a positive side to it. Suffering means you have a longing, a hope, and you are not finding a way. You are searching, but you are failing again and again. You are trying your best to come out of it – you are struggling with your suffering, you have not accepted it as your fate. Then there is a possibility that the night will end – a new dawn, a new beginning, a new consciousness.
The difference is in whether you have accepted your suffering as your fate – “this is all life is” – then it is misery. If you have not accepted it as your life, but only as birth pangs – that when you are being born you have to pass through a certain pain, but there is a future beyond pain, and the pain is going to help you to reach that state beyond it – then suffering has a possibility of breakthrough.
And Avirbhava, as I know you…I have been watching you. It is something special – you may start crying, in a moment, tears, big tears, real big tears. And then suddenly all the clouds have moved and Avirbhava starts smiling a beautiful smile. The tears have disappeared. And within a second again – as many seconds as it takes for me to come from the room to my chair, or to go from my chair back to the room – in this small time span, Avirbhava can go into many breakthroughs.
Just go on watching her: she goes on changing, any moment, absolutely unpredictable. So many seasons come and go, and between all these tears and laughter she looks absolutely innocent, like a child, utterly pure. Her tears don’t look like tears of misery. And her observation seems to be perfectly right. Perhaps what brings tears to her eyes helps her to move toward laughter. And so easy and quick is the change. Everybody once in a while feels such things, but you have old type gears, you have to change by hand. She has automatic gears – just for no reason at all, one moment…
Just one joke for her:

Hymie Goldberg was stopped on the highway for speeding. The traffic officer was about to book him when he saw there were fifteen penguins sitting in the back seat of Hymie’s car.
“What are those penguins doing there?” asked the traffic officer.
“They were hitching a ride,” said Hymie, “so I picked them up. I am taking them to the zoo.”
“Okay,” said the traffic officer, “I will let you off this time.”
The following week Hymie was stopped for speeding on the highway again by the same traffic officer, who recognized the same fifteen penguins in the back of the car. This time all the penguins were wearing sunglasses.
“I thought you said you were taking those penguins to the zoo?” said the traffic officer.
“Yes, officer,” said Hymie, “that was last week. Today we are going to the beach.”

============================================================

Osho,
For the past three months, I have been working physically quite hard in the garden. I loved the work very much, and I felt deeply connected to you. It was as if your creativity and grace were blissfully flowing through me. But somehow in the last few weeks, I have fallen out of this beautiful space and I have seen a lot of old ghosts turning up again: impatience, competitiveness, perfectionism, lots of anger and seriousness. Simultaneously, I very painfully experienced my being less connected with you, to whom I have felt so close and who allowed me to be so close.
While writing this I cannot contain my tears. What went wrong? Soon I have to leave but I don't want to leave with this burden. Please, beloved, help me, and show me where I missed, so that I can leave in joy and peace and carry you with me in my heart.
Premda, the evolution of consciousness goes through many ups and downs. It is a hilly track. Nothing has gone wrong with you – it is just that you are not acquainted with how the path moves. Many times it goes down just to go higher than before. It passes through valleys to reach to the peaks, and each peak is just a beginning of a new pilgrimage because a higher peak is ahead of you. But to reach to the higher peak, you will have to go down again. Once you have understood that it is natural, all your misery, all your clouds will simply disperse.
You have been doing perfectly well. So the first thing to be remembered is, never be worried when days of down-going come; keep your eyes always on the faraway stars. Those valleys are parts of the mountains. You cannot take the valleys away and leave the mountains alone. Once this sinks deep into you, you will pass through the valleys dancing and singing, knowing perfectly well that a higher peak is waiting for you. And there is no end to this pilgrimage. Just as every day is followed by night, every height is followed by a down-going.
One has to learn not only to rejoice in the day but to rejoice in the night too – it has its own beauty. The peaks have their glory, the valleys have their richness. But if you become addicted to the peaks only, you have started choosing, and any consciousness that starts choosing gets into trouble. Remain choiceless, and whatever comes, enjoy it as a part of natural growth.
The night may become even darker, but the darker the night becomes, the closer is the dawn. So rejoice in the darkening night, and learn to see the beauty of darkness, of the stars, because in the day you will not find those stars. And never compare what has been, and what should be, and what is.
What is has to be rejoiced.
Now you are going away from me – this will give you a new experience, because you may be going away from me but I am not going away from you. You will find me in your joyful moments and you will find me in your sad moments. A life which knows no sadness, no tears, remains poor. Life has to know all the varieties of experiences to be rich. The more you know different aspects of existence, and still keep yourself together and centered, the more your life will find itself becoming richer and richer every moment, every day.
Going away is just a means of coming back again. How can you come back if you don’t go away? Always look at life as a dialectical process.
Here, night brings the day.
Here, death brings a new life.
Here, sadness brings a new rejoicing.
Here, emptiness brings a new fulfillment.
Everything is connected together…it is part of one organic whole. We create problems by dividing things. Learn the art – not to divide, but simply to remain alert, watchful, enjoying whatsoever life provides.
You are here with me; you will be in Germany with me because my being with you is not a physical affair. It is a love affair which knows no distances of time, no distances of space. Wherever you are, you will find me. In whatever situation you are, you will find me. Just remember one thing: accept everything that life gives to you. If it gives you darkness, enjoy it – dance under the stars in the dark night, remembering that every night is nothing but a womb for a new dawn, and every day is going to rest again in the darkness of the night.
When it is fall and the trees become naked, and all the foliage falls down, just watch the old leaves flying in the wind in the forest, almost dancing. And the naked trees have a beauty of their own against the sky, but they are not going to remain naked forever. The old leaves have fallen just to give place for new leaves, new flowers.
Existence goes on renewing itself every moment. You should keep in tune with existence, never ask otherwise. That is the root cause of misery: when it is night, you cry for the day; when it is day, you cry for the rest of the night. Then life becomes a misery, a hell. You can make it a paradise by just accepting whatever is given to you with a grateful heart. Don’t judge whether it is good or bad. Your gratefulness will transform everything into a beautiful experience, and will deepen your awareness, will heighten your love, will make you a beautiful flower with great fragrance.
Just learn the art of total acceptance.
Gautam Buddha calls this the philosophy of thusness: whatever is, accept it as the nature of reality. Don’t even imagine to go against it. Never go against the current; just follow the river wherever it leads.

Two tramps sat with their backs against a tree. “You know, Jim,” the first tramp mused, “this business of tramping your way through life is not what it is cracked up to be – wandering, unwanted everywhere, sneered at by your fellow man.”
“Well,” observed the second tramp, “if that’s the way you feel about it, why don’t you go and find yourself a job?”
“What?” exclaimed his friend, “and admit that I’m a failure?”

Never admit that you are a failure. The secret of thusness, the secret of total acceptance, is the secret of absolute success; you cannot fail. There is no power anywhere that can make you a failure, because even in failure you will be dancing and rejoicing. Transform every opportunity into something creative and beautiful.
I don’t want you to get the illusory idea of remaining permanently in the same state of mind; that is possible only if you are dead. If you are alive, climates will change, seasons will change; and you have to learn through winters, through summers, through rains. You have to pass through all these seasons with a dance in your heart, knowing perfectly well that existence is never against you. So whatever it gives, it may be bitter, but it is a medicine. It may not taste sweet to you in the beginning, but finally you will find it has given you something which just one state of mind could not have given.
So whatever is happening is good…take it easy. This will not stay, this will also change; but don’t make any effort to change it. Leave it up to existence. This is what I call trust. Existence is wiser than you and will provide you with all the opportunities needed for your growth.

Osho,
The white cloud is now an experience. The whole world changed the moment I let go. Existence takes care, and life is an adventure. So this way of life – no nationality, no house, no society – is tremendously rich and beautiful inside. The outer world seems sometimes like a bad dream. Everywhere I go I am a problem for people, and everywhere there are houses in which there is somebody who says, “This is my house.” Many are afraid of dropping their masks, but happiness is my blessing. Thank you, Osho, for creating me. As your lover now, in this reality, my character has become like yours. Wherever I go, it feels you go there – or Shiva, or Krishna. This is my real family. Is everything okay with me, Osho?
Everything is absolutely okay with you. That’s what I was telling Premda. He is feeling something has gone wrong. The only thing is that somewhere in the corner of your mind there is still a question mark; otherwise the question would not have arisen. Everything is perfectly good except the last sentence when you ask, “Is everything okay with me, Osho?” That sentence is not right; otherwise, everything is perfectly okay.
But I can understand when it happens for the first time…it is so vast, so enormous, so inconceivable to you that you cannot believe it is happening to you. And when you look at others…and just because of old habit, you compare; then the question arises – it is not happening to everybody, it is happening only to me. Am I right or have I gone crazy? In fact, you have gone crazy – that’s why you are right.
I teach nothing but craziness.
This whole existence is crazy. Here, sanity is sickness. Here, wildness…a beautiful madness, a state beyond mind is the way to know the greatest blessings and the purest joy, the secret-most truth.
Look at all the trees, the birds, the stars, the ocean, the mountains – do you think all these people are sane? If they were sane, they would have been praying in churches, reading the Holy Bible or Shrimad Bhagavadgita or the Holy Koran, praying in some synagogue, listening to some stupid rabbi. But these crazy people all over the vast universe don’t care a bit about any religion, about any philosophy; they simply go on singing their song, dancing their dance.
Do you think these birds who go on chitchatting ever bother whether they are right or wrong? Spring comes and trees are burdened with flowers and fruits. Do they brag? Their acceptance is so total that in their acceptance and totality, no question arises at all. This is their beautiful craziness.
Craziness has something tremendously interesting.
Sanity is just boring. If by some misfortune you happen to be with some sane person for a few hours, he will start driving you insane.
I have heard a story: When India and Pakistan were divided, there was a big madhouse just on the border. Nobody was interested in the madhouse, whether it goes to Pakistan or to India, but it had to go somewhere. And because no politicians were interested, finally the superintendent gathered all the mad inmates and asked them, “Do you want to go to India or to Pakistan?” They said, “We are perfectly happy here. We don’t want to go anywhere.”
The superintendent tried hard to explain to them that, “You will not have to go anywhere. You will remain here, but just tell me where you want to go – to India, or to Pakistan?” Those crazy people said, “Have you gone crazy? You are saying, ‘You will remain here.’ And still you are asking, ‘Where are you going – to India or to Pakistan?’ We don’t want to go anywhere. We are perfectly happy here.”
The superintendent tried in every way, but he himself started feeling a little dizzy because what they were saying seemed to be absolutely right: if they don’t have to go anywhere, then what is the problem? They are perfectly happy.
Finally it was decided…because they could not be convinced, they could not even be explained to; they were all laughing and enjoying the whole thing – what kind of stupidity is this? So finally the superintendent decided to divide the madhouse into two parts.
A big wall was raised in the middle; those who were living on the other side became citizens of Pakistan and those who were living on this side became citizens of India. And I have heard that still those madmen climb up the wall and talk to each other, and they say, “This is strange. We are where we used to be always, and now you have gone to Pakistan and we have gone to India. It seems the whole world has gone insane. By great fortune, it is good that we are inside and not outside; outside it seems everything has gone insane.”
They are still meeting on the wall, laughing and enjoying, that this is a wonderful experience. Everything is as it used to be, everybody is in his own room – just a wall has been added in the middle. Those mad people seem to be certainly more sane than the people outside in the world. We go on drawing lines dividing countries, making new countries, fighting for new countries – and we are where we are.
You are perfectly right. Just don’t listen to the insane people of the world, and don’t compare; otherwise, this question will become a persistent visitor to you. Except the last line, your whole question is a beautiful statement of how a sannyasin should be. Just drop the last line; I don’t think it will be very difficult to drop.

Two Irishmen are driving to a pub with a bomb in the back of their car and evil plans in their minds. One turns to the other and says, “What if the bomb goes off before we get there?”
“Don’t worry,” the other replies, “I have got a spare in the boot.”

Just enjoy the insanity all around.
Of course they will call you crazy; there is no need to argue. There is nothing wrong in being crazy. They have always called the people who were different from them crazy. They have called Socrates a madman, they have called Jesus a madman, they have called Mansoor a madman, they have called Sarmad a madman. And this is their strategy: first, they call these people mad; then they have found a right excuse to kill them. But they don’t know they are killing their highest peaks of consciousness, their greatest sons. They are destroying their own glory.
Socrates is reported to have said to the chief judge who ordered his death sentence by poison, “Remember one thing: your names will be remembered only because of me; otherwise you would have been forgotten. You will remain obliged forever to the man you are sending to death because I am going to become an immortal, and your names will be remembered only because you did this stupid thing.” And certainly, it is true; who would have remembered those judges? But because of Socrates, those names are remembered.
Who would have remembered Pontius Pilate? It is because Jesus was ordered to be crucified by him; otherwise Judea was such a small country of no significance, and there have been many governor generals before Pontius Pilate and after him…
Nobody remembers their names. There is nothing in Pontius Pilate for which he should be remembered. He is remembered only because he killed a man who was unique and different from the masses.
I have heard…In a small school the teacher was telling the students, small boys and girls, about the trinity of Christian theology: God, the son Jesus Christ, and the holy ghost. These three are equivalent to the Hindu trimurti, the three faces of God – Brahma, Vishnu, Mahesh.
After explaining everything about the concept of the trinity, she asked the students, “Can you draw a picture of all three according to your own idea?”
They all tried, but she was struck by a small little boy because he had made an airplane with four windows. And from each window, one face was looking out. The teacher said, “I have been telling you for one hour continuously that God consists of the trinity.”
The boy said, “That’s what I have made: this is God in the first window, in the second window is his son, Jesus Christ, and in the third window is the holy ghost.”
And the teacher said, “Why is this fourth window there? Who is this fellow?”
He said, “In an airplane, without Pontius the pilot who will fly the airplane?”
A pilot is absolutely needed. Even small children remember according to their own idea. Pontius Pilate becomes Pontius the pilot.
Don’t be worried what people say about you. Remember only one thing:
If you are feeling blissful, you are right.
To me, that is the criterion of being right. If you are feeling ecstatic, you have super-sanity, because that is the only criterion of an authentic intelligence and a sane person.
Always look within yourself, not outside at what people are saying. They will call you all kinds of names; they will try to prove that you are mad, you are insane. It does not matter what they say. It is their problem if they think that you are insane; it is not your problem. You should look within yourself. If there is light, beauty, peace, silence, and if flowers are blossoming in your consciousness, then you can stand against the whole world without ever doubting, because the inner experience has an intrinsic certainty, absolute and categorical.

Osho,
When I look inside myself, I catch a glimpse of what seems like centuries of conditioning. I feel that I certainly will not become enlightened, although others might. Is this attitude a natural mistrust? Is this attitude a habit I have to break? Will this attitude prevent me from becoming enlightened? Please, shower some light on me.
Your question needs great consideration for the simple reason that it is going to arise for many sannyasins at different stages, but it has to be divided so that you can understand clearly what is happening.
First you say, “When I look inside myself, I catch a glimpse of what seems like centuries of conditioning.” This will happen to everybody because everybody has been conditioned for centuries. You are forgetting just one thing – which is often forgotten by seekers of their inner world, and this is most important to remember, not to forget.
You are saying, “When I look inside, I catch a glimpse of what seems like centuries of conditioning.” One thing is certain: that you are not part of the conditioning, you are the watcher. When you go in, you see centuries of conditioning around your consciousness. But you are not part of the conditioning, and that is the only ray of hope.
Conditionings may be of centuries, it does not matter. The moment you disidentify yourself with them, they lose all power. You become immediately free. Who is seeing the centuries of conditioning? Certainly the seer, the observer is separate from that which he is seeing. You go into the garden and you see all these trees, but you don’t feel identified with those trees; you go inside and you find centuries of conditioning, but you are not the conditioning. Realizing this is the beginning of a revolution in your very idea about yourself.
You are consciousness.
Conditionings are just like dust which has gathered on the mirror; it can be washed away, and the mirror will come to its purity immediately. No dust can destroy the mirror, it can only hide it. Conditionings can hide you, but they cannot destroy you. Just as dust can be removed from the mirror, conditionings can be removed as easily.
Secondly you say, “I feel that I certainly will not become enlightened, although others might.” This certainty that you will not become enlightened is arising because of your misunderstanding about conditionings. Seeing so many conditionings, you have lost hope. You think you will never become enlightened – you are certain – “although others might.” Do you think others are new people in the world? They are as old as you are. They have passed through all that you have passed through. They have gathered as much dust as you have gathered. But your misunderstanding is giving you a certainty. Once your misunderstanding is dropped, you are enlightened in that very moment.
Only one thing is certain:
Nobody can prevent anybody from becoming enlightened.
There is no power in the world which can prevent anybody from becoming enlightened because enlightenment is your very nature. You are already enlightened – you just don’t know it. You have forgotten it – it is a forgotten language. It has only to be remembered, and the way to remember is to disidentify with all the conditionings; they may be there, let them be there. Remember: “I am not one of them. I am the knower, I am the seer, I am the observer, I am the awareness.” And the awareness cannot be touched by any conditioning.
The third thing: “Is this attitude a natural mistrust? Is this attitude a habit I have to break?”
Yes, it is a natural phenomenon. Everybody gets mixed up with their conditionings, and it is only a habit and nothing else. You can drop it without any effort, just by becoming aware of what I am saying to you.
And lastly, you are asking, “Will this attitude prevent me from becoming enlightened?” Certainly, if this attitude prevails…it will not prevent, but it will go on postponing; it can go on postponing for centuries, which is almost like preventing. But if you drop this attitude, this very moment you are free. This very moment you can open your wings and fly into the sky.
And the last thing: your whole question is intellectual. You have not been meditating. You have been just thinking about things; hence, the question. If you had been meditating, then what I have said to you, you would have found yourself.

Mrs. Goldstein’s frustrated next door neighbor is trying to squeeze some affection out of little Hymie.
“Do you love me, darling?” the neighbor asked Hymie. Little Hymie nodded.
“Then put your arms around me, honey, and give me a great big kiss,” she said. Hymie went on kicking his football.
“How much do you love me, precious?” the neighbor kept on. “Show me how you would cry if I died,” she urged.
“Die first!” said Hymie running off.

Do something. Don’t go on intellectualizing. Children are very clear about their perceptions. What is the point of thinking intellectually that “If I die, would you cry?” Hymie is absolutely right – “Die first! And then we will see.”
You have to stop thinking about these things. Thinking is not going to lead anywhere. Start meditating, becoming more aware, alert – and then you don’t need my answer. The answer is within you. I am simply saying that which you will find arising within yourself.

Osho,
Life is so exciting when I am open to each moment and not asking where it is going to take me next. The problems disappear and nothing can harm me. The moment my mind comes in saying, “Watch out!” the fear arises and life looks dangerous, and I take only calculated steps. How can I remain with the relaxed, joyful, and trusting experience?
Mind is a coward. Those who listen to it become utterly cowardly. Mind is not an adventurer, it is very cautious. It takes every step with long thinking and calculation until it is certain that there is no risk, till it has seen others taking the step and there has been no danger; hence, listening to the mind is the most disturbing phenomenon in your growth.
Everything is going good with you, but immediately the mind comes in and says, “Watch out!” Once and for all say to the mind, “Shut up! I am watching in; why should I watch out?”
Because you listen to it, “…fear arises and life looks dangerous, and I take only calculated steps.” You stop living. Mind is a mechanism, dead. Do you know that the mind can be taken out of your skull and kept separately? Only oxygen and necessary nourishment has to be provided to it, and it will go on living. It does not need you. There are many minds under observation in scientific labs. They are functioning perfectly well; they don’t need you. And perhaps in most of your life, you don’t need them either.

I have heard about a politician who was having a brain operation. His mind had collected so much junk inside that the doctors thought that it would be easier, far easier to clean it if they took it out completely; otherwise, it would take many hours. So they left the politician in the operating theater and took his mind to the next room to clean it. And naturally a politician’s mind needs great cleaning…almost dry cleaning.
While they were cleaning his mind, a man came running. Knowing nothing about what was happening, he shook the politician, who opened his eyes. And the man said, “What are you doing here? You have been chosen to be the president of the country.”
So the politician got up, and as he was leaving the hospital, the doctors saw him. They said, “My God! His brain is still in the lab.” They rushed out and told him, “Wait! Your brain is still being cleaned.”
He said, “Now I don’t need it; I have become the president. You keep it – after five years if I’m not chosen again, perhaps I may need it; you can preserve it. What do I need a brain for now that I’m the president?”

In a strange way, the meditator also does not need the mind – but in a very different context. A meditator goes beyond the mind. The mind becomes slowly, slowly silent, calm and quiet. And more efficient, of course – whenever the meditator wants to use it, he can use it better than anybody else. Whenever he does not need to use it, he is enjoying his inner spaces, ecstasies, blessings. The mind remains silent, it does not disturb.
That’s the whole art of meditation: to keep the mind completely quiet, and make it understand that it is not supposed to comment on any experience that is beyond it.
Meditation is beyond the mind.
You say, “Life is so exciting when I am open to each moment, and not asking where it is going to take me next.” That’s what I call being in a let-go, being relaxed with existence.
“The problems disappear and nothing can harm me. The moment my mind comes in saying, ‘Watch out!’ the fear arises, and life looks dangerous, and I take only calculated steps. How can I remain with the relaxed, joyful, and trusting experience?” You will just have to teach the mind: “It is not your territory; you are not supposed to interfere or say anything.”
It is just an old habit that the mind goes on making commentary on whatever is happening, goes on giving its opinion and advice, whether asked for or not. It is simply a habit, a habit of thousands of lives. So it takes a little time and a little patience, but you are going perfectly well. Just whenever the mind says, “Watch out!” tell him, “I am watching in, you watch out. I’m not watching television.”
Don’t take the mind in any way seriously about your interior experiences, about your trust with existence, about your love with each moment.

Little Hymie arrived home from school with two black eyes.
“Fighting again,” said his mother. “Haven’t I told you when you are angry to count to a hundred before you do anything?”
“Yes, I know,” replied Hymie, “but the other boy’s mother told him only to count to fifty.”

Calculated steps won’t work.
Life is not a calculation.
Mathematics is only a purely fictitious science, totally created by man’s mind. It has nothing in the objective world. That’s why it is perfect; only a fiction can be perfect.
Reality is always imperfect because reality is always growing, changing. Reality is always moving toward perfection but never becomes perfect, because to be perfect means nothing but ultimate death.
Just drop the habit. The mind will try in every way to keep its old control. But you are the real master, and however much the mind tries to control, it cannot succeed if you are determined to put it into its place as a servant. Your consciousness, you, are the master.
It is a struggle only in the beginning. Once the mind understands that you have started reclaiming your mastery, he becomes just like a dog wagging his tail, ready to follow your orders and never interfere in your work – particularly in the work which is not his territory at all.
Mind cannot understand ecstasy, cannot understand trust, cannot understand moment-to-moment living, cannot understand the blissfulness that arises out of this living.
So it will be sheer stupidity to listen to the mind – who is absolutely inadequate, incompetent as far as the inner world, your interiority, your subjectivity, is concerned. Your ecstasy is far beyond the reach of the mind. So teach the mind, train the mind not to interfere – and don’t listen. It may go on just out of old habit saying, “Watch out! Take calculated steps!” Just ignore it.
That word ignore reminds me of Gautam Buddha. His suggestion to his disciples was, “As far as meditation is concerned, ignore the mind.” His word for ignoring is upeksha, which is a very beautiful word. “Just bypass it; let it go on saying whatever it wants; don’t pay any attention to it.” Soon the mind understands where he can be listened to and where he is absolutely unwelcome.
The day the mind understands where it is unwelcome, it stops saying anything about that. And it has to be stopped from interfering in your inner growth.

============================================================

Osho,
An earthquake is happening: my ancient crust is cracking and marvelous squirts of bliss are pouring out. More and more, your words are incredibly accurate descriptions of my inner world, not just beautiful images of somewhere else. Your finger used to point to the moon, but now I have seen my own moon; your finger is pointing to my very center. I am shy to write this. I needed courage to uncover my anguish; strangely, acknowledging my joy needs even more.
Devageet, it is one of the most fundamental experiences that you have pointed out in your question. It certainly needs more courage to expose your joy, your blissfulness than it needs to describe your anxiety, your anguish. The difficulty is, of course, different in each case.
To expose one’s anguish, anxiety, misery, suffering, courage is needed because it is exposing yourself in your utter nudity: your wounds, your ugliness, your insanity – things which everybody wants to hide from the world. It goes against your ego, against your personality.
But to express your joy needs more courage for another reason. There are two reasons: one, it is difficult to find words – almost impossible – to describe your blissfulness, your silence, your serenity, because the experience of all these things is beyond the scope of the mind; hence it is naturally beyond language, beyond words, beyond explanations. Secondly, to say “I am joyful,” to say “I am blissful,” to say “I am discovering my own center,” is dangerous because it creates envy and jealousy all around.
Everybody will believe your misery; nobody will believe your joy. Everybody will believe – even if you are lying – your anxiety, your suffering, because everybody knows what suffering is, what misery is; it is everybody’s experience. Nobody is going to believe your joy – it goes against their egos to accept that you are reaching closer to your discovery, closer to your center. It goes against their very ego that they are still far away from the goal and you have reached so close. It cannot be believed – you must be lying, you must be deceived.
If you go on insisting that you have achieved and if your life starts showing evidence of it, they will create all kinds of explanations to demolish your evidence. They may say you are a hypocrite, you are a pretender, that there is no joy in you – you are simply smiling to befool people. If you are still adamant, and you go on dancing and singing on your way without bothering what they are saying, their second step will be to say that you are mad.
To accept that somebody is coming closer to home is so difficult; it hurts so deeply and so many people, that they are always in the majority and you are alone. It is easier for them to declare you mad, because the only way to save their skin will be for them to be as joyous as you are, which is not a simple matter – they will have to go for a long pilgrimage. But it is easy to condemn you, to find reasons…and if everything fails, you are insane – that is their last resort.
But even calling you insane will not satisfy them, because deep down they feel the jealousy, the envy; they would like to declare themselves also closer to the center, closer to the truth, closer to blissfulness. But they are in darkness, in utter misery, in anguish. They don’t see any end to their night, and you are talking about a beautiful dawn…that you have seen the first ray, the sun is rising, that you have heard the birds singing, that you have experienced the fragrance of the flowers that open in the early morning to welcome the sun, to begin the day.
If you don’t listen and don’t accept that you are mad…The masses have crucified people like these: Al-Hillaj Mansoor, or Jesus, or Socrates, or Sarmad. The masses have become bloodthirsty, and these people were absolutely harmless; they have not done anything, any harm to anybody. In fact they were the greatest blessings to humanity: they were pointing to your potential, your possibility, your future; they were pointing at your dawn – the night is not going to be forever. They were your very hope to get out of the darkness and the deathly life, where you have not found anything except misery.
But instead you demolished them, you destroyed them rather than rejoicing with them. Rejoicing with them needs tremendous intelligence, but to crucify them, any stupid, retarded majority of the masses is perfectly capable. That’s why I say you have made a very important observation: that it is more difficult to expose yourself and to declare to the world that you are feeling blissful, you are joyous.
But in this place, there is no need to be afraid. In this place the exposure of your anxiety will be accepted, the exposure of your blissfulness will be rejoiced – that’s the whole meaning of a religious communion – you will be encouraged. People will see their own future in your eyes, they will see their own crippledness gone in your dances. They will see that if you can reach, Devageet, then we are also not far away; perhaps we are not looking in the right direction, perhaps we are not moving in the right direction….
I have heard about a man who was asking, on a crossroad outside New Delhi, “How far is New Delhi?” And the old man who was sitting under a tree said to the man, “Before I can answer, I would like you to move in the direction you are going. Unless I know in which direction you are moving, how can I say how far New Delhi is?”
The man thought, “This is a strange old man” – he had asked many people, many times, and everybody had simply answered. He said, “First, I would like to see.”
So the man moved a few feet, and then he asked, “Now?”
The old man said, “Now Delhi is very far away, because you are going exactly in the opposite direction. You will have to go around the whole earth, then you will come back to Delhi; otherwise, you have left Delhi eight miles behind.”
When you see somebody blossoming, it is a sign that the spring has come. All the flowers don’t blossom together; first one flower opens its petals, then a few more, then many more, then millions. Spring comes step by step, slowly. When you see one flower blossoming it is an indication that your time is also close by.
In this communion there is no problem; you can expose yourself whatever your situation is. All these people are fellow travelers; they will try to help you come out of your darkness. They will help you if you have reached to the light in your celebration; they will help you in every possible way, in every possible situation.

The inmates of a mental institution were listening to modern jazz records. Finally one patient could contain himself no longer; he jumped up and started banging his head against the wall in time to the music.
The other inmates applauded and shouted, “Sane, man – sane!”
This place belongs to the people who are drunk with the divine, mad after the search for godliness. They will enjoy your realizations: your realization is their realization too. It is a brotherhood – there is a deep connection – it is not an organization. It is a love that is overflowing from each heart, joining it with others.
Here, nobody is a stranger; here, everybody knows you. He may not know your name, he may not know your country, he may not know your religion, he may not know your race. He need not know any of these things but still he knows you, he knows that you are on the same path, in the same search. You are arrowed toward the same star; you are part of one journey, one pilgrimage. If even one of you reaches, that will be a confirmation that you have also reached; maybe a little time more, and the spring will come close to you.
So, never be worried and never be concerned – nobody is going to deny your experiences here. Everybody is going to rejoice, celebrate, feel proud of you.
This is how it should be in the whole of humanity, but unfortunately…what can be done? People should have rejoiced in the presence of Socrates, they should have loved the presence of Jesus, they should have joined their voices when Al-Hillaj Mansoor was shouting, “Ana’l haq!” – I am God. He was speaking for you too; for everybody, past, present or future. He was not speaking only for himself.
People have not been sane enough to understand the madness of those who are seekers after truth, after bliss, after godliness, after the ultimate meaning of life. But here, my people are all mad enough to celebrate with you; your blossoming is their blossoming.
Hence, Devageet, not only for you, but for all I am saying this: always expose yourself. If you don’t expose yourself when you are in misery, it is okay, because everybody knows you are in misery; that is not a revelation. Whether you say it or not, it is taken for granted – where else can you be? But when it comes to the point of joy and bliss and benediction, you should not remain silent, because then you become evidence that all these people are not unnecessarily wandering in a desert. If your thirst is quenched, their thirst will also be quenched. If you have arrived home, they can also arrive.
So you can hide your anguish, your misery, your suffering – there is no problem about it. Anyway somebody else will be asking about those problems. But when it comes to your blissfulness, which is very rare, it is unforgivable to keep it a secret because it is going to become a proof for everybody of the goal they are searching.

Osho,
What is the criterion of the truth?
Truth is not an experience of the mind; hence no logic can prove it or disprove it. No argument can convince you about it or unconvince you about it. Truth is an experience beyond mind, so there is no objective criterion possible. That’s why science never talks about it, because science can only talk about things which can be objectively proved.
Truth is a subjective experience, just like love. What is the criterion of love? Can you prove when you fall in love? Can you prove that really you have fallen in love? Is there a way to prove it? Is there any argument, any logic that will support you – any eyewitnesses? All that you can say is, “I know for certain that my heart is beating differently” – but that is something inner to you. You can say, “I am feeling so blissful,” but that is something subjective. You cannot bring some part of your blissfulness and show it to people as a criterion.
Love, or truth, or bliss, or God – they don’t have any criterion; they are experiences of the inner. Criteria are always of the outer. Don’t impose outer criteria for the inner – that is the fallacy of the atheist.
Why does the atheist deny the existence of God, the existence of soul, the existence of truth, the existence of a life beyond life? For the simple reason that there is no criterion, and no proof, and no evidence. No atheist has ever been defeated by any theist in argumentation – still the atheist is wrong. He is wrong because he is asking for an objective criterion for a subjective experience.
It is just like somebody asks you – you have been listening to classical music, and somebody asks – “What was the taste of it?” or “What was the color of it?” or “How did it feel when you touched it?”
You will say, “Are you mad?” Music is not an experience of the eyes, it is not an experience of the nose; music has no smell. It is not an experience of the tongue; it has no taste. It is not something tangible that you can touch. It is an experience of the ears – and for an experience of the ears, eyes cannot give any proof.
Neither is the opposite possible. For an experience of the eyes – for example, light or colors – ears cannot give any proof. And if you want proofs that are understandable by the ears, then there is no light; you have to deny it. Then there are no colors, no rainbows. You have to deny everything that belongs to the world of eyes, and almost eighty percent of your experience belongs to the eyes. Eighty percent of your life will have to be denied if you insist for some criterion that belongs, not to the eyes, but to the ears, nose, mouth, hands….
The same is the situation about truth. Truth is the space within you when there is no thought, no feeling, no emotion – when there is utter silence and a light which is eternal, which has no fuel…because all fuels are bound to be exhausted sooner or later.
At the innermost core of your being there is a light which is inexhaustible, which has always been there and will always be there, which is beyond time and beyond space…a deep silence. Not the silence of the graveyard – not a negative silence, not a silence which means absence of noise – but a silence which means a positive, affirmative presence of peace, of coolness, of a soundless music…a light that is eternal and a life that is eternal.
When you find these things in the innermost center of your being…the whole experience of bliss, joy, the feeling of coming home, of finding yourself at last – all this is contained in the simple word truth. You can experience it, but you cannot find any explanation for it. You can find a way to it, you can find a method to reach it, but nobody can tell you beforehand what it is.
Gautam Buddha used to say, “Buddhas only show the way; nobody can walk the way for you. You will have to walk and you will have to find…and those who have found it have all become dumb.” It is almost like giving a dumb man delicious sweets…. It is not that he does not know the taste; he knows. He rejoices, but if you want to ask how it tastes, of course he cannot say anything; he is dumb.
All those who have known truth become dumb about truth. They can tell you how to reach it; they can show you the way. They can take you to the window, to the door, but you have to find it within yourself, following the path alone…the ultimate experience.
Only one thing can be said from the outside:
The man of truth has no fear of death.
The man of truth is never miserable.
The man of truth is never a coward.
The man of truth is constantly in a state of celebration; the man of truth is an eternal dance.
These are the things which can be seen from the outside, but these are just faraway echoes; these are not the truth. These are the faraway echoes in the individuality of the person who has found the truth. These are the reflections – reflections of the stars in the lake. But don’t jump into the lake to find the stars! You will not find anything there. Stars are far away; these are only reflections.
In the personality, in the presence, in the gestures, in the eyes of the man of truth you will find something, if you are not completely closed, completely prejudiced, if you have not already decided for or against.
If you are open and vulnerable you will recognize that there is something charismatic, something magnetic, something that invites you to come in…something that invites you to be closer, something that creates suddenly a new dimension of search for you; something that starts silent bells suddenly ringing in your heart of which you have never been aware.
He has touched your heart. His very presence is creative, his very presence is converting, his very presence is the only criterion – but it is not logic, it is a love affair.
Remember: I repeat again, truth is not a question of logic, it is a search of a loving heart.

Osho,
What is the difference between self-respect and pride?
There is no difference between self-respect and pride. There is a difference between the ego and self-respect or pride. Self-respect and pride are simply natural to your individuality. They are your dignity. They are your acceptance of yourself.
The ego is a comparison.
Self-respect and pride are noncomparative; that’s the basic difference.
In ego you are always comparing: I am superior to others, I am better than you, I am higher than you, I am holier than you – I am a saint and you are a sinner. Whatever the reason, you are comparing yourself as being superior and reducing the other to being inferior. This is the formation of the ego.
But pride is noncomparative. It does not say anything about anybody else. It simply says: I am respectful of myself, I love myself, I am proud just to be – just to be here in this beautiful existence. It does not say anything about anybody else. The moment you go into comparison, you start an ugly game.
My respect toward myself is not a hindrance for you to be respectful toward yourself. In fact I would love you to be respectful toward yourself because if you are not respectful toward yourself, who is going to be respectful toward you? If you are not proud of being a human being, the most evolved consciousness in existence, then who is going to be proud of you?
And your being proud is really nothing but a gratefulness for all that existence has given to you – it is tremendous. We are not worthy of it; we don’t deserve it. We have not earned it, we can’t claim it. It is just out of the abundance of existence that it has given to us everything. We don’t value what we have because we take it for granted.
I am reminded of a Sufi story….

A man was going to commit suicide because he was poor, uneducated, unemployed, and he hated to beg. Rather than begging, he thought it is better to commit suicide. He was going toward the river to jump from a high point and get drowned, but by coincidence, at the highest point from where he was thinking to jump, he found a Sufi mystic.
And the Sufi mystic said, “So you have come? Here people come only to commit suicide. I have chosen this place to meditate because very rarely do people come to commit suicide, so this is a very silent place.”
The man said, “It is strange that I have not uttered a single word and you have said the right thing – I have come to commit suicide.”
The Sufi said, “You can commit suicide. But I have one offer: how much would you like to have for both your eyes? The king needs two beautiful eyes and you have beautiful eyes. And the king knows that I always sit at Suicide Point” – that’s what the place was called. “People come here when they are going to commit suicide…. What are they going to do with those two eyes? They can give them to the king. So whatever you want for your eyes, you just say it; your offer will be accepted.”
The man thought for a moment – how much should he ask? He could not think. Whatever he thought…five hundred thousand rupees? He thought, “Five lakh rupees for both my eyes? – ten lakh? twenty lakh?….” But nothing seemed to be the right price. Finally he said, “Ten million rupees.”
The mystic said, “That is accepted. You come with me. First we will take your eyes…and I will bring you back here; then you jump and commit suicide.”
On the way the Sufi said, “But I have a few other customers too. How much would you like to take for your head, without eyes?”
He said, “You are a strange person. Who would like to have my head without eyes?”
The Sufi said, “I have a customer. He’s a magician and he needs a skull very desperately and he is not interested in eyes. Anyway he is going to take away all the skin, everything, and clean your skull completely.”
The man said, “My God! Then how am I going to come back and…?”
The Sufi said, “That I will manage.”
The man said, “I have never thought about it. How much will be appropriate? What do you think?”
He said, “Any offer…it will be accepted.” So the man sold his skull for another ten million.
On the way the Sufi asked, “Would you like to sell the remaining body too? – because what is the point: you are already dead; your eyes are gone, your head is gone – what is left? There is no point in keeping the body…and I have a customer. He is a scientist and he dissects bodies; he is always in need of bodies, fresh bodies. And he will be absolutely happy because he cannot get such a fresh body, that has only just died. The eyes have been taken, the head has been cut, but the body will still be warm – it is just like a flower torn from the tree while it is still alive; it will take two or three days to fade away.”
The man said, “But…suicide is finished!”
The mystic said, “There is no need of any suicide; everything is sold!”
The man asked, “But who will get all that money?”
The mystic said, “Of course, I will get it, because you will be gone. Who else can get it? You can think of it as my commission. If you want to take it with you, you can take it, but you will be gone, you won’t need it.”
As they reached the palace he started thinking again: what is he going to do? He had never thought that his eyes have such value, that his skull has value, that his whole body has value…that this man is going to earn thirty million rupees.
He said, “I don’t want to do this business.”
The Sufi said, “What about suicide?”
The man said, “I don’t want to commit suicide either! For the first time I have realized that I am a rich man. Up to now I have always thought that I am a beggar. I was going to commit suicide because I was thinking I have nothing; now I realize how much I have got.”
The mystic said, “It is up to you – I will have to go back and wait for somebody else – but think again; you won’t get such customers.”
The man said, “Just leave me alone! You are a dangerous fellow. I used to think that you are a religious saint, always meditating on that hillock. You seem to be the most dangerous man – you were selling me piece by piece, and finally all the money would come to you! I don’t know how many people you have sold, but I can understand why you go on sitting there; that is where your business comes. I will make the whole city aware: Don’t go to that point, and beware of that man – he is dangerous, very dangerous.”
The mystic said, “I was just trying to help you. You were going to destroy such precious things by drowning in the river. I have been trying to wake you up. Existence has given you such precious things and rather than being grateful, you are behaving in such an ugly way.
“There is no customer; it was all fiction. What will the king do with your eyes, dead eyes? And the magician can get as many skulls as he needs from the graveyard. And every day people die in the hospital and fresh bodies are available to the scientist. So there is no customer at all. It was just to make you aware that you have so many precious things given to you by nature and you are not feeling grateful, you are not feeling prayerful. Don’t you have any gratitude, any thankfulness? Is suicide your thankfulness?”

Self-respect is respect without comparison. Pride is dignity, a feeling of dignity that existence wants you, that existence has created you, that existence needs you. You are welcome in existence, you are not an unwanted child, an orphan. Moment to moment, existence is giving you nourishment, life, light, everything that you need.
Pride is not equivalent to ego; neither is self-respect equivalent to ego. Ego is comparative, and because it is comparative it is ugly, it is sick. The very idea that “I am superior to you” – for any reason – is inhuman.
But being proud of oneself does not make anybody inferior. In fact it shows the other also the way to be proud of himself, to be respectful of himself.
I am against the ego, but not against pride, not against self-respect. Those are the most important human qualities.

Osho,
Could you please tell me what I have that makes me worthy of such compassion from you, from Latifa, from existence and from all my friends and fellow travelers? And please, don't forget to hit me when you see something like a coconut standing on my head.
Dhyan Om, as far as I am concerned, I cannot be other than compassionate; I am just helpless. It has nothing to do with you, it is just the only possibility for me.
The day I came to know myself, I lost many things and I gained a few things. Of the things that I have gained, the most important of them is compassion. So it is irrespective of who is the receiver: a coconut tree or Dhyan Om, it does not matter. I can only look with compassion. My eyes don’t have anything else and my heart doesn’t have anything else.
As far as existence is concerned…you are part of existence, you are an extension of existence. Existence also doesn’t make any discrimination between a coconut tree and Dhyan Om. It gives to the coconut tree what it needs; it gives to Dhyan Om what he needs. Existence is compassionate to everything, because everything belongs to it. Existence is flowing in everything without any discrimination.
The only problem is Latifa. That surprises me too, why she is compassionate to you. A few jokes perhaps may help you to understand the compassion of Latifa.

In Ireland an old woman went to mass on Sunday, as usual. A new young priest was preaching about marriage. After mass the old woman remarked to her friend, “I wish to God I knew as little about it as he does.”

Do you get it? – No!

Mrs. Cohen was at the movies watching “Superman.” Suddenly, a man approached her and asked, “Pardon me madam, but do you mind if I occupy that empty seat next to you?”
“Not at all,” replied Mrs. Cohen. “I expected it to be taken when I bought the tickets, but all my friends are at my husband’s funeral.”

“I don’t know why you married me!” cried Mrs. Cohen.
“Because,” Mr. Cohen said, “you defied the law of gravity.”
“What are you talking about?” said his wife.
“Well,” said Cohen, “you were easier to pick up than to drop!”

It is a mystery why Latifa has picked you up. Only her compassion has to be considered as a mystery. She knows perfectly well that you are a nut. You think you are a coconut, but she knows – and everybody else knows – you are only a nut! You are unnecessarily making a fuss about being a coconut – just decorating yourself, making a big name. A simple nut does not appeal…a coconut, a coconut from Goa, a Goa-returned coconut. Latifa is certainly compassionate!
As far as I am concerned and existence is concerned, we are helpless. Be grateful to Latifa; she goes through hell, but still she goes on being compassionate. She suffers badly. Whenever I look at her, I immediately know whether the coconut is here or somewhere else.
For five weeks she was just a beauty to look at, always smiling and happy and surrounded by an aura. And the moment she received your message that you are coming back…just the message was enough. You took seven days to come, but those seven days…whenever I looked at her I thought, “This is strange: Om is coming from Goa and this Latifa seems to be coming from hell itself!”
Since then, because I have talked about it, whenever I look at her she tries to smile. But a smile which is made by effort is one thing, and a smile that comes on its own is a totally different phenomenon.
Dhyan Om, you continue to be what you are. This is at least going to help Latifa to become enlightened. This is her austerity, her discipline, her sacrifice, and the whole credit goes to you. When she becomes enlightened you will be praised, because it has rarely happened this way. Women have made men enlightened – that is an old story. Men have never made a single woman enlightened. You are doing such a pioneer work. Your name will resound in the corridors of history!

============================================================

Osho,
On one hand the world is preparing for a global suicide; it looks like there is not much time left for our growth. On the other hand, what I heard from you is that growth is only possible when we relax, sit silently, and wait. This is a paradox. Beloved Osho, please can you speak about how to come out of situations where one part of me is restless and wants to do something? – yet deep down I feel that this leads me nowhere.
Puja Kavina, it is not a paradox, it only appears so. The world is certainly preparing for a global suicide; about that there are not two opinions – it is becoming every day more and more certain. Naturally you think you have to do something to prevent it. It is beyond your doing; whatever you do will bring it closer.
What can you do? The power is not in your hands; the power is in hands which are absolutely stubborn, and they don’t care a bit what happens to humanity. Their ego is their supreme value, the only value. Even though it means their own destruction, they will take the risk; they will destroy whoever they think is their enemy.
In the beginning, when this kind of war material was in the hands of two countries, the Soviet Union and America, there was some possibility that they may come to some negotiation. Now with the power of nuclear weapons in five countries, the possibility of negotiation has become more difficult, more complicated. And by the end of this century, the power will be in twenty-five countries’ hands. Then the question of negotiation does not arise.
My suggestion is: time is certainly very short, but it is enough to become enlightened, and it is enough to spread an enlightened atmosphere around the world. That is the only possibility.
If we can make the people of the world…not the politicians, leave them aside; they have the power but without the consent of the people of the world, their power is not of much use. If armies simply say, “No, we are not going to use nuclear weapons,” if the scientists simply say, “No, we are not going to produce any more nuclear weapons,” if the whole intelligentsia of the world unanimously creates a great uproar: “It is not a question of war; wars we have seen in thousands – they have been destructive, but they have not destroyed all life. This is not war, this is simple suicide!”
But these people: the scientists, the armies, the intelligentsia, the poets, the musicians, the mystics, the painters, the actors – the people who have a certain impact on the masses, although they don’t have any power except their individuality and their creativity – if they join hands together, this global suicide can be avoided. Not only suicide can be avoided, but with the same energy that was going to destroy all life, the planet can be turned into a paradise.
Energy is neutral – it can destroy, it can create. Nobody has thought: What can be the creative use of atomic energy? What can be the creative use of nuclear weapons? If the destructive power is so great, the power for creation will be equally great. Hence, I say not only can global suicide be avoided, but we can bring into existence a new dawn, a new man, a new humanity.
Perhaps for the first time there can be an authentic civilization which loves peace, which is compassionate, which is creative, which drops all discriminations of nations, religions, races, and makes this whole globe one family.
Once there are no discriminations of religions, races, nations, war becomes impossible.
We have to avoid the suicide that is oncoming and we have to change the whole structure of the world so that war itself becomes impossible. All our efforts, all our energies…seventy-five percent of human energy is pouring into creating war material. We are living only on twenty-five percent of our energy. If that seventy-five percent is also released for living, there will be no poverty, there will be no sickness. Life can be prolonged. People can live young until their last breath; they need not become old.
All this is possible, and for this, there is enough time. But you have to understand perfectly well: anything on your part as a protest is not going to help. You will be simply crushed, ignored…. Pacifists have existed for centuries; they have not been able to avoid any war.
In fact I have seen so many processions of protest and I have always wondered…the people who were protesting were all violent: their slogans were violent, their gestures were violent. If they had power in their hands, they would start killing those people whom they think are warmongers. They are doing the same thing, they are not peaceful people; they may be pacifist in ideology, but they don’t know what peace is.
I want my people to know the peace, to know the silence, to know the beauty of their inner being, the blissfulness and love and light, and spread it. And spreading it is not going to be a missionary thing – you are not to convert anybody. Just your very presence, just your loving eyes, your peaceful existence – the charisma that arises with enlightenment, a certain different wavelength that the enlightened man starts radiating around him, changes people’s hearts without their knowing.
It is not a question of convincing them intellectually; for that, time is certainly very short. We have not been convinced for centuries, intellectually, although great efforts have been made that there should be no war, there should be no government, there should be no nations. Great intellectuals have been trying – like Bakunin, Bokharin, Leo Tolstoy, Bertrand Russell – but it has not created any visible effect anywhere.
My understanding is that these people themselves were not peaceful people. They have not known anything of the eternal joy of their own interiority, the dance of their own being. They have not tasted from the springs of nectar that are at their very center. Once you have tasted your own immortality, you start spreading an invisible fire…no intellectual argument, but people will be immensely touched by your very presence, by your aroma, by your fragrance, by your love.
We need in the world more love to balance war.
We need in the world more creativity to balance the destructive forces. We need in the world more enlightened people to balance the blind politicians. For this there is still time enough, because enlightenment can happen within a second. It does not need time; it needs only a total longing for it, a longing as if your life is at risk.
I can understand why you are feeling a paradox. You would like to do something, but things have gone beyond your doing. What can you do to prevent the Soviet Union or to prevent Ronald Reagan? And soon nuclear weapons will be in twenty-five countries, with pygmy politicians. What can you do?
The only thing possible is: forget doing.
Think of being.
You can be more joyful, you can be more loving – that is within your capacity. No Ronald Reagan can prevent you. No nuclear weapons can prevent you. People have never thought this way. They have always tried to protest against wars – nobody has listened to them.
I am suggesting a totally new solution. And in the circumstances, that is the only alternative possible: forget doing, grow into your being. And the growth of your being is contagious; it will help many people to light their unlit torches from your life fire.
If we have people around the world who know the beauty of life, of creativity, of poetry, of music, of painting, of dancing, of love, then nobody – no politician – will have the guts to force humanity into a war. So rather than going against war, you create the balancing force – which is in your hands. If the warmongers have nuclear weapons, then you have to create something equivalent, or more powerful – and enlightenment is certainly more powerful than any nuclear weapon.
In the Old Testament, there is a beautiful story of two cities, Sodom and Gomorrah. God became very angry with these two cities, because in both people were practicing perverted sex. In Sodom people were making love to animals; hence sodomy has become the word for making love with animals. In Gomorrah people had become homosexuals, and all kinds of perversions…God finally decided to destroy both those cities completely, and in the Old Testament he did destroy Sodom and Gomorrah.
It does not look right of God, but the Jewish God is an angry God. That is our projection: it is not a question of whether God is angry or not. God is a hypothesis – you can make anything out of it, whatever you want. God declares in the Jewish scriptures, “I am a very angry God, very jealous. I will never forgive you if you go against me; I am not your uncle, I am not a nice man.”
But in Judaism there is a rebellious stream, a very small minority stream of Hassidic mystics. The orthodox Jews don’t accept them as religious at all, but as I understand it, they are the only religious people in the whole Judaic tradition. They are people who dance, sing, love, play music. They are very joyous people and they have interpreted Judaism according to their own joy and blissfulness.
They cannot tolerate such a thing, that God destroyed…and a God who is omnipotent, all powerful, he could have changed them – if he can create the whole world, can’t he change two cities and their sexual perversions? Has he to resort to destruction and death? He is the father of those two cities also, and when he has all the powers…this whole universe was created by him and he could not manage to change those two cities?
Hasids have changed that story and I love it, although that change is not in the Jewish scriptures. Jews will never accept that change, but I, for one, accept it. It makes a tremendous impact on anyone who can understand.
The Jewish story is:

When God decided to destroy Sodom and Gomorrah, a Hassidic mystic went to him and asked, “Have you decided?” God said, “I am absolutely certain; I am going to destroy these people completely.”
The Hassidic mystic said, “But I have a question to ask: If there are two hundred people, one hundred in each city, who are good people, who are authentically religious, who are awakened, will you still destroy those two cities? Those two hundred people will be destroyed with them. It seems you are taking too much care about the perverted and you are not taking any interest in the awakened.”
God had to think it over; the argument was significant. How can he destroy the awakened people, the spiritual people, the good people? He said, “If you can prove that there are two hundred people in those cities who are awakened, enlightened, then I will not destroy them. How can I destroy them?”
The Hassid – they are very beautiful people with a great sense of humor – the Hassid mystic said, “If I cannot prove two hundred but only twenty, are you going to destroy the twenty enlightened people in those two cities? Do numbers matter so much? Are you thinking of quality or of quantity?”
God was at a loss to argue with this man. He said, “Okay, you prove twenty.”
The Hassid said, “And if I can prove only two?”
Now God was perfectly aware that the question of quality and quantity…it does not matter whether there are two enlightened people or two hundred enlightened people, they cannot be destroyed. To destroy them is to destroy the whole base, the whole foundation of religion. God said, “Okay, okay, you prove two persons!”
The Hassid said, “In fact there is only one – but he lives six months in one city and six months in the other city. What do you think about it?” From two hundred he has come down to one.
God said, “I have understood your logic. You bring that man before me.”
He said, “I am that man. Can’t you see me? Can’t you look inside me? Are you going to destroy me? – because I live six months in Sodom and six months in Gomorrah.” And God had to concede: “In that case I will not destroy Sodom and Gomorrah.”

Jews will not be ready to accept it, because it is not in their scriptures, but it is in the Hassidic teachings. I have loved the story, because the Hassidic mystic has proved far more intelligent than the so-called God, far more loving and compassionate than the so-called God.
Even God cannot save the world from the hands of politicians. Now you will need mystics; only mystics can create the atmosphere around the world of love and peace, of silence and joy, of song and dance; they will make life so rich that it becomes impossible for people even to think of war.
Politicians will be left alone without any support from their armies, from their scientists, from their intelligentsia, from mystics, from poets. And against all this intelligence, all their nuclear weapons will become impotent. They can create war only if unconsciously we are ready to commit suicide, if in some way we are supportive to them. It is our support that has given them power. If we withdraw our support, their power disappears. They don’t have any power of their own.
What power does Richard Nixon have now? Once he is no longer the president, nobody even bothers whether he is alive or dead, what he is doing; otherwise if he had just a little cold it was headline news. Now if he wants his name to be in the newspapers again, the only way is to commit suicide. But he will not be able to see it; others will read it – and that too in a small corner on the third page of the papers. Who cares about people who are no longer presidents, no longer prime ministers? It is our support that gives them power.
There is time enough to withdraw our support; there is time enough to create a non-political humanity. And the times are such that it is possible. In ordinary times you cannot convince people to withdraw their cooperation from the politicians, but the times are abnormal and every day the war keeps coming closer. In this moment, people can choose very easily not to cooperate, because cooperation simply means committing suicide.
So one thing: make people’s lives more joyous so that even the unconscious desire for suicide disappears from their being. And second, make them aware the power is in your hands, and if the war happens and life disappears from the earth, you will be responsible, not the politicians. They are simply puppets. We give them power and then the puppets start behaving like masters. Withdraw the power and you will see that their size goes on becoming smaller and smaller and smaller, and they will disappear. They don’t have any power of their own; it is your power given to them.
For that there is enough time. And it is a great challenge, a very adventurous time. When the world is facing suicide, the possibility is that the world can be convinced – not intellectually but through your growing hearts, your love – to let the old world die and a new world with new values be born.
You won’t have such an opportunity again. In the past there was never such an opportunity. It is not to be missed.
It is so simple a matter, but you have to begin with yourself. It is not that you have to do something. I am saying you have to be something: a force, a charisma, a magnet, which can pull people’s hearts toward you; a poetry, a song, such that people unknowingly start being influenced by it; a dance, so that people who had forgotten how to dance suddenly feel energy arising in their feet. They would like to join you in the dance.
So we are not to be against the politicians or against their nuclear weapons; we have to create a balancing force – more powerful. And once people have tasted life, which they have forgotten completely, they will automatically withdraw their support. It has already started happening.
In the Vietnam war thirty percent of the soldiers did not use their weapons. The American government was at a loss about what to do. The generals could not figure it out because such a thing had never happened – a soldier goes to war to kill. But in Vietnam it was so clear: America is doing something simply absurd – destroying poor people who have not done anything against America. And because it was the younger generation who had gone as soldiers, they could see the futility of it. Why should they be killed? Poor people working in their fields or in their orchards, small children, women – why should they be killed? They are not fighting; they are not a danger to America.
Thirty percent of the soldiers would go to the war front every day with their guns loaded and would come back in the evening without having used their guns at all. These thirty percent have shown the way. If it can happen to thirty percent, why can’t it happen to a hundred percent? – and the Vietnam war was not going to destroy all life.
Soldiers should be made aware…in fact the whole atmosphere around the world will become a warning for everybody that politicians have gone mad and now they don’t need anybody’s support. Just think of it: if armies simply march and meet the enemy armies and have a beautiful dance together, come home happily – and they go home happily – what can the politicians do? They could have court-martialed one soldier, but they cannot court-martial all the soldiers. And who is going to court-martial them? – because the generals will be part of the dance.
A great adventurous moment is coming close to us; there is nothing to be feared. You cannot do anything to prevent it, but you can be in such a way that your very being becomes a prevention.

Osho,
I've often experienced a strange space while sitting in front of you, and these days it is happening more and more. It is like being sucked into a space where I tend to pass out, almost faint. A jerk – my eyes open, but only for a short time; then it happens again. I've tried to move into it with watchfulness, but it doesn't seem to work much.
It seems like a precious experience, but somehow I feel I am missing something by not being awake enough. Any suggestions, Beloved Master?
Chidananda, what is happening to you is absolutely right. There is no need to create a problem out of it; you are not missing anything. In fact you fall into such harmony, in such deep communion, that it appears as if you have fallen asleep.
Whatever I am saying you may not be able to repeat in words, but it will be resounding in your heart, in your being, and it will do its work. It will change you. You will see the change in your actions, in your behavior, the way you respond in situations. That will be the proof – not that you remember what I have said.
And don’t force yourself to remain awake, because that means you are creating a disturbance in the harmony. Allow yourself to be overwhelmed completely and lost into it. It is not falling asleep, it is falling into samadhi.
Samadhi and sleep are very close; they appear almost the same. Because we are accustomed to and we know sleep, when for the first time samadhi starts happening we think it is sleep. Sleep is known, samadhi is unknown. The only difference is in sleep you have dreams; in samadhi you don’t have any dreams but just a silence, utter silence – a deep stillness as if you are no more.
In church, the priest did not allow anybody to leave in the middle of his sermon. His reason was that it wakes up people who are taking a beautiful morning nap.
I also prevent people from leaving in the middle, although for a different reason. There are a few people who are moving toward samadhi and if you simply leave, it creates a disturbance. You may disturb their state, their harmony; they may lose the track.
Whatever is happening, Chidananda, is perfectly beautiful; just accept it with great gratitude. This is what I want to happen to everybody.
That will be one of the happiest days for me; when everybody here is absent, is in a state of nothingness – in a sense present, perhaps for the first time in his life; present as a silence, and for the first time absent as a separate entity; when everybody becomes one with the whole and slowly, slowly melts. The place is no longer so many people here, but just a lake of consciousness without any ripples.
Just to check whether you are in that state or not, my strategy is to use a joke; that gives you a jerk. If I see that it is giving you a jerk, that means you were in the right space. And after the joke…you have laughed and you go back again.
Chidananda, you don’t need anything but a joke.

A zebra managed to get loose from a zoo and wandered into the countryside. He came to a farm, where the first thing he saw was a sheep. “What do you do?” asked the zebra. “I grow wool,” said the sheep.
Then he saw a cow. “What do you do?” asked the zebra. “I give milk,” said the cow.
Next he saw a hen. “What do you do?” asked the zebra. “I lay eggs,” said the hen.
Then he saw a bull. “What do you do?” asked the zebra.
“First take off those fancy pajamas and I will show you!”

So just a joke once in a while…you wake up, you have a jerk and then again the silence.
You have heard Basho’s famous haiku:
An ancient pond,
A frog jumps in,
The sound and the silence again.
And the second silence is deeper than the first silence. The frog has disturbed it for a moment, but again the silence comes back and it is deeper than the first.
It is just like you are walking on a street in the night. It is dark. A car comes by and you see the light. It passes by you and for a moment there is light, strong light, and then again there is darkness. You will be surprised: now the darkness is deeper than it was before. The experience of light has thrown you deeper into darkness.
Many times, not knowing how life grows, we start creating problems. Now, Chidananda is going perfectly well…even that becomes a problem. One starts thinking something must be wrong: nobody else is going perfectly well, and I am going perfectly well…I am not normal. Everybody is fully awake, listening, and I am disappearing into a deep silence – and certainly you will not be able to recall what I have been saying.
But that is not needed, this is not a university where you have to be examined for your memory. This is a mystery school where your test is your actions, your responses. Whether you have heard me or not will depend…if it changes your behavior pattern then you have heard me. Whether you remember my words or not, that is irrelevant.

Osho,
What is the difference between human nature, instinct, and habit? Are there any means by which they can change or not?
Habit is not nature, it is nurture. You learn it by imitation. By seeing people doing things, you start doing them. By seeing what makes people successful, you follow them. It does not come out of your nature, it comes out of your surroundings. Yes, it can become so deep-rooted that in every language there is an expression: habit is second nature. It becomes so deep-rooted that you cannot even make the distinction whether it is habit or nature.
But habit is never nature. You did not bring it with you, and any day you want to drop it, you can drop it. Any day you want to change it you can change it.
Nature cannot be changed.
And instinct is part of nature. In you, nature is expressed in four layers. Instinct is the lowest. Then there is intellect, which is higher than instinct. Most people never know anything more than these two, and these two are always fighting for supremacy. All the religions have remained with intellect; that’s why they are against instinct.
Only a few great thinkers like Acharya Brihaspati in India and Epicurus in Greece have been in favor of instinct against intellect. These are very rare people; otherwise everybody has been in favor of intellect, because intellect has a higher position. It brings more respectability to you, more honor. Instinct is almost like the animals. Intellect makes you superior to the animals – but instinct is juicy, intellect is dry. Hence the people who live with instinct are joyous, happy, loving, and the people who live with intellect are dry, quarreling.
In fact there is an old story that dogs must have been great intellectuals in their previous lives; that’s why they are continuously barking at each other. You cannot stop dogs from barking at each other, and you cannot stop intellectuals from barking at each other; there is a similarity. It can be either that dogs are born as intellectuals, or intellectuals are born as dogs – or perhaps there are both types.
Beyond your intellect is your feeling. Another name for your feeling is intuition, a more scientific name. But very few people reach to intuition, because to reach to intuition, you have to go beyond intellect, and meditation is the only way. But unfortunately meditation is not part of our education. Education stops at intellect, creating a quarrel between your instinct and intellect, creating a split, a schizophrenia that you will suffer from your whole life.
If you meditate, something beyond intellect starts functioning. You can call it the heart, you can call it intuition. It has no arguments, but it has tremendous experiences. But it is not the end of your whole nature. There is, beyond this third, the fourth, which has not been named. In the East, it has simply been called turiya, and turiya means “the fourth.” It has not been named because any name falls short of it. It is your ultimate nature, your very essential nature. It is where you meet with the universal nature, just like a dewdrop disappearing into the ocean.
Nature is a vast world – it begins with instinct and ends with the fourth, the turiya.
Habit is a nurture; you learn it from others.
For example, when I was a student and I wanted a scholarship for my post-graduate studies, my professor was absolutely confident: I had all the qualifications. There was just one great disqualification – that I might get into an argument with the vice-chancellor about something. So my professor, the head of the department of philosophy, went with me just to prevent me from quarreling. He went on telling me on the way, “Listen, everything depends on him. It is a special scholarship; it comes from the vice-chancellor’s special fund. Other scholarships are very small; this is the biggest scholarship, and you need it.”
He knew that with whatever money I was getting from my home I was purchasing books. Even if I had to go hungry it was okay, but I could not resist…if I saw in the university bookstall a new book, I had to purchase it. The head of my department supported me as much as he could. Knowing me – that I could go hungry, but I would purchase the book – he had arranged with the mess manager: “I will pay his bills for food and everything that he needs, so don’t ask him.” He wanted me to get the biggest scholarship, so I could purchase as many books as I wanted.
He was persuading me all the way while going toward the vice-chancellor’s office: “Just remember one thing, you have one disqualification. Don’t get into an argument with that old man; otherwise all your qualifications won’t do. It is simply in his hands.” I remained silent, non-committal, and he said to me, “Why are you silent? – because I am afraid…”
I said, “I cannot commit myself and I cannot promise. If he provokes me, then I don’t care about the scholarship. I will not miss the opportunity to have a good encounter.”
He said, “You are mad, but I will be sitting by your side, and if you start some argument, I will start pulling your shirt. That is to remind you that you are forgetting.”
I said, “You can do anything you want, but I am not promising anything to you.”
He said, “You are stubborn.”
I said, “I am not stubborn; if he does not provoke me, there is no question.”
But as I entered the office, he provoked me immediately. He said to me, “Why are you growing your beard?”
The head of my department looked at me and thought, “Finished! That scholarship is gone!” because I said to the vice-chancellor, “You are asking an absurd question. The beard is growing by itself. I’m not growing it, I’m not pulling out these hairs.”
He said, “That’s right; but you can shave.”
I said, “That brings up the question: I can ask you why you have been shaving your beard which nature has given you. You cannot ask the same question to me because I am not growing it, just as I am not growing my nose. And what can I say if somebody asks me, ‘Why don’t you cut off your nose?’ Why are you shaving twice a day?”
He was an old professor of history from Oxford…he was a professor in Oxford, and when he retired from there he was appointed here as vice-chancellor.
I said, “You have to give me an answer.”
He said, “You are asking a question I have never thought about. And you seem to be right…why did I start shaving my beard? The only thing I can think of is that because everybody else was shaving, I started shaving.”
I said, “It is only a habit. And you are living in a habit blindly – not even alert about why you are shaving your own beard twice a day, wasting time. And the imitation of others does not show much intelligence; you should have asked why they are shaving. And you would have found that their answer is the same: they are imitating others.”
I told him, “You just think of one possibility: if women start growing beards…which is possible. Just by giving a woman certain injections, hormones which man has and the woman does not have, she will start growing a beard and a mustache. Do you think she will look beautiful?”
He said, “My God! She cannot, she will look awful.”
I said, “The same is the situation with you. You look awful without a beard, which is a natural phenomenon.”
When I said, “You look awful,” my professor started hectically pulling my shirt, hitting my leg with his. I said to him, “Professor S.S. Roy, you have not come with me to pull my shirt, or to hit my leg with your leg.”
I told the vice-chancellor, “You have to interfere. He is disturbing our conversation.”
Even today, I can remember Professor S. S. Roy’s face! He could not believe that I would do that to him.
The vice-chancellor said, “Professor S. S. Roy, that’s not right.”
I said, “I have been telling him all the way, but he is greedy about me getting the scholarship, so he wants me not to argue with you. But I don’t care about the scholarship; I care about whatever is the truth, scholarship or no scholarship.”
The vice-chancellor looked at me and he said, “Don’t be worried about your scholarship.” He did not ask anything about my qualifications…whether I qualify for the scholarship or not. He simply signed. He said, “I loved you. No student has ever dared to say in front of me, ‘You look awful.’ And I cannot answer it! Perhaps you are right, because it is unnatural what I am doing, and what you are doing is natural. And I would love once in a while, passing by the office…you are always welcome, you can come just for a chitchat. I enjoyed just this small talk with you.”
My professor was amazed. Coming back, he was absolutely silent. I said, “What is the matter? You are very silent.”
He said, “I am wondering what kind of man you are. You managed so quickly, and you said to him, to his face, ‘You look awful.’ And we know that he is a very angry man and very revengeful. And he has invited you: ‘Whenever you want…there is no need for any appointment. You can come directly in.’ What did you do? It was almost like magic – within a minute. And you made me into such a fool. I could not even raise my eyes. I was looking down…What to say? I have done those things; I cannot deny it.”
People don’t think what they are doing: what kind of dress they are using, whether it is comfortable or not; what kind of houses they are living in, whether they are aesthetic or not. They are simply imitating others.
A life of imitation is not a true life. It is not sincere. One should live naturally on all the four steps:
Instinct is of the body.
Intellect is of the mind.
Intuition is of the heart.
And the fourth, turiya, is of the being.
If you can live all these four in harmony, you are the perfect man. Nothing should be denied in favor of anything else. All four have to be together in a harmony. And if you can avoid habits, if you can allow your nature to be your whole life, no space for habits at all…. All habits take you away from your nature; all habits prove you to be mediocre.
Live naturally and you are as natural as a roseflower; live through habits and you are made of something plastic, dead, meaningless. Then you feel miserable, and nobody else is responsible for it. You allowed imitation to enter in your authenticity and it has poisoned everything. Just follow your inner voice.
Your body has its own wisdom – use it.
Your mind can grow into a great giant as far as intelligence is concerned; use it, but don’t be used by it.
Your heart has so much love, so much beauty; it can fill the whole universe, it is oceanic. Allow it to spread and expand, and share it with people.
And the fourth is the ultimate. That is your eternal life with all conceivable blissfulness, ecstasy, joy, fearlessness, deathlessness.
If one lives simply according to his nature on each of these four rungs, he is a true man; he does not have any habit. Habits destroy your truth and impose things on you which were never intended by nature to be your destiny.

An American, an Englishman and an Irishman were all facing a firing squad. “Listen,” said the American to the other two, “one at a time we will think of a means to distract the fire; then when the firing squad turn their backs, the one who creates the distraction runs over the hill. I will go first and show you.”
The squad lined up and took aim. Quickly the American shouted, “Tornado!” The squad turned round to look and the American ran over the hill.
The squad started to line up again and the Englishman yelled, “Flash flood!” Again the squad turned, expecting to see a tidal wave of water.
For the third time the squad lined up to take aim. The Irishman, thinking quickly, yelled out, “Fire!”

============================================================

Osho,
Going inside to feel the question, I was reminded of the time I first sat at your feet, twelve precious years ago. I said, “I have no question.” You then lovingly diffused me. Osho, I never want to recover from this love. Do I need to know the question?
Neither the question matters nor the answer; what matters is a silent being, which has no questions and no answers. This is what I call innocence. The moment a question arises the innocence is lost. And one question brings another, there is no end to it. You will go on finding answers to each question and, strangely enough, every question creates new questions; in the same way, every answer also creates new questions. This way ends in insanity.
The sane being has no question and has no answer. Ordinarily there is a misunderstanding that the man of wisdom knows the answer. That is absolutely wrong. The man of knowledge may know the answers, but the man of knowledge is not a man of wisdom. And the difference is great. The man of knowledge is as ignorant as anybody else. All his answers are borrowed. In fact he is in a more difficult situation than a person who has only questions. He has a far deeper slavery to the mind than the ignorant man.
The ignorant man can go out of the mind, transcend it without any fear, because he has nothing to lose. But the knowledgeable man hesitates to step out of the mind, because he has much to lose: his whole knowledge, his whole prestige, his whole respectability. And that’s all he has, he has no wisdom.
Wisdom is a space without any ripples of questions and answers – neither knowledge nor ignorance but a pure silence, innocence. This is the state of the awakened one, the enlightened one, the buddha.
You are asking me, “Do I need to know the question?” No, nobody needs to know the question and nobody needs to know the answer either; everybody needs to know himself. And that revelation of oneself, that realization of oneself comes only when there are no questions, no answers…just a pure sky without any clouds, an utter peace that passes understanding.
This is the definition of the authentic seer, the true mystic: one who knows without knowledge, who is as ignorant as a small child – whose ignorance is innocent, whose knowing is innocent.
Ramakrishna lived just in the last part of the nineteenth century…such an innocent being. And one of the very learned men, a great scholar – perhaps the greatest scholar of those days – was Keshav Chandra Sen. They both lived very close; Keshav Chandra lived in Calcutta and Ramakrishna lived outside Calcutta by the side of the river Ganges, as a priest in a small temple in Dakshineshwar.
Keshav Chandra was respected all over the country for his wisdom, for his knowledge, for his tremendous rationality, intellectuality, authority over scriptures and his logical acumen. People from all over the country used to come to sit at his feet.
But slowly, slowly he became very puzzled: the people who had been listening to him for years started going to Dakshineshwar to sit at the feet of Ramakrishna, who was uneducated, who had no knowledge of any scripture, who could not be called in any sense a man of knowledge. He could not argue, could not convince anybody about anything.
But what was happening? Keshav Chandra was puzzled that the people who had been with him for years were slowly disappearing from his gatherings and going to the gatherings of Ramakrishna. And whatever information he had collected about Ramakrishna simply showed him that Ramakrishna seems to be half mad – suddenly he starts dancing, singing; just listening to a beautiful song, he goes into samadhi. For hours, he is lost somewhere; you cannot even wake him up, he has gone so deep into himself. It is not ordinary sleep, it is almost like a coma.
Once he remained in such a state for six days continuously. Every effort was made to wake him, but all efforts failed. And finally when he awoke, the first thing he said, with tears in his eyes, was, “Why have you people forced me to wake up? I was enjoying myself so deeply, and you go on pulling me to the outside world, where there is nothing. I have known everything; I have experienced everything and found that it cannot give me lasting peace or eternal bliss or the realization of my own self. So, whenever I go inside myself, please, don’t disturb me.” Naturally his followers became very much concerned; six days is too long a period, and he remained in a coma.
All the reports that reached to Keshav Chandra proved that this man was hysterical, whimsical, a crackpot. But the people who used to come to him were intellectuals, professors, well-versed in scriptures. Why have they moved toward Ramakrishna?
Finally, he had to decide to go and see this man. Not only to see, but to challenge him to a debate. He informed Ramakrishna, “I am coming on such and such a date. Be ready, because I am going to challenge you to discuss with me matters of ultimate significance.”
Ramakrishna laughed. He said, “It will be really a great joy to meet Keshav Chandra. He is such an intellectual giant and he does not know whom he is challenging. But let him come, this is a good excuse. I will accept the challenge.”
His disciples said, “But this will be very humiliating. He will bring all his followers, and before all these people…we know you cannot argue – you have never argued in your life.”
But what Ramakrishna said is something to be remembered forever. He said, “I don’t argue because I am the argument. Just let him come. I don’t know the scriptures, I don’t need to know them. I know the truth – why should I bother about borrowed knowledge? I don’t have any education, I don’t know how to prove something or disprove something, but I don’t need to know – my presence is the proof. Just let him come.”
The disciples were afraid because they could not understand that Keshav Chandra would accept his presence as an argument. And Keshav Chandra came. Ramakrishna hugged him – he was not expecting that Ramakrishna would come out of the temple and hug him – and took him inside. He said, “I am so grateful that you came, I have been waiting for so long. Whenever you feel like challenging me, you can come. Whenever you feel the urge to argue, you can come. I am always available, there is no need even to make any appointment; I am twenty-four hours in this temple. You can come day or night, any moment.”
Keshav Chandra kept himself aloof, but found it was very difficult: this man is so loving, his very vibe is so touching. And Ramakrishna said, “First, before you start your argument, for your welcome I will dance.” And he had his musicians there who started playing drums, and Ramakrishna started dancing….
Keshav Chandra could not believe it, his followers could not believe it. He had challenged many people, he had argued all over the country with great scholars and defeated them, but he had never seen such a man, who is welcoming him with a dance. And the dance was so beautiful – it was not the dance of a technician, it was the dance of an overflowing love. It was not formal, the welcome was not just etiquette; even Keshav Chandra could feel that the man was authentic.
After the dance Ramakrishna said, “Now you can start.” And Keshav Chandra said, “First I want you to prove the existence of God.”
Ramakrishna laughed. He said, “The existence of God? You are the proof. Otherwise from where does such great intelligence come? It must be coming from existence, and if existence can produce Keshav Chandra that means existence is not unconscious, is not unintelligent. That’s all we mean by God: that existence is not only matter. You are the proof. It is strange that you are asking for the proof and you don’t know that you are the proof. I can bring anybody before you as a proof that existence is intelligent. That’s all we mean by God: that existence is not without consciousness.”
Keshav Chandra’s followers could not believe that they had seen Keshav Chandra in shock for the first time. He was silent, he could not find what to say. And Ramakrishna’s disciples were also in a shock. They said, “My God, we used to think: ‘How is this poor fellow going to argue?’ But he has silenced him without much trouble; no scripture has been quoted – nothing. Keshav Chandra himself has made the argument against himself.”
And each time Keshav Chandra said something Ramakrishna would clap – just like a child. And he was saying things against him! The disciples thought, “Keshav Chandra will think Ramakrishna is insane. He will not be able to understand: ‘I am arguing against him, and he is clapping with joy?’”
And just in the middle Ramakrishna would stand up and hug him again and say, “That was really a beautiful point. I loved it, you go on.” His joy, his love, his unruffled calm became his victory, without any argument.
Keshav Chandra fell at his feet and said, “Just forgive me, I have had very wrong notions about you.”
Ramakrishna said, “What are you doing? You are a man of knowledge, I am an ignorant man – so ignorant, so uneducated, I cannot even sign my own name. I know myself but I cannot sign my own name, I cannot read anything. What are you doing?”
And Keshav Chandra became one of the great lovers of Ramakrishna. And Ramakrishna had no answer for any question, nor did he have any question. But Ramakrishna’s innocence touched many people and transformed many people. Just his love was a great alchemical process.
You don’t have to ask any question and you don’t need to receive any answer. Just drop both. They are not opposites to each other – the question and answer – they are not contradictions, they are complementaries, they are part of one whole. You have to drop the whole thing, you have to come out of this childish game. I answer your questions just to help you to come out. Slowly, slowly, your questions will die out, your answers will die out, and just a cleanness remains behind – that is your true being. All the questions are created by the priest, all the answers are created by the priests; it is a silly game. They create the answers, they create the questions, and in their questions and answers they divide the whole humanity into fragments. Otherwise what is the difference between Christians and Hindus, except their answers? – so trivial that you will find it hilarious.
But people go on creating questions. Mind is a very efficient mechanism to create questions, and it is also very efficient at creating answers. Each answer brings more questions; there is no end to it. There are thousands of philosophies in the world and none of them has come to any conclusion. None of them is complete or is ever going to be complete, for the simple reason that every answer will create new questions; it is an endless process.
The moment you drop all questions and all answers you have dropped all the priests, all the philosophers; you are freed from the whole past. You are freed from the mind, you are freed from language – you have moved to the beyond, into the inner sky, where there is your eternal life, your infinite light, your deathlessness, your bliss, your ultimate blissfulness; where you will find everything that man has ever dreamt of finding, and a contentment, a fulfillment that is never disturbed again.

A big revival meeting was being held. It was midwinter and all the motels were filled with preachers. The small son of the owner of one of the motels came in from the cold and found the lounge crowded with preachers. The boy announced to the room full of preachers that he had dreamt of hell. One of them grinned at him and asked, “What was it like?”
“Just like here,” said the boy, “I almost froze.”
“You froze?” asked another preacher.
“Yes,” replied the boy, “ the preachers were so thick around the fire, no one else could get near it!”

These preachers who are talking about heaven and hell, who are talking about God and truth, have never entered their own being. I have met with almost all types of monks, priests, preachers, philosophers – none of them is interested in meditation. They are all playing games of the mind, which are childish, absolutely meaningless. You can go on playing those games and wasting your whole life.
I teach you a simple thing: just be silent, utterly silent, and you will have found all the treasures and all the mysteries and all the secrets of existence.

Osho,
The dictionary definition of humble is: “Having or showing a consciousness of one's defects or shortcomings. Not proud, not self-assertive, modest.” Is a rebel humble? Is there more to the definition of humble?
The dictionary definition of humble is one thing, but to know humbleness as an experience is totally another. The dictionary is the world of words, and humbleness is something beyond words.
So, do you want to discuss the word humble or the experience of humbleness? They are totally different things. The word love will have a dictionary meaning, but the experience of love will be a totally different thing. So always remember, the dictionary meaning is not relevant in this gathering of mad people. Their search is for the living experience, not for dissection of dead words.
The dictionary meaning almost always falls short of the actual experience. For example, the dictionary meaning of humble is, “Having or showing a consciousness of one’s defects or shortcomings. Not proud, not self-assertive, modest.” All these three things have to be understood.
First, the man of humbleness is not an exhibitionist; he does not show a consciousness of his defects or shortcomings. A man of humbleness simply is no more; he exists without an ego, without a personality. And without a personality you cannot have shortcomings and you cannot have defects. These are possessions of the ego. That’s why ego feels a deep inferiority complex whenever it sees some defect, some shortcoming.
The dictionary meaning is that if the ego accepts and shows its shortcomings and defects to people, it is humble. But the existential humbleness simply means egolessness: there is nobody to experience defects, there is nobody to compare oneself with others as being inferior, as having shortcomings.
Second, the dictionary meaning says, “not proud.” Anybody who says, “I am not proud” will be proud of this very fact. He will declare loudly, “I am not proud,” and if you say, “I am even more humble than you, even less proud than you,” he will feel offended. He is proud, but from the back door. The true humbleness knows nothing of pride or no pride. Just a small child…does he know if he is proud or not proud?
The sage comes back to the same state of innocence; he is neither proud nor not proud – he is not aware. The very ego that could have decorated itself with being non-proud is missing.
The dictionary meaning again says, “not self-assertive.” A man who is not self-assertive is bound to be self-repressive: where will the assertion go? The self is there, the ego is there. He may not assert it – then he will have to repress it, but a repressed ego is more dangerous than an ego which is assertive because the repressed ego goes on accumulating, and you are sitting on a volcano which can erupt any moment.
The authentic humbleness knows nothing of assertion or repression. Do you think a roseflower is assertive because it is opening in the morning sun and blossoming, and because it is spreading its fragrance to the winds? It is simply natural; there is no question of assertiveness. Whether anybody sees the flower or not will not make any difference, whether anybody passes by the side of the flower or not will not make any difference. The flower will go on dancing in the wind, in the rain, in the sun, will go on spreading its fragrance; it is simply natural.
The humble man is just like a flower He is not assertive, he is not repressive, he is simply natural. When he blossoms, fragrance comes out of him. When he becomes enlightened, he radiates light. Love overflows…his compassion is so abundant that it has to be shared with others. It is not assertiveness. Do you think that when a rain cloud showers it is assertiveness? What should a rain cloud do with its rain? It becomes heavier and heavier and heavier; it becomes a burden. It has to share its rain with the thirsty earth. A humble man is simply natural. And whatever grows in this naturalness – whatever blossoms, whatever fragrance, radiation comes out of naturalness, without any effort on his part – is a happening, it is not a doing.
It may appear to egoistic people as assertiveness, that the roseflower is asserting its redness, its fragrance; it is doing a kind of PR job, inviting people to see, inviting people to smell, declaring to the world, “Look, is there any other rose better than me?” But this is your own projection. You are not being kind to the poor roseflower. He is not doing any PR job, it is just his nature.
And finally, the dictionary says, “…the humble man is modest.” But a man without ego – how can he be modest? Modesty means you have an ego but you have controlled it. You have made boundaries, limits; you have cultured it, you have made it civilized. But it is very thin…skin-deep. All your so-called modest people, just scratch them a little bit and immediately their barbarous ego will be out.
A truly humble man has not practiced humbleness. It is not his discipline, it is his understanding and it is his renouncing of the ego. He is not modest, he is simply what he is. You will interpret him according to your own projections…somebody will think that he is too proud, somebody may think he is too self-assertive, somebody may think he is very humble. But it will depend on you. He is only a mirror; he will simply show your face. Dictionaries cannot do justice to real experiences of life, particularly experiences which go beyond mind.
You are asking, “Is there more to the definition of humble?” These are not the definitions of humble at all! The dictionary cannot understand what humbleness is. To understand humbleness, you don’t have to go into a library, you have to go into meditation. You don’t have to consult a dictionary, you have to consult your own being. There you will not find any definition, you will find the real thing – humbleness itself. And don’t be satisfied until you have found the real thing.
As far as religious experiences are concerned, dictionaries are absolutely useless, because religion is not part of linguistics; it is something beyond language.

Osho,
Oh, my God, how am I ever going to get out of this one?
Vimal, I don’t know who “this one” is but I will tell you two jokes. You can figure it out, who “this” is. One:

Mr. Isar was attending his friend’s wife’s funeral. “It must be hard to lose a wife,” remarked Mr. Isar. “Almost impossible,” remarked his friend.

Perhaps you are in trouble – I can sense it from your question. But don’t be worried, every night has an end, and every wife too! Just a little patience….

Mrs. Kessy has just returned home after her holiday. “How did you get along with your father, whilst I was away?” she asked her son.
“Just fine,” says the boy, “every morning he took me out on the lake in a rowboat and let me swim back.”
“Goodness!” exclaims Mrs. Kessy, “isn’t that a long distance to swim?”
“Ah, I always made it all right,” says the boy. “The only trouble I had was getting out of the bag!”

Vimal, you are in the bag. Just try first to get out of the bag, then swimming out of the lake is not going to be a great trouble. But getting out of the bag I can understand…and I have deep compassion for you. That’s why I was always seeing Vimal in tears – what is the matter with the poor fellow?
Now he has come out in the open, “Oh my God, how am I ever going to get out of this one?” That means this is not the only one; he has had other troubles before. He has got out of those troubles, he is experienced. So I am not too worried about him, he will get out of this one and he will fall into another ditch.
This is the trouble with experienced people: they think that they know so much – now they can manage not to fall into another ditch. And again they find that not only are they getting experienced, ditches are also getting experienced. It has been going in parallel for millennia.
But there is hope. Just make it a decision, that if you can get out of this one, you will not fall into another ditch. Then I can bless you. But you have to make a commitment; otherwise, what is the point? It is better to remain with the old one. You are familiar, the ditch is familiar, you know each other perfectly well. And slowly, slowly, one becomes immune. The problem arises with the new ditches: you have to start learning from abc.
In the East, things are simpler, because people remain in one ditch. There is no divorce, they become accustomed, habituated. And because there is no question of any possibility of changing, there is no point in crying over spilled milk. It is spilled, it is better to forget and live life as your destiny has given it to you. It is written on your forehead, it is written in your birth chart – everything is decided beforehand. What can you do? It gives a certain consolation. Hence you will find in the East husbands and wives suffering exactly the same as in the West, but with tremendous contentment.
In the West the suffering is not that great, but discontentment is very great, because the possibility is there that you can change. And the hope is that perhaps you can get someone better, someone specially made for you.
Nobody is specially made for you. Everybody is made for himself; nobody is made for anybody else. But just the idea that you can change…a small trouble, and immediately you feel frustration, freaking out, and all kinds of things.
In the East these things happen also every day, but nobody freaks out. It is just fate, it is kismet, it is written in the lines of your hand; it is God who decides. You have simply to learn how to live with the person God has decided you should live with.
But in advanced countries, the trouble has reached a climax: all contentment has disappeared from married life. Now the next step is the disappearance of marriage itself. And unless people are allowed to move easily, without any legalities, without any social hindrances, from one partner to another partner at any time of the day or night…if movement is made absolutely easy, perhaps people will not feel so frustrated, so much in slavery and imprisonment.
But so much change will bring new problems…you will be utterly tired. Remember that any solution is not going to have only positive effects; it has its own negative shadow. If change is allowed it is going to be tiring, exhausting, making life a kind of despair, because each time you have to prove again your manliness, your womanliness, your beauty, your strength. And all these things go on declining, so each time you have to be more of a hypocrite.
Hypocrisy in life is never a blissful state, and hypocrisy with a partner you are living with twenty-four hours a day cannot be continued. It is good for one hour or two hours, meeting the woman or the man on the beach, or in the movie hall where everything is dark and you cannot see whether her hair is false or dyed, whether her teeth are real or artificial, whether she is alive or dead – in the darkness, anything goes. Neither does she know about you.
But living twenty-four hours together, hypocrisy is bound to be broken; the reality has to surface, and that will hurt you very much. Again you will say, “My God, I have fallen in a bigger ditch.” And as you go on and on you will find bigger and bigger ditches…because smaller ditches are for beginners; bigger ditches are waiting for the experienced ones.
It is better, Vimal, to try to understand the woman you are with. Try to understand what her problem is, because if she is a problem to you, she must be a problem to herself. If you love her, have compassion for her; try to understand her difficulties, her problems. Perhaps that will melt the ice and she will start trying to understand your difficulties, your problems. That’s exactly what love is: two persons are trying to solve life’s problems together without getting fed up and bored too quickly – patiently seeing it as an opportunity for learning and growth.
Each relationship is a growth opportunity. Don’t condemn it, enjoy it in all its phases – in the moments when everything is beautiful and in the moments when everything goes dark.
That’s how life is, ups and downs.
And you have to learn, you cannot expect things to be always going up; for that, first you have to be enlightened and then you have to find an enlightened woman – that is very difficult. First, it is difficult to become enlightened, and then to find an enlightened woman is an almost impossible job.
It has not happened up to now in the whole history of man; not a single enlightened person, man or woman, has been able to find another enlightened person, for a simple reason: Why should any enlightened person get into any ditch, man or woman? If after enlightenment you still have to fall in the same ditches, what is the need of enlightenment?
The whole secret of enlightenment is in how to avoid the ditches. Without enlightenment you cannot avoid; if you avoid, the ditch will follow you. These are not static ditches that you go around and run away from. They run faster than you!

Mulla Nasruddin was saying to one of his friends early in the morning, walking on the lawn, “My wife is almost like a mousetrap.” And women are so attuned, their antenna is always up in the air; if you speak loudly they may not listen, but if you whisper they will listen to every word.
The wife came out and she said, “What are you telling him? Yes, I am a mousetrap – and who are you? You are a mouse. And remember, the trap was not running after the mouse, it was the mouse himself who entered the trap. So what are you telling your friend?”

But this story is old. Now traps have wheels, dry batteries – they run. Once they see a mouse anywhere…even if they smell a mouse, they run. They don’t wait for the mouse to come. So it is better, Vimal: become enlightened, be a Gautam Buddha, sit under a bodhi tree with closed eyes. Only then can you hope…
But keep your eyes closed, because there are stories in the scriptures that ladies from heaven come to distract the people who are becoming a threat to the king of the gods. His throne starts wavering when somebody becomes enlightened – that means a competitor is coming…fresh. The man there on the golden throne may be very old and this new man is coming fresh, young; there is every danger…. To avoid the danger, they send ladies from heaven, who dance around the person who is becoming enlightened – naked; they don’t care about police commissioners!
I have nothing to do with the puranas. In the Hindu puranas – which the police commissioner should be respectful of – they dance, they seduce. So perhaps the idea of wheels on mousetraps is not new, it is as ancient as the Hindu puranas. They are the most ancient scriptures in the world. They sent not only ditches from earth, but ditches from heaven also to destroy your enlightenment. And once they have destroyed your enlightenment, they disappear; then they leave you here for the earthly ditches to take care of you. So be aware!
Gautam Buddha has strict instructions for his followers: “Never look more than four feet ahead, so at the most you can see the feet of the woman, that’s all – don’t go more than that. And run away – don’t talk to a woman….” Clear-cut instructions: “Don’t touch a woman, don’t sit in a place where a woman has been sitting. At least for ten minutes leave that space empty, because for ten minutes it remains vibrating.”
And I am not saying anything of my own, I am simply quoting things within quotation marks. And not one scripture – Hindu, Jaina, Buddhist, all three religions…thousands of scriptures with the same idea. There must be some truth in it, and the truth is that those people were trying to become enlightened with a repressed sexuality.
There is no heaven and no ladies are coming from there and no old guy is sitting there on a golden throne who becomes afraid; these ladies are coming from repressed sexuality. The more silent you become, the more vulnerable to your own unconscious – you can become a victim. Your unconscious can create all kinds of hallucinations, and those hallucinations can destroy your peace, your silence, your feeling that you are coming to the peak of your realization. Suddenly you fall with a thud on the ground, flat. You look all around: there are no ladies, they have gone. There were no ladies before either; it was just your repressed psychology projecting.
So don’t repress and try to become enlightened, but still keep your eyes closed as far as possible. Don’t take any chances. It is better to be fully cautious; otherwise you may fall again into trouble.
That is one way to get out of trouble. The other way is to understand the woman. Be human. She is human; some bridge is possible – it is not impossible. And just making the bridge is a great experience, just coming to a state of harmony where there was conflict before is a great realization. My preference will be for the second, and if you become enlightened with this harmony, then no woman or man can disturb your enlightenment.
I don’t consider those seers who were seduced by their fantasies worthy of being called seers. They were perfectly ready to be seduced by their own repressed sexuality, and they have created all these beautiful stories to console themselves: it is not their fault, it is God from heaven who sends beautiful women.
Strange, you are searching for God, and God is trying to keep you away; you are a devotee of God, and God is sending troubles for you as a reward. You have renounced your wife, your children, your family, but God is not satisfied – he is sending more beautiful women. He does not want many more people to become enlightened it seems; he seems to be against enlightenment. This cannot be so. God should be – if there is any God – immensely happy when somebody becomes enlightened, because he becomes the argument to the world proving the existence of God.
So it is good, Vimal, for you to try to understand the woman; create a bridge between yourself and her. Learn patience and learn humanness, and see that humanity is frail, is defective. Just as it is defective in the other person, it is defective in you. Perhaps you cannot see your defects and your woman cannot see her own defects – she sees your defects, you see her defects. That is the whole problem: not only yours, but of everyone who has a woman to live with; they are both capable of seeing each others’ defects.
Just the other day, Anando brought me a piece of news. In the Soviet Union, one woman who was a crane driver struck an electric pole with her crane, and got such a great electric shock the doctors declared her dead. According to their old tradition, she was waiting two days to be buried. But before burying her, one of the doctors who was taking care wanted to do an autopsy. And when he cut some part of her body, blood came out of it. He could not believe it: she was alive!
She came back to consciousness, but with a strange phenomenon which has never happened before: her eyes had become x-ray eyes. Now she can take your x-ray photograph. She is being used in a hospital: the patient simply stands before her and she can see the whole skeleton. She can find where the disease is, where the problem is, where the fracture is, where the cancer is, where the operation is needed. But she is suffering from immense migraine, because there is so much electricity in the head that her eyes…and she cannot see anything other than skeletons all around.
Of course, Anando has brought the news because of her own ghost – afraid that “I am troubled by only one ghost.” What about this woman who will be seeing the doctors, the nurses, then everybody in the street…? If she is moving, she will see only skeletons moving all around.
But I had a thought, that this is a very good idea: somehow, some way should be found that every woman can have x-ray eyes, so she can see into Vimal, where the defects are. In fact, they don’t need x-ray eyes, they see with ordinary eyes every defect. Not only do they see it, they exaggerate it as much as they can. Being with a woman is a discipline, it is a religious austerity.

============================================================

Osho,
Lately, I have been feeling very insecure, and I see how much I dislike that space of not knowing. And then I try all kinds of stupid things to control the situation. I feel as if it is such an imprisonment, and at the same time, I have a deep feeling in me that knows that this is how life is, and I should accept it. I find it very difficult to watch myself, and the insecurity comes up even more. Could you please comment?
We are trained in wrong ways; otherwise, security is something to be afraid of, and insecurity is something to be rejoiced. What exactly is insecurity? It means tomorrow is not going to repeat today. It means tomorrow you may not even be alive. It means that one has to live each moment as if it is the last moment.
A life of security will be simply boring. It will be like seeing the same movie again and again and again – knowing every detail of what is going to happen. You can enjoy a movie only once. If you are an idiot, then it is another matter….
Insecurity is the very fabric of life. If you don’t understand insecurity, you can never understand life. Seasons will change; climates will change; the fall will come, the spring will come. Everything will go on changing, nothing can be taken for granted; this is insecurity. You want everything to be certain, permanent. But have you ever thought what will be the outcome of it if everything is permanent? You eat the same food every day, you say the same things every day, you listen to the same things every day. And there is no death even to demolish this tragic living – you are living in a nightmare.
Insecurity keeps people fresh, alive, adventurous – knowing that things can be changed. Even without their changing them, they are going to be changed. So there is great scope for change, for transformation.
An ancient saying is, “The authentic man is one whom the sunrise never finds where the sunset leaves him”; or, “where the sunrise leaves him, the sunset never finds him there.” He is always on the move, he is a flow…he is not a dirty pond going nowhere.
But the whole training of our minds is such that we are made afraid of insecurity, and our whole life we are trying for safety. Financially, politically, religiously – in every dimension we want to be secure. But security means death, a living death. It means tomorrow will be simply a repetition of today, and today is a repetition of yesterday.
Are you living? Is there a dance in your life? Are you moving, growing, risking, taking the challenges of dangerous paths? In the acceptance of the danger, in the acceptance that anything can happen any moment, life comes to its best, to its fullest.
Your question is, “Lately, I have been feeling very insecure, and I see how much I dislike that space of not knowing.” You are completely upside down; you will have to change your posture. Insecurity is not a space that has to be disliked, it is a space that has to be loved and cherished, celebrated…because tomorrow will bring new news.
And because of the fear of insecurity, you are also fearing not knowing; and not knowing is the highest peak of consciousness. But certainly you must be afraid of peaks because you can fall from there; you prefer the plain, asphalt road – no danger of falling from there. You would like to be at the lowest point in consciousness, because from there you cannot fall.
Millions of people have decided to live at the minimum out of the simple fear that from the maximum you can fall. It is safer to live at the minimum; it is even safer not to live at all. Nobody has ever heard that dead people are insecure; graveyards are the most secure places. Once you enter your grave, there is no fear: even death cannot do anything to you – one cannot die twice.
Man has been trying to create false props for security, knowing perfectly well that they all fall down, but still he goes on piling up props around him. Time does not care about your props, nor does life care about your props. In fact, it is compassionate of nature that whatever you do, you remain insecure. You can have a bank balance, you can have a big insurance – but these are just strategies to befool yourself. What insurance can there be against death? What insurance can there be against the constantly changing flux of life? You cannot prevent it: it is a mountain river flowing fast, dropping from high mountains into waterfalls, moving into valleys toward the ocean where it will disappear completely.
The idea of safety has created the idea of accumulating knowledge – nothing should be left unknown because the unknown creates insecurity. If it is known, you feel safe.
Even small things, you are continuously trying to know…even if you are traveling in a train with a passenger, you immediately want to know his name, where he is going, what religion he belongs to, what his profession is. You may not have thought that this is a way of feeling safe about the man; otherwise, who knows? You may be traveling with a madman, and in the middle of the night he may sit on your chest.
That’s why people are always afraid of strangers. They become uneasy even if you start living your own style of life, not following the crowd. That means you are becoming an outsider, a stranger. So people go on filling their heads with all kinds of knowledge, most of which is simply rubbish and crap; people become walking encyclopedias.
In my village, I used to know a brahmin. He was a little cuckoo – I have never come across another man like that. He had crammed the whole Oxford Dictionary; that was his great achievement. You could ask him the Oxford Dictionary meaning of any word, and he was almost like a computer: he would immediately give you the exact words that the Oxford Dictionary says. And he was living under the wrong impression that he knew the English language.
By cramming the Oxford Dictionary, one cannot know the English language. Language is a living phenomenon: it comes through dialogue, it comes through contact with living people. The Oxford Dictionary may be marginally helpful, but just the Oxford Dictionary…. He was not able even to make a single sentence, because in the Oxford Dictionary there are only words. He knew the whole language, and still he was not able to make a single sentence.
This is the situation of the scholars: they are afraid of their not knowing; they go on piling up scriptures over their not knowing, covering it up with thick layers of knowledge. But underneath they are as ignorant as ever.
Ignorance has not to be covered, but transformed into innocence. Ignorance has not to become knowledgeability, ignorance has to become a feeling of the mysterious and the miraculous in existence.
This is the way of a religious man. The scholarly man is never religious – cannot be.
Your whole approach is categorically wrong – not in part, but absolutely. You have to understand that insecurity is the very nature of life; there is no way to avoid it. And when there is no way to avoid it, the only wise way is to enjoy it. When it is impossible to avoid it, why go on hitting your head against the wall? Then it is better to transform insecurity into a beautiful experience. In fact, it is that.
Man can never demystify existence, he can never become all-knowing. The desire to become all-knowing is dangerous. In this ambition of becoming all-knowing so that you can be safe, the possibility is that you may collect much information. And in collecting information, you will forget one basic thing: that you have to go through a transformation. Information is not going to help you at all – you need a transformation of your consciousness. By transformation, you will not become a knower, you will become more and more a mystic.
Each and every thing in life, from the smallest grass leaf to the biggest star…it is all mysterious. Neither holy scriptures have any answers for it, nor science has any answers for it, although they both go on proposing hypotheses. Religion tries to propose a hypothesis of God: that he created the world. This is really pitiable; it has nothing to do with authentic religiousness, it is a childish effort to forget your ignorance. Nobody has witnessed any God creating the world. By the very nature of the fact, nobody can be a witness; otherwise the world is already there, somebody is there to witness it.
Man’s stupidity knows no limits. Christianity believes God created the world…but this is not enough: they have to know the exact year, date, day – in detail. And they have calculated – nobody knows how they have come to this calculation because they have not given the process of their calculation – that God created the world four thousand and four years before Jesus was born. Of course, it must have been Monday, and the first of January, because he cannot start in the middle of the year. In fact, wherever and whenever he started, that was the first of January. How can the calendar exist without a world?
And it raises a thousand and one questions which Christian theologians have not been able to answer – not even a single one. What was God doing for eternity? And why did he create the world exactly four thousand and four years before Jesus was born? What is the secret of it? And where has this fellow been before? And the more basic question is: From where did God come? Who produced him? Is he an orphan, with no mother, no father? Who created him? If the world needs a creator, then God also needs a creator.
This hypothesis can satisfy only very childish minds, and can give them security. But millions of people are in that space. In temples, in synagogues, in mosques, they are praying to a God which is just a hypothesis.
Some day when man really comes of age and to maturity, he will laugh at us: “What kind of idiots is the whole history full of? They create a hypothesis, and they worship a hypothesis.”
Two plus two make four: that is a hypothesis, but you never worship it – or do you? Just writing “two plus two is equal to four”…and then flowers and devotional songs…But your God is not better in any way than “two plus two is four.”
But science is not in a better position either. They say that at a certain point, nearabout four billion years ago…Their calculation is as bogus as the religious calculation: four thousand and four years, or four million years, or four billion years. How do you come to that conclusion? It is simply whimsical. They say the world came into existence out of an explosion. Explosion of what? They have removed God; now instead of God, it is an explosion of energy. But that means the energy was there. And if the energy was there, existence was there.
Gautam Buddha seems to be more logical, Mahavira seems to be more logical; they don’t believe in the creation at all. They have simply denied that the world has ever been created: it has always been there, and it will always be there, changing its forms.
You cannot conceive a point when the world was not, and then suddenly it was there. It is not logic, it is magic: a moment before there was nothing and a moment after, there was everything. God seems to be a street magician! But the street magician knows only tricks. Out of an empty cap, he brings birds – but they are hidden in the empty cap. He creates the illusion that the cap is empty, but it is not empty.
Gautam Buddha is right when he says, “The very idea of the creation of the world is foolish. It will lead to more stupid answers and questions.” But why do people want to know such things? There must be a psychological need, and a universal psychological need. This is the need: safety. Knowing that God created the world, you feel at ease.
Strange, I have never felt any unease about whether God created the world or not. Who cares? In what way am I related to that creation? It does not affect me this way or that. I am ready to accept the mystery of life, and I am against all those people – whether religious scholars or scientific researchers – who are going to satisfy your fear of insecurity by giving you hypotheses.
Even science could not control its temptation and accept the mysteriousness of existence, that we don’t know. Not even a single scientist has been so courageous as to say, “We don’t know.” In fact, the whole project of science is such that slowly, slowly our area of knowledge is growing, and the area of our ignorance is decreasing. Logically it can be inferred that one day, somewhere in the future – it may take millions of years – a point will come when everything will be known; the whole area will be covered by knowledge, and there will be nothing left to be known anymore.
I cannot agree with this. Yes, science tries to know things, but that does not demystify them. It simply pushes the mystery back a little. You split the atom – soon you will be able to split the sperm – and then you say that the atom consists of electrons, protons, and neutrons, and you think you have provided the knowledge. But the question is, why does the atom consist of electrons, protons, and neutrons? The mystery is not dissolved, it has become more subtle.
The man of understanding will accept that insecurity is the very fabric of life, and that not knowing is the counterpart of the miraculous and the mysterious existence. We know nothing. All that we know is very superficial, and all that we know goes on changing. That which seems to be so certain today becomes uncertain tomorrow.
Have you observed that for almost thirty years, no big volumes on science have been written? Only periodicals, monthly publications…. And people don’t write big books for the simple reason that by the time their book is finished, it will be out of date – so great is the explosion. All old theories become wrong; new theories come in. All old hypotheses drop dead; new hypotheses arise like the phoenix, out of the ashes of the old hypotheses. And they know perfectly well that these are also going to fall.
If you are trying to write a complete history of something scientific, you are wasting time. So scientists only write papers, not books; they read papers, not books, because a paper can be read in a university or at a conference of scientists. At least it is real, true at that moment; nobody knows about tomorrow. People used to think that Albert Einstein will never be refuted. He has been refuted, he is no longer the giant he used to be. Inch by inch, his whole theory of relativity has been criticized, and better proposals have come into being.
But now one thing is certain – because three hundred years’ experience of science shows that no theory is going to become authentic knowledge, it is only a temporary hypothesis. Somebody with a better intelligence, with more logical acumen, with better scientific equipment, is going to demolish it.
Charles Darwin is no longer accepted. The idea that man has come from the monkeys or apes is very appealing; looking at man, it needs no proof! But for millions of years, monkeys have remained monkeys, man has remained man. Neither do we see people falling back toward monkeys – going up the trees, and growing tails, and jumping – nor do we see another modern monkey getting down from the tree, standing on two feet, and declaring, “Now I am a human being.”
There has not been a single scientific theory which has remained true. Everything has changed, and everything is changing so fast that perhaps in the future it will not be possible to read even papers.
One of the great mathematicians – perhaps the greatest mathematician, Goedel – was writing a book on mathematics. His lifelong effort – he wasted forty years – was to give to the world a complete book on mathematics; there would be no need of any improvement in it. He was a great genius. And when he was coming to the conclusion of his book, Bertrand Russell demolished the whole book of forty years just by a small puzzle.
Bertrand Russell was also a mathematician; he has also written a very great book on mathematics, Principia Mathematica, which I don’t think anybody ever reads, except a few crazy people like me! He came to know about a problem: the government of Britain had ordered all the libraries to make a catalog of all the books they had, to keep one copy of the catalog in the library, and to send another copy to the central government library so that they could know how many books were in the whole country.
The librarians made the catalog…and finally a few intelligent ones became very disturbed: what to do about the catalog they are keeping in the library? – because that has become a big book itself. Should it be included in the catalog? If they don’t include it, then it is against the order. The order says, “All the books in the library should be included in the catalog.” So according to the order, the catalog also has to be included. But it looks very foolish that the catalog includes itself.
But they were just small town librarians. The idea came and puzzled them, but they thought, “We should not worry, we will just send them to the central library.” But to the central library, the order was the same, that they should make a catalog of all the catalogs, keep one copy with them, and send the other copy to the government.
The man at the central library was far more educated, far more intelligent, but even he could not figure out what to do: whether to have the catalog included in the catalog itself…That looks ridiculous, and hilarious. But not to include it goes against the order. So he asked Bertrand Russell, “You are a great mathematician, you have to solve this puzzle.”
Bertrand Russell worked on it but could not find any solution. Everything was wrong: If you put it in the catalog, it does not look right that the catalog is cataloged in itself. If you don’t keep it in the catalog, that is not right because the catalog is in the library and you have left one book uncataloged.
Remembering Goedel, the old man who was a world-famous mathematician and who was known to be completing a book on which he had worked for forty years – and perhaps no mathematical book would ever be so complete, so exhaustive – Bertrand Russell sent the puzzle to him. Goedel was just completing the final chapter, the last pages. His whole hypothesis was that mathematics can solve all problems…but he could not solve the problem of this catalog: whether to include it in itself or not.
He became so shocked that just a small thing cannot be solved by his whole mathematical experience that he did not publish his book. He became so frustrated, he sent the puzzle back to Bertrand Russell and told him, “I’m not going to complete the book and I’m not going to publish it although I have wasted my whole life on it. What is the use? It cannot solve a simple thing.”
Science is an effort to demystify existence in every way. And that’s what theology has been doing before science – trying to demystify everything. God created the world – that makes you safe. God is the father – that makes you secure; he will take care of you. Everything is decided by God; of course, it cannot be against you. God is compassionate…that’s what Mohammedans say: “Rahman rahim” – he is kindness, he is compassion itself. So don’t be worried about anything. Even all your sins will be forgiven, because his compassion is far bigger than your ability to commit sins.
How many sins can you commit in a small life of seventy years? If you go on committing sins day and night, without taking time for eating and sleeping and bathing – just sins and sins and sins, a continuum from the cradle to the grave – even then you cannot commit so many sins that they are greater than the compassion of God. You will be forgiven – it gives great safety, a great consolation – just believe in God.
Theology was trying to create safety, consolation, security. And now science has taken over from theology, on a more pragmatic basis, and is doing the same thing: just giving you a false idea that you need not worry, science knows all.
The very word science means knowing.
But I want to insist again and again to you: neither theology, nor science, nor philosophy – no effort of man can demystify existence.
You need to be courageous to accept the insecurity – not only accept, but rejoice in it. You have to rejoice in the mystery of existence: the trees, the oceans, the mountains, the stars…everything is mysterious. From the smallest pebble on the beach to the whole universe, everything is so mysterious that there is no possibility of knowing it.
Not knowing is the way of the mystic. Insecurity is the way of the mystic. And to be a sannyasin is to be on the path of the mystic.
If you change your basic standpoint – which is wrong, utterly wrong – then your whole problem disappears. And then you are capable of dancing amid all insecurity; you are capable of loving and laughing amid all not knowing.
Not knowing is nothing but innocence, and insecurity is nothing but a constantly changing panorama, always fresh and new. Nothing is repeated in existence.
You must have heard the saying, “History repeats itself.” History repeats itself because history has consisted up to now of stupid human beings. Existence is so intelligent: it never repeats itself; it never creates another Jesus, another Moses, another Buddha, another Chuang Tzu, another Socrates. It simply never repeats. Its creativity is tremendous, inexhaustible.
Yes, the history of man repeats itself, because the life of man is a routine. If you look at your life…you go on repeating it. Slowly, slowly the repetition becomes your efficiency: you become almost a robot, you lose your consciousness. Consciousness is needed only if each moment is new, because you have to respond to a new situation. Old answers won’t do.
It is a great blessing that life is insecure, love is insecure, and fundamentally we are in a state of not knowing. We can be childlike – running after butterflies, collecting seashells on the beach, or colored stones, as if they are diamonds, and enjoy all of them.
In my childhood, I used to have as many pockets as possible. My tailor used to be very angry with me. He said, “You will spoil my credit; nobody will come to me for their clothes to be made. What kind of dress is this? – with four pockets in front, pockets even on the arms, pockets on the pants…not just two, four.” He said, “You are mad, and you are driving me mad.”
I said, “I need all these pockets because I love the river, and I find so many beautiful stones that all these pockets fall short.”
Whenever I would come home with my pockets full of stones, I would even go to bed with all the stones. Everybody was angry… “What do you think these stones are? Diamonds, or emeralds, or rubies?”
I said, “I don’t know, but they are immensely beautiful and I cannot sleep without my treasure; it feels good that they are close to me.”
Not knowing is nothing but innocence. These two things are very foundational: insecurity and not knowing. If you can relax in these two, you are a sage, you are awakened. If you go against these two, you are going against your own enlightenment, against your own possibility of being a sage.

Osho,
It is a shattering, an upheaval from the depths. Tears pour through the cracks, washing the stones into jewels in the moonlight. My eyes are naked and unprepared for this garden: blooming, silent, and unknown in the darkness – blossoms in the night. Osho, is it possible, is it real? And tears, tears, tears…. Osho, I have become just eyes in the night, and your blessings are the morning dew.
Devageet, the tears of joy, the tears of peace, the tears of silence are the most precious things you have. Laughter cannot reach to that height. No words are able to express the beauty of the tears. Your eyes are the most transparent part of your body, and your tears come directly from your very heart. It is a silent dance, a very silent music….
One should not think of it as a shattering experience. In a way, it is shattering: it shatters that which is false in you. But it cleanses and brings into light that which is real in you. Don’t pay attention to the dying false, it has never been alive – it was only a pretender. Focus your whole consciousness on the uprising of the real. That is your very being. The tears are welcoming your very being and its discovery.
You are asking, “Is it possible, is it real?” Yes, Devageet, it is possible. It has to be made possible for everybody. And it is the most real thing in you. Comparatively, nothing is more real than your tears. But the tears have a negative side too: if they come out of sadness and suffering and misery, then they are negative, then they create a dark night around you. But if they come out of joy and bliss and ecstasy, they create a great light within you and without you. And that’s what is happening.
You are saying, “It is a shattering, an upheaval from the depths. Tears pour through the cracks, washing the stones into jewels in the moonlight. My eyes are naked and unprepared for this garden: blooming, silent, and unknown in the darkness – blossoms in the night. Is it possible, is it real? And tears, tears, tears…. I have become just eyes in the night, and your blessings are the morning dew.”
Devageet, what is happening to you is expected to happen to everybody who has become intimate to me, who has come close to me – not physically, but spiritually. It is a great moment to welcome and to rejoice and to dance to abandon. You are coming out of your grave, you are going through a resurrection.

The funeral procession was reaching the top of the hill when the rear door of the hearse burst open. To the horror of all the mourners, the coffin slid out, and then proceeded to bounce and clatter its way down the hill. At the bottom of the hill, its speed carried it right through the open doorway of a chemist shop. Before the appalled surprise of the chemist, it crashed into the counter, causing the lid to fly open.
“For goodness sake!” said the corpse. “Give me something to stop this coffin.”

You are coming back out of the coffin. It must have been a long journey. It must have been very shattering, but it brought the dead man back to life! You are coming back to life. You have been dead…now you will know life for the first time. And millions are the people in the world who are living in their coffins, and don’t know what life is.
To experience life in its totality and intensity is to know the only significance and meaning of existence. That’s the only way. No philosophical thinking can make you aware of the tremendous meaning, and the beautiful blossoms, and the immortality of your being. Then the juice of life, drinking the juice of life is the only way there has ever been of finding godliness in the stones, in the trees, in the rivers, in people, in animals, in the birds. The whole of existence is full of vibrating light. It is just that we should be tuned in – and then suddenly everything becomes such an ecstasy, you could not have conceived of it before.
Just to welcome your tears, a joke for you.

A layman and a vicar were playing golf, and the layman was not having a good game.
“Ah, damn, I missed!” said the layman at the first green. And then missing an easy putt, he said, “Ah, damn, I missed again!”
The layman kept on playing a bad shot, and kept saying, “Ah, damn, I missed!”
The vicar put up with this for half the round, but then he felt he owed it to the dignity of his calling to say something to the layman. “You really must not keep using such dreadful language, my dear Sir,” said the vicar, “or the Lord may well strike you down.”
And just as the words were out of his mouth, there came a jagged flash of lightning; and in a split second the vicar was burned to a crisp. Above the rolling thunder clouds, a deep voice was heard to say, “Ah, damn, I missed!”

============================================================

Osho,
I look at other people's questions to see how they can express these feelings. I just can't find words to express my tears or my love, although the longing is there. Do I need to use words to expose myself?
Language is useful, but not always. Words have a utility, but not everywhere. There are spaces where language falls short, words prove impotent, and in fact those are the only spaces which have any significance.
That which can be contained in language is mundane; that which always eludes language is sacred. Hence, nothing has ever been written anywhere, in any age, about love, about peace, about silence – although these words have been used as a necessary evil, as a human frailty, because man cannot speak through silence, cannot just speak through tears. He has to resort to something which is too small to contain the vast experiences; it distorts everything.
Hence there is no need: if you feel contented, if you feel something beyond words is arising in you…it comes out through your tears, which are far better an expression than words.
Words have a limited meaning; tears have only hints about the unknown, just fingers pointing to the moon. If it is coming through songs or through music, it is far better. If it is coming through a dance, it is far more authentic.
But even if there is no expression at all – it simply remains within you like a flame in a temple where no wind is blowing, unwavering, utterly calm and quiet but still radiating the space inside you – some of that radiation is bound to come out of your body, out of your eyes, out of your hands. It is not your doing; it is happening on its own, and then it has a beauty. Then it can express without expressing, can say something without saying.
But I can understand your problem: you listen to others’ questions…. This is not only your problem, this is our whole upbringing. We always go on looking at what others are doing, and if they are all doing it, there must be something in it. So many people are asking questions, and you cannot manage to reduce your feelings into a question. You may be feeling as if something is wrong with you.
Nothing is wrong except the idea of comparison, the idea of imitation. Those who are asking questions may not have such deep experiences. Their experiences may be very superficial – language is perfectly capable of translating their experiences into words. Their questions may be only intellectual, nothing to do with anything beyond the mind.
They may be very articulate, well-versed, scholarly. But even a parrot can be a scholar – only parrots are scholars. But the parrot does not understand the meaning of what he is saying; neither do the scholars understand anything. But they know a vast vocabulary, they know many, many words, with different nuances. Their capacity to express is great, but they don’t have anything to express – their words are empty.
So some may be asking out of intellectual curiosity; some may be asking just to show their knowledge – not that they want to know the answer but that they already know the answer. They are just checking whether I also know the answer or not. There are different categories of questioners.
A few are very childish. One man is continuously asking that he should be allowed to sit in the first row. It seems he has come here only to sit in the first row, because he is threatening that if he is not allowed to sit in the first row, he will go away from here, be against me, propagandize against me. The qualifications that he is showing in his threats certainly prohibit him from the first rows – he will never be allowed to be in the first rows. He seems to be absolutely stupid. Does he think that he can threaten me, or blackmail me?
And the very desire to sit in the first row is nothing but egoistic; here you are to be humble. The people who are sitting in the first rows have been here for years, and they have disappeared long before. That’s why they are in the first rows – just posthumous existences. Once they used to be; now they are no more. You are too much – you will have to remain in the very last row. If you want to be in the first row, disappear. Your question is coming out of your ego and you must be blind, utterly blind, because you cannot see what kind of question you are asking.
And I don’t determine who should sit in the first row. It is something autonomous: slowly, slowly, as people drop their egos, they start moving closer to me.
Your ego is the distance between me and you.
If you want the distance not to be there then you have not to ask, you have to destroy your ego and the distance will disappear. One day you will find yourself sitting in the first row.
There are questions and questions. A few people are asking because I have said something before and now I am saying something which appears to them to be different or even contradictory. Neither were they hearing at that time, nor are they hearing at this time – because those who have listened to me are not going to find any contradiction anywhere. Their deep listening will make a great harmony out of all statements that I am making. If the statements look opposite, that means you are incapable of creating a harmony. You have not heard, you have not understood.
A few people go on asking questions just to show others that they are growing spiritually very high. One day they are touching the very sky; another day their girlfriend has left them, and all their spiritual flight is finished! One day they are beyond jealousy, beyond ego, and the next day their question comes: “What to do with jealousy? Perhaps it has come back….” It has never gone anywhere. They were just enjoying the idea that they don’t have any jealousy. Perhaps there was no opportunity for jealousy to show, and now the opportunity has arisen.
You are asking, “I look at other people’s questions…” In the first place, that is wrong. You are here to listen to my answers, not to listen to others’ questions. “I look at other people’s questions to see how they can express these feelings.” How can you see their feelings? You can listen to their questions but whether they have those feelings within them or not, there is no way to see. In fact, the people who don’t have those feelings find it easier to express; those who have those feelings find it almost impossible to express.
And you are unnecessarily worrying: “I just can’t find the words to express my tears or my love, although the longing is there.” Your tears are enough. Your love is enough. There is no need to send the question; just drop a few tears on the paper and write underneath: L-U-V, love. Don’t write the exact spelling, because that means it is coming out of the mind.
Or just make…Many small children who are sannyasins send me letters – they cannot write much, they simply make a picture of the heart and an arrow. And they have said everything, far better than any poet. What more can any poet do? Just drop two tears also – then it becomes more heartful, more expressive. And it is not a question, it is simply an expression. Love is not a question; neither are your tears a question. They will show your longing; they will show the space you are in.
“Do I need to use words to expose myself?” There is no need. But if you feel the need – not because others are asking…If you feel the need without any comparison and without any imitation, then ask, use words. There is no harm in it. But I repeat again: don’t imitate. Don’t do just anything because everybody else is doing it and if you don’t do it, what will people think? – perhaps you don’t have any love, perhaps you don’t have any tears, perhaps you don’t have anything to ask.
Here, nobody is going to think about you. Even to think about somebody is an interference in his freedom; it is trespassing his territory. Who are you even to raise a question in your mind about somebody else? My whole effort is to make you respectful of the dignity of everyone else, and his absolute freedom.
Even to think about him is a very subtle interference.

Mrs. Isaac was dying. “Rosen, dear,” she pleaded weakly, “I want you to promise me that you will ride in the same car with my mother at my funeral.”
“Okay,” sighed Rosen, “but it is going to ruin my whole day.”

There are a few things which should not be expressed; it is better not to express them.

Little Hymie was taking his bath with little Becky before the Sabbath. They were making soap bubbles, when suddenly little Hymie looked at Becky and said, “And now I am going to duck you.”
“Ha!” said Becky with contempt. “You don’t even know how to pronounce it!”

It is better sometimes to keep silent.

Osho,
After being here with you for a while, the world looks to me like a big madhouse, and your place looks like the only madhouse where we can become sane. How can we prevent ourselves from becoming mad again when we go back into the world? The madness is very infectious, and until now, whenever I have gone back into the world, I begin to become what everyone else calls “normal.”
It is certainly a great problem for all sannyasins when they go back into the world: if they remain the way they are here, they will certainly be thought abnormal, unfit. They may lose their jobs, they may lose their wives, they may lose everything. They may find themselves in an insane asylum. So it is exactly what you are doing that everybody else is doing – when you go into the world, be normally mad; just fit with their style.
Only one thing has to be remembered: that it is your acting, that you are acting simply in order not to create unnecessary trouble for yourself and for others. And you can act, because you have been in the world; you know all the roles there. There is no need for anybody to prompt you. You have lived your whole life in that big madhouse; you know its language, its style, its functioning. Act it! Don’t become normal, just act normal. Deep inside remember that it is madness.
In other words, with awareness adjust yourself to society – but with awareness, so that your consciousness remains floating above and there is no compromise as far as your consciousness is concerned.
Outside, if people like to use lipstick, you can use it – there is no problem. Although it is ugly…but what else to do when the world has painted lips? It is dirty and in countries where people are kissing each other, when you kiss one woman you may be kissing hundreds of people because the same lipstick has been moving all around. It is highly unhygienic, and recently it has become the most dangerous thing in the world because you can catch a disease called AIDS, just by kissing someone.
The hygienic way is such that you will be immediately caught, for being abnormal. The hygienic way is what Eskimos do: they rub noses when they are in great love, they never kiss. For centuries they have known the fact that kissing is a dirty habit; mixing each other’s saliva cannot be called a healthy and hygienic thing. When the Eskimos first saw the Christian missionaries who had reached their land, they could not believe it. What kind of people are these? – because their way of showing love was absolutely hygienic.
The nose is so clean, and so cold and cool, and just rubbing the nose is a little playful too. But don’t do it in any society where it is not known. If you start rubbing noses with somebody, you will be caught immediately: something has gone wrong with this man!
It is better to adjust and be normal. Just remember inside – a clear division – what is acting and what is your reality. You will have to hide yourself behind a personality. Here you can drop the personality outside the gate and you can be a real individual, but the moment you go out of the gate, just pull up your blanket of personality around yourself; it is absolutely right, there is nothing to be worried about.

“Betty,” called the teacher, “tell me the meaning of the word trickle.”
“To run slowly,” said Betty.
“Quite right,” said the teacher. “Now tell me the meaning of the word anecdote.”
“A short funny tale,” said Betty.
“Good girl,” said the teacher. “Now see if you can give me a sentence with both those words in it.”
Betty thought for a moment: “Yes, I know,” she said. “Our dog trickled down the street wagging his anecdote.”

Now, children have their own perception of things, and when you are talking to children you have to understand their language and their perception. What Betty is saying is perfectly right according to her perception. She had already given the meaning of both the words separately; but the teacher understood it according to her own understanding – the dictionary meaning, of which Betty is unaware. She has certainly seen the dog trickling down the street wagging his tail; she is talking about her experience.
When you go into the world don’t suddenly start talking about experiences that happened here; otherwise people will think you are becoming a little lunatic, something is getting loose in your head. If you start talking about ecstasy, blissfulness, silence, love, they will listen to you but they cannot understand – and it is not their fault. When you go back to them, speak their language. Unless you find someone with whom you can share your experiences – who has some idea, who has entered into some inner space; he may not have reached to the ultimate XYZ, but he has started the ABC – then there is some possibility.
Sufis, because of this problem, have been underground for twelve hundred years, because Mohammedans are fanatic people…. Sufism was born in the Mohammedan areas of the world; it is the pure essence of Mohammedanism, but only for those who have that deep insight. Otherwise it appears to be against Mohammedanism. The superficial organized religion is always against its very own foundations; it is always against its own founders.
Jainism is against Mahavira, and Buddhism is against Gautam Buddha, and Christianity is against Jesus, for the simple reason that these people were rebels, and what they said was impossible to organize. Their words had to be diluted, their words had to be interpreted; their words had to be changed to fit with the existing collectivity. They had to be made “normal.”
Christianity is normal, Jesus is not. Jesus belongs to this company – he belongs to our circus; here he will completely fit. Even if he comes with his cross, nobody will take any note and nobody will object to it. People will help him to put the cross aside and sit down – “We will not need it here, you can leave it outside.” Here, anybody will be absolutely welcome. But in Mohammedanism, or in any organized religion, the problem arises….
The Sufis were the true Mohammedans – but Al-Hillaj Mansoor was murdered, and Sarmad was killed. Then Sufis had to go underground; there was no other way. And “going underground” can be understood to mean that they started behaving normally. With the society they will behave exactly the way the society expects from everybody.
If you want to see a Sufi mystic, it is very difficult – and it may be that he is just sitting in front of you. He may be a shoemaker, or he may be a carpenter; he may be a potter – he may be anybody ordinary. You may have passed the man many times. You may have inquired in the whole village, “I have heard there is a Sufi mystic in this village” – but even the village people don’t know who the Sufi mystic is. They will say, “We don’t know any Sufi here.”
Unless you come across someone who belongs to the inner circle of the mystic…and there may be only a few people, a dozen people at the most, who know the reality of the man. They meet in the middle of the night in secrecy. If you come across somebody by chance – if you go on searching, you will come across somebody – and if he is convinced that you are really a seeker, he will tell you, “I will get the permission of the master and I will take you for the first, initial meeting.” Then he will inform you, “On such and such day, in the night at such and such time, you meet me.”
And he will take you to a place where you will be surprised to know that twelve persons are sitting around a man you have been seeing every day, for all this time that you have been searching for the Sufi master. He is no one but the shoemaker, but now he is no longer in the dress of the shoemaker; he is sitting in the dress of a king. And all those twelve people are sitting around with such deep devotion and love, the whole atmosphere is fragrant.
For twelve hundred years, thousands of Sufi mystics have been living a normal life in the day, and in the middle of the night – just for one hour or two hours – they meet with those who can understand each other. Then they expose their hearts.
So when you go outside, behave normally but remember it is only an act because you don’t want to be an unnecessary nuisance in the society – and it is not going to pay you either.

Tom went to the boss’ office: “Can I have tomorrow afternoon off, Sir?” he asked his boss. “It is my grandmother’s funeral.”
“Come off it, boy,” said the boss. “Did you not have an afternoon off a couple of months ago because your grandmother died?”
“Yes,” said Tom, “but Granddad married again.”

In that mad world, where granddads are marrying, behave in the same way. Don’t become a focus of people’s attention; they will decry you, they will condemn you. They have stoned people to death; they have never shown any mercy – they are almost incapable of being merciful. There is no need to provoke their anger and their violence; there is no need to be a martyr.
Your purpose is to attain your unfoldment, silently. If the day is not the right time for you, no need to be worried: there are flowers which only open in the night when everybody has gone to sleep.
One of the most fragrant flowers in India is the Night Queen. It is a very small flower, but it comes in thousands, simultaneously – the whole tree becomes just flowers. And it is so fragrant…in one place I had a tree in front of my bungalow. My neighbors started complaining against the tree, saying, “You have to cut it down, because we cannot sleep; the fragrance is too much.” The whole neighborhood used to become full of fragrance.
I had asked many gardeners, “This is a flower which is called Night Queen; there must be a parallel plant which opens its flowers in the day. If there is such a flower as Night Queen, there must be a flower known as Day King.” But no gardener could help me to find it.
I found it in Kashmir. I was certain that there must be a parallel flower because in existence there is always balance; this Night Queen is a woman, so there must be a man, a male flower. And I was surprised to see, the male was very poor. It was exactly the same kind of flower – a bigger size, male chauvinistic size. It blossomed in thousands in the day. But there was no fragrance.
So don’t be worried: you need not expose yourself in the open daylight in the ordinary world. There, you will be in unnecessary trouble. Keep growing inside, and remain alert that you don’t get identified with your act. It is only an act that you are playing – you are playing the act out of compassion; you don’t want to disturb anybody. And your real growth is something inner.
Sufis say that your prayers should be in the middle of the night, when even your household people are fast asleep. Nobody should know that you pray. Your prayer will be just a whisper between you and the unknown; you should not be an exhibitionist.

Osho,
There is a beautiful mango tree in your garden which grows delicious fruits, which I know you are especially fond of. I too have enjoyed the taste of these mangoes very much, but now I am absolutely forbidden to eat them any more. Although your cook has been tempting me to eat one once in a while, I have been faithful in my observance of this new austerity.
Beloved Master, I am in the dilemma of Adam and Eve in the garden of Eden. The smell of ripe, delicious mangoes in my room keeps me awake all night. Perhaps the forbidden fruit is not an apple after all, but a mango. Please help.
Milarepa, the mango is certainly more appropriate than the poor apple. But the problem is that the story about the apple is a Christian story, and in the Christian countries mangoes don’t grow. Otherwise it is absolutely certain: if mangoes were present in the Garden of Eden, God would have forbidden Adam and Eve to eat the mangoes rather than to eat the apples. Apples have nothing to be compared with mangoes. But mangoes grow only in the East – countries like India – in many varieties. In India the mango is called the king of all fruits; the apple stands nowhere in comparison with it.
But to fit the mango in a Christian story is very difficult – the Christian god does not know the taste of mango at all. It would only be possible if the story of forbidding had happened in India. Every story has its geography, its history, its atmosphere. It does not come out of the blue.

The Mother Superior of the orphanage called three girls, who were leaving, to her office. “Now,” she commenced, “you are all going out in the big, sinful world, and I must warn you against certain men. There are men who will buy you drinks, take you to a room, undress you, and do unspeakable things to you. Then they give you two or three pounds, and you are sent away ruined.”
“Excuse me, Reverend Mother,” said the boldest girl. “Did you say these wicked men will give us three pounds?”
“Yes, dear child,” said the Mother Superior. “Why do you ask?”
“Well,” the girl said, “the priests only give us apples.”

Not even mangoes! But in a Christian framework, mangoes don’t fit. They need a different territory and a different world. In the Garden of Eden there was not a single mango tree, and here…. You have been forbidden – but not absolutely forbidden – because the mango tree was planted by the gardener, the old gardener who used to take care of the garden here twelve years before.
He planted it for me. And when you inform him that the tree is ripe enough, and has started giving fruits…And you have been keeping those fruits because mangoes have to be taken from the trees. If they are fully ripe, then before you can reach them, the parrots reach them.
And the parrots don’t understand any language – neither Hebrew nor Sanskrit nor English nor Hindi – you cannot forbid them. They have been eating in the Garden of Eden from every tree. They are eating in this garden from every tree, and they come with a big group. If the mangoes are ripe – and they certainly smell so beautiful – they attract the parrots in dozens. So mangoes have to be taken from the tree just before they start ripening. Then you have to keep them in your house, in some hotter place – maybe hidden under the grass, dry grass, or hidden in dry wheat. There they ripen.
Milarepa is now my gardener. There are many gardeners, but by chance that mango tree has fallen in his territory. So I can understand – it is very difficult to sleep. He is ripening those mangoes in his room. Then nobody can sleep – as they become more and more ripe, they will disturb your sleep.
You are not absolutely forbidden; once in a while, don’t bother about anybody – just get up and enjoy one fruit, and that will give you a good sleep. But not more than one, because after all, you have to be under a certain discipline. Don’t destroy your freedom by licentiousness.
That’s what has to be understood – you are free, and one fruit is more tasteful than two. The more fruits you eat, the less tasteful they will become. That’s a well-known economic law: the law of decreasing returns. If you go on eating mango and mango and mango, then you will jump out of the room and run away, shouting, “Mango and mango!”…you have gone crazy.
There is a limit, and I am making the limit just so that you can enjoy it in its totality, because it is only one; one every night. And a mango is not a small fruit. One is good, just in the middle of the night.
Sitting silently, take the mango in your hand. Meditate over it; don’t be in a hurry, because you are not a thief, you are allowed. Then eat it slowly – not in a hurry. Chew forty-eight times every bite. That is the science of digesting a mango fruit. And if you chew forty-eight times each bite, one mango fruit is almost forty-eight mango fruits.
It depends on you, how many you want to make out of one. And you will get tremendous joy out of it. Then go to sleep. And your every night will become an Arabian night.

============================================================

Osho,
When I came to Pune I felt more strongly than ever before that I have come home. Recently I began to see that although I hear your words, I don't listen. The few times that I have allowed myself to listen, I have felt such a transformation, an opening. Beloved Master, please will you guide me on how to listen?
The question you have asked is a little bit strange. Strange, because you say that the few times that you have allowed yourself to listen, you have felt such a transformation, an opening. So listening is not something that you are not capable of. You can allow yourself to listen; you concede the fact, and still you are asking how to listen. It is as if you have eyes, you see everything – and still you ask how to see. It would have been better to phrase the question in another way; perhaps that’s what your intent was.
You have a misunderstanding that you allow it. If it is within your powers to allow yourself to listen to me, then the whole question is useless. The reality is that sometimes it happens that you listen. It is not your allowance, it is not within your hands; it is just a happening, not a doing. And whenever it happens, you suddenly find a great transformation, a great opening to existence and all its beauties.
Your misunderstanding lies in that you can do something, that you can force yourself to allow opening. That is not possible. In fact, that’s how you are preventing your being from opening.
You forget all about it, you simply enjoy…sometimes listening, sometimes not listening. Listening will deepen by itself. It is not an art that you can learn; it is a knack that you have to wait to grow in you. More and more listening will be happening and more and more opening. All that you can do is something negative, not positive. What I mean by negative is: you can remove a few hindrances that don’t let listening happen.
You cannot make yourself open by force.
But you can watch closely and see why sometimes you are ready and open and why sometimes you are closed. So whatever you find keeps you closing, you can remove that.
It is what all the great physicians of the world know: their medicine is not capable of bringing health to you. The power of healing is within you. All that they can do is to remove the hindrances so the power of healing starts flowing. You cannot force that healing power to flow, but you can certainly do something negatively to make the way, to clean the path, to remove the rocks.
And then wait, and wait with trust, because it has happened even without you doing any negative work.
So there is no reason why it will not be happening. The only thing that hinders it – and there are not many things that you have to remove – the only thing is a preoccupied mind. If you are too much preoccupied with something – it does not matter what it is – then you cannot be open. If you are not preoccupied, then there is nothing to prevent the opening. But almost everybody is preoccupied, although the objects of preoccupation are trivia. If you look at them attentively, you will have a good laugh at yourself, at what kind of nonsense goes on within you and creates a tremendous barrier for listening.
Hearing of course happens because you have your ears and they are functioning, but the poor ears cannot manage to listen – they are instruments only for hearing. If your unpreoccupied mind is behind the ears, then hearing becomes listening. And without listening there is no understanding. So just watch what your preoccupations are and drop them.
Don’t go directly to make some positive efforts, because that is not the way great things come to you. They always come when your doer is absent, and the preoccupied mind is also your doer. Emptying the mind is possible. It is your doing; you can undo it. But listening is something beyond you, something far greater than you – you cannot manage it. You can simply allow yourself to be overwhelmed by it, to be flooded by it. But one thing you can certainly do: you can undo the preoccupation.
What are our preoccupations? What do we go on thinking, and why do we go on giving so much nourishment to thinking? What has it produced in the long life you have lived up to now? Is it not a sheer wastage of time? And it is standing there almost like a China wall.
All the religions, all the philosophies, all the cultures, all the civilizations have helped you to remain preoccupied. They have all changed you into deaf beings as far as listening is concerned; they don’t want you to be people of understanding. They are afraid of your understanding, because in the light of your understanding all their fictions will disappear and they are living like parasites on those fictions. They want those fictions to remain in your mind as a reality.
For example, all religions have insisted on repressing sex. The moment you repress any natural instinct, it becomes your preoccupation. The repressed energy goes around your mind. Sex becomes cerebral; you think about it.
An old man had gone to the doctor. He was feeling very weak and it looked almost as if his story was coming to an end. The doctor said, “There is not much that I can do. I can only give you a suggestion: cut your sex life in half.”
The old man said, “Okay, which half – thinking or talking?” Real sex had disappeared long before; it was now only thinking and talking.
All the religions have made your sex energy become transformed into thinking and talking – that has become your preoccupation. I am just giving you one instance – one of the most important. And there are many. Anything that has been prohibited, inhibited, anything that has been condemned, takes on a tremendous attraction and that attraction creates a preoccupation. You may be doing something but you are preoccupied.
I have seen people in temples – because in temples you have to leave your shoes outside – with their hands folded toward the statue of God, but they are looking at the door where they have left their shoes. They think they are praying to God, but anyone can see they are praying to the shoes. Their minds are preoccupied that somebody may take away the shoes. Just to avoid this, Mohammedans had to find a way: they take the shoes with them into the mosque. They have found a strategy – they put the shoes sole to sole and sit on them, so no fear of anybody…otherwise the shoe remains so much in the mind that it is almost insulting to God.
You have to watch what your preoccupations are that create the wall – and you forget to listen. Removing that wall is not difficult; just watching the futility of it is enough for its disappearance.

Sidney is visiting the psychiatrist. “Okay, Sidney,” says the psychiatrist, “what’s this?” and he shows Sidney a triangle.
“That’s a keyhole,” says Sidney, “and what’s going on behind there!”
The psychiatrist then shows Sidney a rectangle. “What’s this?” he asks.
“A motel window,” says Sidney, “and what’s going on behind there!”
The psychiatrist shows Sidney a circle. “What’s this?” he asks.
“A porthole,” replies Sidney. “And boy, oh boy,” he continues, “what’s going on there!”
“Well,” says the psychiatrist, “you certainly are sexually disturbed.”
“I am sexually disturbed?” Sidney exclaims. “What about you? – showing me all those dirty pictures!”

A preoccupied mind goes on projecting its own preoccupation on everything. And because it is so full of its own thoughts, it cannot allow any listening.
You have known perfectly well that there have been times that listening has happened and you have seen the great transformation that it brings. But you have not watched closely that it has always been a happening, not a doing. Once you understand that something is a happening, all that is left for you is negative doing. You simply remove the obstacles, the hindrances that prevent the happening, that prevent the spontaneous reaching to you, that prevent the opening of your heart. And remember, there is no technique to make the happening happen.
The happening simply means it is beyond you – it comes like a breeze. All that you can do is keep your windows and doors open – that is the negative part. Just by opening the windows it is not certain that the breeze will come immediately. The breeze is not just waiting by the side of the window, so that you open it and the breeze comes in…but an open window is an invitation.
An open window is saying to the breeze, “I am ready; if you come you will be welcomed, you will not be sent back. I am available.” Hence, just do the negative part and wait. Slowly, slowly the transformation goes so deep that preoccupation of the mind becomes impossible. When you can manage to have diamonds, naturally you will lose interest in stones. When you can have real roses come to you each moment, you will lose interest in plastic roses.
Nothing has to be done; it simply is the way things happen. Just get in contact with the higher, and the lower disappears. And to get in contact with the higher, you have only to make a passage for it to reach to you.
Existence is trying from everywhere to reach to you, but you are closed. Not a single window is open; no door is open. You have filled even small cracks in the wall out of fear, for the sake of security. This is not security, this is suicide.
Open all the doors, all the windows. Let the sun come in, let the wind come in, let the rain come in. Let existence enter into your being and give you a fresh life each moment. You can have such a joy, such immense ecstasy, without torturing yourself and becoming a saint, without making yourself uncomfortable doing all kinds of yoga gymnastics, which are nothing but contortions of your body. You can be at ease, comfortable.
There is no need of fasting, there is no need of lying on a bed of thorns, there is no need of renouncing the world – these are all stupid things. If you want to become a saint, they are necessary – stupidity is the foundation of all your saintliness. But if you want to be a man of understanding, then nothing of all this is needed. All that is needed is: remove the obstacles, watch, and see when listening happens and when it does not happen; what is the difference in your mind? That difference has to be destroyed.
Everybody is capable of it, but everybody has fallen into the habit of being preoccupied, because the whole crowd is preoccupied. And you are brought up, unfortunately, by these people. Your upbringing by wrong people is the basic problem, and there seems to be no alternative.
Many times a few children have been found in the forests, raised by wolves. Just six or seven years ago, near Lucknow a child was found in the forest, raised by wolves. The child had been missing from a village for almost fourteen years. His parents had lost all hope, they could not figure out where the child had gone. A wolf had just taken the child. But the child was so beautiful and so innocent that even the wolf, out of love and compassion, rather than eating the child, started raising him. And a group of wolves, female wolves, were giving their milk to the child.
For fourteen years he was among the wolves…and his life with them revealed many secrets. When he was found he could not stand on two feet, because he had never known anybody to stand on two feet; he was running on all fours. That’s the impact of upbringing. Naturally, he could not speak a single word of any language, but he used the language of the wolves perfectly well. He used to run so fast…no human being can run that fast; only wolves can do that. That showed many things that upbringing can do to a person.
He was kept in Lucknow hospital. First they tried all kinds of massages to get him up on two legs; it took six months for them to make him stand up. But still his running was so fast that they could not leave him without chains – he was still wanting to go back to the wolves in the forest. And then they started teaching him his name – they had given him the name Ram. It took almost one year for the poor boy to say “Ram”, when asked “What is your name?” That was all the language he ever learned: the word Ram.
He remained for two years in the hospital and died. My own understanding is that he died because he was being forced to do things which he had become almost incapable of. His fourteen years’ training…and fourteen years is the age when sex matures. And with the maturing of sex, biology stops any evolution. So those fourteen years are the most important for learning. Whatever you learn, you learn in those fourteen years. Even the man of eighty years may know much more, but that will be only in terms of quantity – the quality will remain of the fourteen-year-old.
That’s where biology has left off evolving – unless a person takes evolution in his own hands. And to me that is the religious endeavor: where biology ends, religion begins.
After the second world war, millions of soldiers around the world had to go through a psychological test for their mental age, and surprisingly enough they were all below fourteen years, as far as their mental age was concerned. Somebody was thirty, somebody was thirty-five, somebody was forty, somebody was fifty – that made no difference, their mental age was fourteen.
Up to fourteen, nature brings you to a stage; beyond that nature’s work is finished. If you take up the work in your own hands, you can start growing your mental age; otherwise only your body will grow old, the mind will remain retarded.
Unfortunately there is no way right now for children to be raised so that from the very beginning meditation becomes an intrinsic part of them, silence becomes their natural experience, opening to existence becomes just natural. That’s my conception of a New Man – that he will be brought up from the very beginning to be in communion with nature and existence. He will not be inhibited in anything, he will not be suppressed in anything, because all inhibitions and suppressions create preoccupation – and those are the most dangerous things for meditation.
The moment you start sitting and preparing for meditation, suddenly you are amazed: so many thoughts simply attack you from all sides. Your whole mind becomes a whirlwind. Ordinarily it is silent, not that much disturbed. But whenever you want to meditate, your mind immediately takes it as a challenge, because meditation is a death of the mind. Mind creates every disturbance, so that meditation cannot happen. Listening silently is a meditation. But even though our upbringing has been wrong, we are intelligent enough to remove obstructions.
Don’t repress any natural instinct.
Don’t go against nature.
Whatever you want to do, do it even if the whole world is against it. Whatever you want to be, be, without caring about consequences, and you will not be preoccupied – you will have taken the very roots of preoccupation away.
I have heard about a very great poet. His golden jubilee was being celebrated. Everybody was drinking and dancing and singing and rejoicing. Then suddenly they became aware that the poet was not there in the hall. So his closest friend, an attorney, went out to look for him in the garden and found him sitting under a tree, in the darkness, very sad. The attorney said, “This is not right; your guests are rejoicing, dancing, singing. They are celebrating your golden jubilee and you are sitting here outside. It will be good if you come in and join your friends. They have come from far away.”
The poet said, “It is all because of you! Do you remember twenty-five years ago that I came to you to ask, ‘If I murder my wife what will happen? What will be the consequence?’ And you prevented me by saying, ‘Never do such a thing! Otherwise at the most I can keep you from getting a death sentence, but still you will have to go to jail for at least twenty-five years.’”
The attorney said, “Yes, I remember that evening. But what does that have to do with now?”
The poet said, “Remember, today the twenty-five years are finished. If I had not listened to you, I would have been a free man. I would have come out of jail. I am so angry that I feel like killing you! You are the person who has kept me in prison my whole life!”
People go on following others’ advice. Live according to your own light and then whatever happens, you will find a peace, a contentment, a fulfillment. You may not be a great success in the world, you may not be very famous, but you will be yourself.
And the person who is himself is naturally meditative, naturally silent; he has no preoccupations, because he has not left anything that he wanted to do undone; he has never left anything that he wanted to do incomplete; he has never repressed any desire, any instinct, any natural longing. He has nothing to be preoccupied with.
So remove all your preoccupations – this is the negative work – and then the meditation, the silence, the opening will be the rewards coming to you on their own.

Osho,
There is an emptiness that is happening inside of me. In my joyous moments and in my tears this empty feeling is always there, a feeling of unfulfillment. Even in your presence it is there, and it hurts. The tears don't seem to stop as I am writing this to you. Beloved Osho, please help me to understand what is happening to me.
Kendra, it is very easy for you to ask a question; it is not that easy for me to answer it – for the simple reason that if I truthfully answer it, it will hurt you very much, and I cannot answer otherwise. It is not only you – many people ask questions in beautiful language but go on leaving out the real facts: facts that they are perfectly aware of, facts which are creating the trouble. And unless you are able to understand those facts, you cannot get out of the darkness and the emptiness that you are feeling.
I have been watching you: you fall in love with bank balances, not with men. Your love for money is too much. That is creating your whole problem. You love shopping just like any other ordinary woman. You are extravagant and you don’t have the money for it. So naturally you have to find someone who can provide that money for you.
You were with John, and John sincerely loved you. But when you found Emerson, who is one of the richest men in America, you immediately dropped John as if he did not exist at all. You started hanging around Emerson. You had brought Emerson here in the hope that he will remain here, but he proved to be very much a coward. And this was not his number, he has no desire or any longing for search. He is of the same type of mind as you are.
Emerson is Hasya’s son. When Hasya and her husband parted, Hasya did not take any money from her husband; it was simply against her dignity. And I respect a woman who is ready to part from the husband, not bothering about his money. Ordinarily the son would have come with the mother, but seeing that the father is going to have all the money and the mother is leaving without any money, he remained with the father. He also looks at the bank balance.
Emerson could not remain here. It was not possible; he has to be close to his father because all the money is there. Once his father is gone from the world, Emerson will emerge as one of the most super-rich persons in America. Already he is richer than you can conceive.
John is a courageous man. He has risked all his money for my work; he has not even bothered about the future, about his own security. Now that Emerson is gone, you are again trying to catch hold of John, but now it cannot be the same – John has eyes too. He has seen what your preferences are. That’s what is creating all the emptiness and all the darkness. It has nothing to do with spirituality. But anybody listening to your question will think it is a great spiritual question – that you are full of tears and the tears are not stopping. It will be good for everyone to tell his whole story because I cannot go on digging out your stories.
Now settle with someone, not with somebody’s bank balance. Change your whole idea – love is not a financial affair. You love money; that is not going to help you. Love somebody, a living human being, not bothering about the money – and all your emptiness and tears will disappear. If they don’t disappear then ask me again, but don’t torture John anymore. Even when you were with John he was not aware. But I was aware because you both were living in the same house with me in Uruguay. I could see that your love was not authentic, was not sincere, was not human. And you were deceiving John…but I simply waited because these kinds of things don’t go on for long. Soon you found a far richer man than John.
If you are waiting for somebody rich, then don’t make much fuss, just wait; somebody will be on the way. But then you will always be pretending to love. And shopping is not a thing that is of any importance. What fulfills the heart and takes away the emptiness of the heart is the fullness of love. You can love a beggar and be absolutely fulfilled, and you may love an emperor and still remain empty.
Money cannot do any transformation in your being.
So whenever you ask questions be very clear and very sincere. Write down the actual facts, because it is not possible for me to know about everybody’s actual facts. I can answer your question without knowing the actual facts and my answer will not be of any use.
You are intelligent, you are capable of love, but you are spoiled. Because you are intelligent and you are capable of love, you can easily catch hold of somebody who has money. If that remains your goal for your whole life you will suffer very badly, because youth is momentary. Soon that will be gone. And as your youth is gone, your capacity to catch rich fish will become less and less, and your emptiness will become more and more deep.
I am happy that John is not being caught again in your net for two reasons: for John’s sake and for your sake – because this is the only way you will come to your senses.
The whole situation of your life is making you a pessimist, only looking at the dark side of things. Right now you cannot get hold of somebody who has enough money to spend uselessly…. This is against your dignity, it is a kind of prostitution: if you fall in love with the money of a man, and the man is secondary and the money is primary, it is prostitution, it is not love. It will drive you deeper and deeper into pessimism and dark nights. And here with me at least, you have to learn to see facts as facts, because then we can deal with them, dissolve them, change them.
Don’t live in fictions.
Just the other day I was reading the definition of a pessimist. Pessimists are not born. Pessimism is a disciplined habit; you go on doing wrong things again and again and the ultimate result is a pessimist. The definition I was reading was:

A pessimist is one who feels bad when he feels good, because he is afraid he will feel worse when he feels better.
He is the kind of guy who won’t pick a four-leaf clover for fear he will be bitten by a rattlesnake.
He wears a belt along with his suspenders and is never happy unless he is miserable.
He even keeps his fingers crossed when he says good morning and complains about the noise when opportunity knocks.

You are still so young that you can avoid becoming a pessimist. Become a realist and see eye to eye within yourself: what you have been doing may look clever to you but it is simply cunning. And cunningness is destructive of intelligence, it is not cleverness.
There is still time, you are so young and you can change your path. And this time fall in love with a man without bothering about his bank balance. Love itself is the greatest treasure in the world.

Osho,
The Sufis say that a person has a purpose in life and you need to find out what your purpose is. This question keeps coming up for me now that I am not in a commune any longer. There it did not matter; the important thing was to be with you. Does it matter what work I do? Please could you talk about this?
What the Sufis say is not what you have understood. They certainly say that every person has a purpose in life. Their meaning is that every person has a unique individuality, unique function, a unique place in existence, irreplaceable. And they say you need to find out what that purpose is. The emphasis is not exactly to find out what that purpose is; the emphasis is first to find out who you are.
The moment you understand yourself, you will understand the purpose also, without any effort. Understanding your unique individuality will give you an insight into your purpose in life, but you cannot find the purpose directly without finding yourself. The purpose is secondary; you are basic. Hence, I never say find out the purpose, I say:
Know thyself.
Be thyself.
These two sentences are enough for your whole life’s philosophy. Everything else will follow on its own accord.
You are asking, “This question keeps coming up for me now that I am not in a commune any longer. There it did not matter; the important thing was to be with you. Does it matter what work I do?”
You are again getting confused. The purpose of your life is not the work that you do; you can do anything. By purpose I don’t mean your work. You can be a shoemaker, you can be a carpenter, you can be a dancer, you can be a musician – that does not matter. Whatever gives you bliss, whatever gives you peace, whatever brings more awareness to you, whatever makes your life a life of gratitude…any work will do.
The work is not important but what happens within you, doing the work, that is the decisive point. If it brings light in your being, if it brings a deep fulfillment, if it makes you more loving and more joyous, then it is absolutely irrelevant what you are doing; do it and do it totally. The more totally you do it, the more intelligence you bring in doing it, the more your individuality will become authentic, the more your potential will become actual, the more you will find you are coming closer to your destiny, to your home.

Eleven-year-old Lucy was walking down the village street leading a cow by a rope. She met the vicar who said, “Little girl, what are you doing with that cow?”
“Please Sir,” said Lucy, “it is my father’s cow and I am taking her to the bull.”
“Disgusting,” said the parson, “can’t your father do that?”
“No,” said Lucy, “it has to be the bull.”

Everybody has his own purpose, that’s right, but to find your purpose is impossible without finding yourself. And the moment you find yourself, simultaneously you will find your purpose. So there is no need to be concerned with the purpose. The whole concern should be knowing yourself, and the way to know yourself is meditation.

============================================================

Osho,
Robert Bly speaks of the three brains of man – the reptilian, the mammalian and the new brain. The reptile brain is utterly cold and ruthless. It deals with, and grows on, survival issues. The mammalian deals with comforts, which include: family, friends, relationship, home, society, religion, etc. What scientists call “the new brain” is a very thin, incredibly dense, cellular layer surrounding the rest of the brain. They have found no purpose for it. Bly says that it deals with transcendence and grows on mystery.
All three exist simultaneously but shrink or grow depending on where we focus our energies. Each can seize control of available energy, and the first two try to do so when their own survival is threatened.
Could you please talk about this in the context of your work with us, the commune, and the New Man?
The scientific analysis of the mind, or more particularly of the brain, has nothing to do with my work with the New Man and the new humanity. The brain is part of the body; it dies with the body, it is born with the body. My work consists of provoking in you that which has been before birth and that which will remain even after your death. My concern is with your immortality. Hence, the difference is tremendous.
Scientists have not yet come to accept that which is beyond matter. Their whole work remains confined to material existence. They don’t think you have a soul; they don’t conceive of you as a spiritual being. And that is one of the most dangerous things about science: it destroys your basic dignity. It also destroys your most fundamental mystery.
What Robert Bly is talking about is very mundane. It is the analysis of how man’s brain has developed from the reptile to the mammalian. And now there is a third layer growing which he thinks is the transcendental. The transcendental, by its very nature, means that which is beyond the mind. The brain cannot have any layer for the transcendental.
It is true that the brain has three divisions. The first is certainly concerned with survival. You can give it any name – the reptile brain. It is very basic, because unless you survive, nothing else is possible. The second is mammalian. That reminds me of Jesus, when he says, “You cannot live by bread alone.” The bread is absolutely needed, but just bread is not enough for human beings. They need art, they need music, they need philosophy, they need religion, they need civilization; their needs grow to much greater heights than just survival. The third brain that is still growing consists not of the transcendental, as Robert Bly speaks of, it consists only of an effort to know the unknown – not the transcendental, but only the unknown.
There is a difference to be understood between the unknown and the transcendental. The transcendental is the unknowable: whatever you do, you will never be able to know it. You can experience it, you can have it, you can dance it, you can sing it, you can drink it, but you cannot make it part of your mind and part of your knowledge. But there is much that is still unknown; perhaps it is almost infinite, that which is unknown.
The third layer is trying to move into the unknown. And its effort is how to make the unknown known. The whole scientific endeavor is to demystify existence, to make everything known – nothing remains unknown. And science accepts only the division between the two; the whole existence is divided into the known and the unknown.
The known is every day growing more and more as science progresses, and the unknown goes on diminishing. But the unknown is the infinite. It will go on diminishing, but I don’t think that there will come a day when science will be able to say, “Now there is no unknown left any more; our work is finished, we can close shop.”
Even just for argument’s sake, if it can be accepted that there may be a possibility that all the unknown becomes known, then too, there is a third dimension which science has been consistently denying. And that third dimension is my work. It is the work of all the buddhas of all the ages, of all the mystics, of all those who are really concerned with the essence of existence. The third category is of the unknowable; hence, the word mysticism. Hence the word mystic – it is just the polar opposite of the scientist.
Science tries to demystify existence, and the mystic tries to destroy all demystifications – and to uncover the mystery again, in its immense beauty and glory, in its wonder, and in its splendor. The mystic’s work is of a totally different dimension; it is not of the brain, not of the mind – it is beyond the capacity of both.
Meditation is the way to go beyond mind and to enter into the dimension of the unknowable. And because science is not willing to accept the unknowable, it is harming the whole of humanity, because unless you accept the possibility of the unknowable, meditation is meaningless. Meditation gains meaning only if there is the third category of the unknowable, because meditation is a means to the unknowable.
If you, from the very beginning, deny the unknowable, you are not going to accept the possibility of meditation.
And this is the blindness of science. In other words, this is scientific superstition. Man has suffered long from religious superstitions; now he is suffering from scientific superstitions. My work is to rid man of all superstitions: scientific, religious, political. Whatever their name may be, a superstition is a superstition.
Science has no reasons, no arguments, no evidence to deny meditation, but it still goes on denying it. Its very denial is so unscientific, so laughable, so ridiculous. The scientist does not understand a very simple phenomenon; that by denying meditation, by denying the unknowable, he is denying himself. He is saying, “I am a robot”; he is saying, “There is nothing like consciousness in me.” He is saying, “I am only matter, and a by-product of matter.” The moment man becomes just a by-product of matter, then what is the harm in being cannibals? Whenever you have a chance, you can eat each other without any difficulty. Just a by-product of matter….
It is an old story, that people can’t see their own defects. It is not only applicable to people, it is also applicable to all that man has created. Religions are incapable of seeing their own defects. Strangely enough, Judaism cannot see the defect that is intrinsic to it – Buddhism can see it. Buddhism cannot see the defect on which it is based – Jainism can see it. And so the merry-go-round goes on. Everybody is capable of seeing the straw in the other’s eye, and nobody is able to see the camel in his own eye; we become immune to our own defects.
That was the fallacy of all the religions. That’s why they failed humanity; they could not help. They had immense potential, but it was not used because of their superstitions; it was all lost in the desert. They became so much involved in protecting their superstitions that they became uncreative, only protective, defensive. The same is now happening with science, the same story. Now science is very much afraid of anybody showing the defect in its basic structure.
The New Man will be free from the old religion, and will be also free from the old science. He will be simply free from any superstitious approach to life. He will have an open approach, without any prejudice. He will be available to any dimension, for any inquiry.
Religion used to say to science, “This is not possible because it is not written in the Bible.” The Bible was the prejudice in the West; how can it be possible if it is not written in the Bible? The religions were not ready to go beyond their scriptures. Again it seems that man goes round in a circle….
Science has suffered so much from the hands of the religious people. Just within this century it has been able to get out of the prison. But it seems that prison is something natural; although the scientists are out of the prison of religion, they have created their own prison, just out of old habit. Now if anything goes against their scientific researches up to now, or if anything goes against the foundations of science, without any inquiry they immediately deny it; they don’t even give an opportunity to look into the matter. It is the same stubbornness, the same adamant, prejudiced outlook which they have borrowed from religion.
Robert Bly is just a writer about science. He has no idea that science is not all – there is much more to life.
All that I want is to make man capable of remaining open and vulnerable to everything, whether it is according to his belief system or not. It may destroy his whole belief system, but if it is true, the New Man will go with truth.
There are only two possibilities: either you are ready to go with truth, or you drag truth behind yourself. That’s what has been done up to now. Religions have been trying to drag truth according to their opinion; truth has to be according to their ideology, their prejudice. Now science is doing the same stupidity. Now everything has to be according to science.
Life is neither confined to religions, nor is it confined to science. Religion was created by the man of old, science is created by modern man. But life is far bigger than the ancient man or the modern man or the future man – life will always remain bigger. And to accept the possibility of oneself always being in the wrong, makes one humble.
The New Man will be absolutely humble before truth. His devotion will not be to any prejudice – scientific or religious – his devotion will be wholeheartedly for whatever is true. He will be ready to drop all kinds of prejudices, all belief systems, all hypotheses, if he comes to feel that there is some truth which is beyond all that he has been thinking up to now. The New Man will be ready to go into the unknowable.
The unknowable is not part of the mind. The unknowable is available to your being, to your consciousness, to the hidden sources of your life.
Except meditation, nothing can help you to drink out of the living sources of life. The spring is within you. It is not in the brain, it is not in the mind, it is not in the body; it is somewhere far deeper, beyond time and beyond space. To me, meditation is the only possibility to destroy all superstitions and to make man free to seek and search without any preconceived ideology.
The New Man will use science for survival; more than that is not the purpose of science. It can give you better bread, better technology, better machines, better medicines. The New Man will use it as a survival measure.
The mammalian mind will be used for entertainment: for art, painting, music, dance, drama – any dimension that makes your life richer and more decorated. And the New Man will use the third layer of the mind to search hidden layers of reality, unknown spaces of reality.
But these are only three divisions of the mind. The New Man will also use the fourth; he will also use meditation to get beyond mind and to see as a pure observer and a witness the miracle of existence, the mystery which cannot be demystified. In fact the more you enter into it, the more mysterious it becomes. In other words the more you know it, the less you know it. The day you know it, you don’t know it at all.

Osho,
I feel like I am buried alive under my fear. I've always been so desperately trying to be someone special to hide this fear, running further and further away from myself, until I don't know any more what it means to be real. Why do I still feel such a need to hide behind masks which I know only bring me pain and emptiness, never allowing me to love or feel loved by anyone? Why am I so afraid? Even here at your feet, surrounded by those who want to love and help me, I am still hiding. Please strip me naked, tear me apart.
The fear you are suffering from is rooted in every being. It is bound to be so, because every day we know someone dies and we know that we are standing in the same queue. And whenever someone dies we are moving in the queue, closer to death. Soon we will be at the window to take a ticket to get out of existence.
The poet is right when he says, “Don’t send anybody to ask for whom the bell tolls, it tolls for thee.” When someone dies, there is an old tradition: in the churches the bells start tolling to inform the whole village, “Someone is dead – come back from your farms, your gardens, your orchards.” It is a call to people that somebody has died and he has to be given the last send-off. But the poet is perfectly right, “Don’t send anyone to ask for whom the bell tolls, it always tolls for thee.” Whenever someone dies you are reminded again that you are a mortal being, that death can take possession of you any moment.
This is the root fear; all other fears are reflections of it. If you go deep down into any fear, you will find the fear of death.
You are asking, “I feel like I am buried alive under my fear.” Everybody is in the same situation. You are fortunate that you have become aware of it, because if you are aware, you can come out. And if you are unaware then there is no possibility of coming out.
You say, “I have always been so desperately trying to be someone special to hide this fear, running further and further away from myself until I don’t know any more what it means to be real.”
Do you think the people who are special are doing something else? The presidents and the prime ministers and the kings and the queens – do you think they are in a different boat? Just look around and you will find them all in the same boat. They are all trying to be special in the hope that perhaps if they are special, life will treat them differently than it treats ordinary people. Obviously it cannot treat a president of a country the same way it treats a shoemaker.
But they are absolutely wrong. Life makes no discriminations… presidents or shoemakers, toilet cleaners or prime ministers, it does not matter at all as far as life is concerned. Death knocks them off with equality. Death is the only communist in the world; it does not care whether you have money or you are a beggar, you are educated or uneducated.
You cannot say, “Just wait, I am qualified enough. You cannot behave the way you behave with uneducated people. Just wait a little…I am a police commissioner of Pune, you cannot behave this way. First, give me a notice and I will consider. And you have to follow a certain discipline decided by me.” Whether you are a police commissioner or just a stray dog, it makes no difference – death comes and makes everybody equal.
But the desire is that if you are special existence will treat you with some kindness, some compassion. It will think twice, “The man is a Nobel Prize winner, you should just give him a little more life. The poor fellow is a great painter, you should not blow out his candle just the way you do with everybody else.”
This is the hidden hope, unconscious hope, why everybody goes on trying to be special. But it is absolutely foolish and absurd. Just look back at what has happened to the millions of kings and millions of queens who were so powerful….
Before death everybody is absolutely powerless.
In Jaina scriptures there is a very beautiful story. In India there is a myth that if a man becomes a world conqueror he has a special name – for no ordinary king, not even an emperor. He is called a chakravartin. It means that the wheel of his chariot can move around the earth anywhere, nobody can hinder it. He is all-powerful.
The story is about one chakravartin, and because he is a chakravartin…the myth says that in heaven the chakravartins are treated in a special way.
There is a golden mountain…the Himalayas is nothing but a very small toy in comparison to the gold mountain called Sumeru. Only chakravartins have the special privilege of signing their name on the gold mountain.
And when this chakravartin died, he was so excited…to sign on the gold mountain in heaven is the greatest privilege that any human being can ever attain. But what is the use if you are alone there to see it? So he managed that his whole court – his queen, his friends, his generals – should all commit suicide immediately, the moment he dies, so that they all reach heaven simultaneously. He wanted to sign on the gold mountain as nobody else had ever done before. Signing alone, there is not even a witness – what is the joy in it? He must have been a perfect exhibitionist.
Because of his orders, all his friends, his queens, the members of his court, his generals, all committed suicide as he died and they all entered the gates of heaven together. The gatekeeper stopped them and he said, “Let the chakravartin go alone first to sign on the mountain.”
But they said, “We have committed suicide only for a simple purpose: we want our chakravartin to sign before all of us. His queens are here, his generals are here, his wise counselors are here, his ministers are here…and we have even sacrificed our life just to see him sign. You cannot prevent us.”
But the gatekeeper said to the chakravartin, “Forgive me, I have been on this post for centuries and before that, my father, and before that, my grandfather; this post has been occupied by my forefathers since the very beginning of time. And I have heard from my elders, ‘Never allow any chakravartin to go to the mountain in front of others because he will repent it very badly later on.’ And the chakravartins all insist…. You are not the first who has brought a whole army with him; almost every chakravartin has done the same.
“So I simply want you to remember that you will repent if I allow these people. I have no problem, you can have some time to think it over. You are new, you don’t know what the experience is going to be. I have seen many chakravartins coming and going and they have all thanked me afterward and said, ‘You are very kind that you prevented everybody else and sent me alone.’”
The chakravartin thought, “What to do? because I do not know what is actually going to happen, and this man seems to be authentic and sincere and he has no reason to prevent me unnecessarily…. There is no harm if these people go and see, but I don’t know what actually is going to happen, so it is better to listen to his advice.” So he stopped everybody at the gate, he took the instruments from the gatekeeper to go and sign on the gold, and he went inside the gate toward the mountain. He could not believe…such beauty! As far as he could see there was all gold and gold – mountain peaks reaching so high that the Himalayas certainly looked like a toy.
As he came closer to find a place to sign, he was shocked because there was no space! The whole mountain was signed, because we have been here for eternity; millions and millions of chakravartins have died. He was thinking, “I am very special and there is not even a little space left on this big mountain.”
He moved around – no space anywhere. And then he came across another person, the mountain keeper. He said, “Don’t waste your time. Even if you go in search for a millennium, you will not find any empty space; all space is filled.”
So the chakravartin said, “Where am I going to sign?”
The mountain keeper said, “For centuries I have been serving here. My father has served here – from the very beginning my family has been at this job. And I have heard from my forefathers the same story, that whenever any chakravartin had come, there was no space. So the only way that has been found is: erase one of the names and sign your name, and forget all about being special. It is such a vast existence. That’s why the gatekeeper has prevented the army that you had brought; before all those people you would have lost all pride. You can just erase…I will help, I am here.”
The whole joy was gone, the whole excitement was gone, and he said to the man, “It means somebody else will come tomorrow and he will erase my name.” The mountain keeper said, “That, of course, is the case, because there is no space; to create space, that is the only way. We cannot create more mountain; all the gold in heaven has been used to create the mountain. You simply sign. Back at the gate you can go with your head high and you can brag…nobody is going to know because I am not going to tell anybody. That’s why the gatekeeper did not tell you why he was preventing your army. Just go and brag that the whole mountain was empty.”
But the chakravartin was a man of some integrity and truth. He said, “That I cannot do; neither can I erase any name. And I am not going to sign – it is absolutely stupid.” He went back and he told the gatekeeper, “I am thankful to you and I am going to tell my people why I am thankful. I am going to spread the news in the world, because many of these people have committed suicide. They will have to be born again, they cannot remain in heaven.
“I will make every effort to send the message to the world: ‘Don’t unnecessarily waste your life in conquering the world to sign on the gold mountain in heaven. There is no space. First you have to erase somebody’s name, which is ugly, and then you have to sign in that place and tomorrow somebody else will erase it. The whole exercise is one of simple stupidity.’ I am shocked, but a great realization has arisen in me: one should not ask to be special, because existence does not accept anybody as special, superior or inferior.”
Your fear is driving you toward being special but that will not change the situation. The only way the fear can be dropped is, rather than putting your energy into being special, put your whole energy into being yourself. Just find yourself, because in trying to be special you are running further and further away from yourself. That you are clearly aware of it is good: the further away you go from yourself, the further away you are from knowing the truth that you are an immortal, that there is no death.
Once you recognize your immortality, death disappears. And with death, all fears evaporate into the air. But not by becoming someone special.

In the religious instruction lesson, the teacher asked the class, “Who wants to go to heaven?” All the children put their hands up, except for little Hymie. The teacher asked him why he did not want to go to heaven. “Well,” little Hymie said, “my father keeps saying, ‘Business has gone to hell’ and I want to be where the business is! What should I do in heaven?”

You will go on running further and further away from yourself in search of something that can take away your fear, your paranoia, your death. But the further away you are, the more will be the fear, the more will be the paranoia, the more overwhelming will be the death. It is better to go inward and find your real being.
This is a simple logic, a simple arithmetic: before searching anywhere else, please search within yourself. The world is vast, you will be lost in the search…so first look within yourself; maybe what you are looking for is already there. And all the great enlightened people of the world are absolutely in agreement that it is there, without any exception.
This is the only scientific truth that has no exception – which has remained unchanged as far back as you can go. You will find it has always been declared by those who have known themselves, “We are immortal; we are deathless. Life knows no end.”
So first, go in.
Just a glimpse of your own immortality, and it is as if one has awakened from a nightmare. All the fear disappears, and instead of fear there is nothing but pure bliss, pure joy – just flowers showering eternally with the fragrance of eternity.

Osho,
Sometimes I have so much energy I really think I might burst. This energy materializes in different forms – one moment it's pure excitement and frenzied joy, the next it's total, paralyzed misery. I am so addicted to action and drama that by lunch break I'm already out cold from exhaustion. How can I direct this loopy energy phenomenon so that I can enjoy it, rather than it enjoying me?
Premdipa, once there was a man who took a ride in an airplane. Unfortunately he fell out of the plane. Fortunately he was wearing a parachute; unfortunately the parachute was not properly packed and it did not open. Fortunately there was a haystack in the field below; unfortunately there was a sharp pitchfork sticking straight out of the haystack. Fortunately the man missed the pitchfork; unfortunately he also missed the haystack!

That’s how life goes on. There is no need to be too much worried about it. Enjoy your energy. Sometimes it is fortunate, sometimes it is unfortunate – you have to accept both. If you want it to be always fortunate then you are asking too much; it is not possible in this changing world.
Everything is always going up and down. So when you are up, enjoy; when you are down, rest and wait, then soon you are going to be up. The down periods should be rest periods and the up periods should be dancing periods. And it is perfectly natural, otherwise life will become very monotonous. This tragi-comic drama – one moment it is tragedy, another moment it is comedy – makes life more juicy, more spicy. So I don’t see, Premdipa, that there is any problem.
You say, “Sometimes I have so much energy, I really think I might burst.” You only “think.” I know people who really burst and then come together again!
Unfortunately they burst, fortunately they come together again. You only think, and still you are thinking that you are in a great difficulty.
“This energy materializes in different forms.” Great!
“One moment it is pure excitement and frenzied joy, the next it is total, paralyzed misery.” Great!
“I am so addicted to action and drama that by lunch break I am already out cold from exhaustion.” Great!
“How can I direct this loopy energy phenomenon, so that I can enjoy it, rather than it enjoying me?” Just say every time it changes: “Great!” and you will be enjoying it rather than it enjoying you. It is a simple secret: whenever it changes, say “Great!”
And don’t be worried that others are hearing, because they may not know what is going on inside.
But this communion is of the mad people; they know that here are all kinds of crazy people… “This woman must be having some great things happening inside. She cannot contain her joy, she shouts loudly, ‘Great!’”
And you will start a movement. You will find others also thinking, “This is something! Why should we be left behind?” And soon you will be seeing people just walking around shouting, “Great!”
There is no need to bother about anybody. Here everybody understands everybody else – that all are mad and they enjoy each other. Nobody is going to condemn you. If anybody condemns, report it! What else am I here for?

============================================================

Osho,
Who are you? Somewhere I feel the answer will be there when I realize who am I, yet, what I get is already so much. To sit at your feet is the greatest blessing of all my lives. Suddenly, I know I am loved by existence. What a deep, deep joy to realize this. I am dancing in your garden. This is more a song of my heart than a question.
Who are you, my Beloved Master? My tears flow in awe and wonder.
The question is easy and natural, but it is impossible to answer it. “Who am I?” has been asked for thousands of years and it has helped thousands of people to discover themselves, but nobody has been able to find the answer, because one’s being is a mystery. You can ask a question about it, you can experience the mystery, but the answer is not possible, because the answer murders the mystery.
An answer is a way of demystifying. You can feel me, you can rejoice with my joy, you can be filled with my song, you can dance to abandon, but these are all making the mystery deeper; they are not answers. One day, you will understand – when you come to know yourself. Knowing is possible, but bringing it to words is impossible.
It is just not in the nature of things to formulate an answer about your innermost being. It is a secret and it is going to remain a secret. In fact, the more you enter into it, the more you are overwhelmed with wonder, not with knowledge – enchanted by its magic, by its silence, by its grandeur, almost breathlessly…you see the greatest beauty that you have ever imagined. But you cannot find any words to describe it, it defies all description; it negates all explanations.
The question is significant because the question is nothing but a quest. The question takes you closer to yourself, hoping that you will find the answer – that you will find yourself – but you don’t find the answer. In fact, you find that the question was fundamentally unanswerable.
One of the most enlightened people of this century, Raman Maharishi, had only a simple meditation…. He was uneducated; he left his home when he was seventeen. Somebody, perhaps his mother or father, had died and the shock was so much that for him, the whole world became meaningless. Rather than going to the funeral with the others, he simply escaped into the mountains. The fact – that death is going to take you over any day – made him aware, “I have to know myself before death comes.” He was just a boy, uneducated – he knew nothing of scriptures, he knew nothing of meditation techniques, but out of his innocence, he simply sat in the hills asking only one question: Who am I? He wanted to know before death came. He was not willing to die without knowing himself. Who am I? became his only concern, the ultimate concern.
At first it was only a question in the mind. Slowly, slowly, it penetrated his blood, his bones, his marrow. A moment came when it was no longer a question – his whole being became thirsty; it became a thirst, a quest. Even the question went beyond words and he was no longer asking, Who am I? His whole being was transformed into the question: Who am I? It was no longer a mental exercise; it became an existential experience.
And the day it happened, the clouds dispersed and he knew the ultimate glory of his being. He became famous all over the world. People from all over the world started coming, just to sit by his feet. He was not an orator; he had no knowledge as such. All that he could teach was simply one thing that had helped him, and that was, “Sit silently with me and just ask the question – ‘Who am I?’ Go on asking. It automatically comes to a point where words disappear but the question remains – just a feeling, a mood, an overwhelming sense of inquiry. And when it becomes so intense that you can only say that now it is a thirst of every fiber of your being, then, unpredictably, the explosion happens.”
The question disappears, but the answer is not found. The question disappears – you become the answer. First you became the question; now you become the answer. But no verbal answer is found. You don’t come to a logical conclusion that “I am A, or I am B, or I am C.” You know who you are, but your knowledge is far, far away from being reduced to language. You will sing out of sheer gratitude; you will dance out of sheer thankfulness; you will rejoice because you are blessed – when others are groping in the dark, your sky has become completely without clouds and you have come into the open.
You are tasting your being, you are seeing your being, you are hearing the music of your being, you are full of the fragrance of your being – but nothing of it is possible to express in words.
You are saying, “Who are you? Somewhere I feel the answer will be there when I realize who am I.” No, there will not be any answer anywhere. When you realize, you will also laugh at the very question. You will be there, a tremendous ecstasy will be there, but no answer.
It is not a question-answer thing. No answer can satisfy you. You can read all the books of religion and philosophy and theology; you can read all the answers that people have been formulating, but nothing is going to satisfy you. Just as the word water is not going to quench your thirst…and if you are very scientific you can change the word water into H2O, but that is not going to help you either. You need real water. And once your thirst is quenched, you cannot express the experience of deep satisfaction. You can just say, “Now there is no longer any thirst!”
That’s what the ultimate experience of oneself comes to: you can say, “Now there is no question at all. All the questions have disappeared – only I am, a light unto itself, a luminosity, a mystery, a wonder, but without any possibility of communicating it to anybody else.” Hence, the whole emphasis in the East has been to have a deep, intimate contact with the man who has come to know himself. He cannot communicate it, but his very being is vibrating and if you come close enough in your love, in your openness, you may be infected by him. He cannot answer, but he can help you catch it.
It is not only that you get diseases by infection; you can get health also by infection, by being with a healthy person. You can also get your enlightenment as infection from being with an enlightened man. And this being with the enlightened man is the whole art of disciplehood. Remaining open and available, waiting for the right moment…neither do you know the right moment nor does the master, but the right moment comes.
When you are utterly silent and your ego is absolutely absent, the two flames of the master and the disciple become one. Then they dance hand in hand, then their eyes see into each other – the same source of life, the same mystery, the same spring, eternal spring; the same flowers, the same mysteries.
This is called communion. You can get the feel of who you are, in communion with someone who has already reached there.
The authentic master does not pretend to be superior to you; all that he can say is, “I am a little ahead of you.” Just a little time gap…which does not make the disciple inferior. You started late; you will reach a little later, but in the eternity of existence nothing is late. It does not matter when you reach. What matters is that you are on the right track. Then the final illumination is going to happen. And if you have seen a man who is already illuminated, he has given you the evidence of your own future. He has proved everything that you need. This creates a trust.
And remember, I make a great difference between belief, faith and trust. Belief is not trust, it is just to repress your doubts. Faith is the whole system of all your beliefs together. In a very systematic way, logical way, all beliefs are connected together and then it becomes your faith, your religion. Trust is just the opposite. It is not to repress your doubt, it is a spontaneous uprising in you, when there is no doubt. The question of repressing doubt does not arise; you have simply come in contact and you have felt your heart beating in the same tune, in a deep synchronicity with the master.
It is a heartfelt experience; you know reality cannot be otherwise. Although you have not reached yet, you are on the right path. Your hand is in hands which are pouring their warmth and love, and making you courageous enough to take the quantum leap from the question to a no-answer experience. Your question was asking for the answer, but there is no answer as such.
Experience is the answer, you are the answer. Only your transformation of consciousness is going to quench your thirst.

One Sunday morning, a young black woman who needed forgiveness for her sins came to a Baptist church. She got up in front of the congregation and stated, “Last week I slept with a young soldier and I now ask the Lord’s forgiveness.”
“Hallelujah!” cried the congregation.
“Two days ago,” she continued, “I slept with a young sailor, but now I ask the Lord’s forgiveness.”
“Hallelujah!” cried the congregation again.
“But tonight, because I came here and done my penance, I will sleep with the Lord.”
But before the congregation could respond, an old drunk yelled out in a clear voice, “That’s right, mama, make love to them all!”

A drunkard will understand in his own way. The poor woman was saying, “I will sleep with the Lord,” meaning “I will be with the Lord and I am not going to sleep with anybody else. God will be with me.” But the drunkard has, in his drunkenness, understood that she is going to sleep with the Lord. And before the congregation could respond, the drunkard yelled out in a clear voice, “That’s right mama, make love to them all!” Why bother about one Lord? He does not understand that by “Lord” she means God. He is thinking of all the landlords, or perhaps the story happened in England where there are so many Lords – make love to them all!
In communication through words, what is said is not necessarily understood. You are free to understand according to your prejudice, according to your state of mind, according to your consciousness. Hence, realities that go beyond mind cannot be expressed. First they become distorted when you pull them into words; then they become distorted when somebody hears them who has no experience of them.
The man of understanding knows that this is a crime against truth: to distort it first, and then let it be distorted by those who are utterly drunk – some with money, some with power, some with knowledge, some with something else. But these are all ways of becoming unconscious, and in unconsciousness what you hear is not what is being said to you.
When you are conscious and silent and able to understand, then there is no need to utter even a single word.
Two mystics in India had a meeting for two days. The disciples of both were immensely interested to hear them speak with each other, they wanted to know how two enlightened men communicate. One was a Mohammedan Sufi mystic, Farid; the other was Kabir, one of the greatest mystics India has known. They hugged each other, they laughed with each other; they wept in joy, in ecstasy, with tears in their eyes, but they did not speak a single word for two days.
The departure time came and the disciples of both were really freaking out. Two days of concentrated waiting and they did not utter a single word! But they remained controlled as the mystics departed and Kabir came to lead Farid up to the boundary of his village. Again they hugged, again they laughed, again they cried, but those tears were of immense ecstasy. As they left each other the disciples of both erupted, almost enraged.
They asked Kabir, “What happened to you? You go on talking to us – it is not that you are silent – why did you remain silent for two days?” And the same question was posed to Farid by his disciples: “What kind of insanity is this? Hugging, laughing, crying, weeping, but not speaking a single word – and we were waiting with such great expectation and hope, that something would transpire between you which may help us.”
The answer of both the mystics was almost the same. Kabir said, “You don’t understand. The moment I saw him, within my heart I said, ‘My God, he has reached where I have reached. There is nothing to say – he knows it all – but we can rejoice in each other’s illumination.’ And that we did.”
And Farid said to his disciples, “You don’t understand. Whoever would have spoken a single word would have proved that he knows nothing. The moment I saw Kabir, I said within my heart, ‘My God, I used to think I was the only one around here. This man has reached long before – so beautiful, so luminous, so mysterious, such a miracle.’ All that I could do was rejoice with him – with laughter, with tears, with hugging…but words would have been absolutely out of place.”
There are three possibilities: the man who knows can speak to those who don’t know; the man who does not know can even speak to the man who knows; two men who do not know, can go on talking till infinity. But the fourth possibility of speaking does not exist: two men who know are bound to fall into silence. Their celebration will be of silence.
So you go on inquiring, “Who am I?” – but transform the question more into flesh and blood rather than leaving it just in words in the mind. The mind is the most superficial thing in you. Let the question become your bones, your marrow; let it beat in your heart, let it be an undercurrent whatever you are doing, awake or asleep – just a silent question mark that follows you like a shadow without making any noise.
And you can be certain – it is my promise to you – that one day suddenly, out of nowhere, you will be standing in absolute awareness, knowing the mystery which is unfathomable.
Your mystery is the mystery of everybody else; your mystery is the mystery of the whole universe.

Osho,
Occasionally, a strong feeling comes over me that exactly the situation I am in at that moment has happened before. Others tell me of experiencing the same feeling and that it has been termed, ‘deja vu.' I have always wondered what this experience was and its connection with meditation. Can you help me to understand it?
The experience termed deja vu has a reality of its own, because this is not your first time alive; you have seen many lives, many deaths. And naturally in thousands of lives it is simply impossible not to come to the same places, to meet the same faces…to see a certain tree and feel that you have seen exactly this tree before. The feeling is absolutely certain, without any doubt, you are not imagining it: you have seen a certain person before, or you have been in a situation before, in every smallest detail.
It is a very strange feeling; one gets dizzy. But it proves that all the religions that have been born outside of India are very incomplete; they cannot explain the experience of deja vu. Unless you have the idea of reincarnation, deja vu is not explainable. You come into a town and suddenly you feel you have been here before. You know that if you go to the right you will reach the river and if you go to the left you will reach the railway station – and you try it and you find that you reach the river or you reach the railway station! You recognize the trees on the way, you recognize the river; it is as if you have seen it in a film, or perhaps in a dream.
But you have not seen it in a film; neither have you seen it in a dream. You have seen it in another life.
You are full of all the memories of all your past lives. It is just the mercy of existence that it goes on closing each chapter: the moment you die, the memories of that life become a closed chapter. One life is enough to drive you crazy. If you could remember many lives you would not find a single man who is not crazy – because the woman who is your wife was your mother in the past life, or your daughter or the woman that you are in love with was a man who murdered you in the past life, and now you are again getting into the same trap, in a different fashion. And if you remembered all your lives, things would become very complicated.
It happened:

I was reaching a place, Katni, and people brought a small girl – she must have been nine years old. And she had been insisting for a few months that she remembered her past life perfectly; she remembered that in her past life she was in a certain family in Jabalpur, where I was a teacher in the university. It was not far away, it was only a hundred miles at the most from Katni to Jabalpur, and by chance I knew the Pathak family. They had a workshop and a petrol pump just four blocks away from my house, and I had to go there almost every day for petrol for my car or for something – air for the tires. So I knew those people perfectly well.
I asked the parents of the girl, “Has she been to Jabalpur?”
They said, “No, and we want somehow that she should forget all this. It is disturbing her studies, it is disturbing our life; she insists that she wants to go to see her old family. We don’t know who these people are and how can we just impose ourselves on them, telling them that ‘This is a member of your family!’”
I said, “I know these people, and at least one thing is certain: she is describing the house perfectly right; she is describing their profession perfectly right. She is saying that she had three brothers – there are three brothers. And she says she was the eldest sister and she died as a widow, and I know this much: they had a sister, who was a widow and who died nearabout eight or nine years ago. And your daughter’s age is nine years.” I asked her, “Can you tell me the names of your brothers?” And she immediately told me the names.
So I told the family, “You come with me; you can stay with me. I will talk to the Pathak brothers and I will bring them, with ten or twelve other people, to the house. And let us see whether she recognizes them or not.”
When I told the Pathak brothers, they were immensely interested and excited. A little bit afraid also, but they were perfectly willing to go through the experiment, so they collected all their servants, a few friends, and a group of at least twenty-five people came to my house. The girl immediately ran, clutched the hand of one of the Pathak brothers, and she said, “Have you forgotten me?” And then she looked around and she caught hold of all the three brothers – “It is strange, you don’t recognize me? I am your sister, and because I became a widow when I was just thirteen years old and because our mother had died, I was almost a mother to you all. I brought you up, and you have forgotten!”
I inquired of them, “What she is saying – is it true? Has your mother died?”
They said, “We don’t remember our mother…and it is true that we were brought up by our sister. She was almost like a mother to us, and she did not marry again just for our sake, so that she could take care of us; otherwise who would take care of these children? She sacrificed her whole life.”
They all touched the feet of the small girl and they said, “We would like to take her home.” That became the problem: she became so split. One part of her wanted to remain with the old family – the attachment was deep, of many, many lives – and another part wanted to be with the new family. But there, the attachment was only for nine years; it was not that strong.
I suggested that for six months she lives with one family, and for six months she could be in the other family…but I said, “Her whole education will be disturbed, and soon she will have to be married; then she will have three families and this will drive her mad.” I suggested to the parents and the Pathak brothers that the best way would be to give her a few hypnotic sessions and to make her forget her past life.
It is just accidental; it rarely happens. By some freak of nature, some small crack has remained open and the memories of the past life go on flooding the present mind. I had to give her nine sessions, just insisting on one thing: to forget everything of the past.
She forgot everything of the past and started asking her father and mother, “What are we doing here? We should go back home.” But they asked, “What about the Pathak brothers?” She said, “Who are they?” I took her around to the Pathak brothers’ house and their workshop, but she did not give any indication that she recognized anybody.

Deja vu is a small fragment from the past, somehow entering your present. It is a reality. And these are the facts: deja vu, memories of past lives which have been confirmed many, many times, make the theory of reincarnation not just a religious theory but a scientific fact. Any day, when science is of a more open mind….
The trouble is that the whole of scientific progress is happening in the West, where one life is the accepted concept, so they are all prejudiced with the idea of one life. But the world is becoming smaller every day. Sooner or later, science will have to take note of the phenomenon, because it is so essential for human growth, for meditation, for transforming consciousness – because if you can remember your past lives, it becomes a proof that there is a future after death, too. The remembrance of past lives also proves that after death you will be here in a different form, with a different name.
Also, if it becomes a scientifically proven fact – which I have no doubt it will once science starts moving in that direction and drops the Christian or the Jewish or the Mohammedan idea of only one life…That is simply stupid, because in existence nothing dies; everything continues, only forms change. Why should it be otherwise as far as life is concerned?
If people become aware that they have lived the same kind of life thousands of times…and this was the use that the theory of reincarnation was put to – to create a great boredom and a fed-upness, because all these things you have done before. And you have not learned anything, you are again…for thousands of lives you have been running for power, for money, and you are still doing that. It seems every life’s experience is being erased and you start from abc again!
If it becomes scientifically supported, you will have great difficulty in repeating the same stupid games. You have played enough – it is time to change, it is time to raise your consciousness; it is time to go beyond this vicious circle of moving from one life into another, again and again like a wheel.
The Hindi word for the world is samsara and the word samsara means “the wheel which goes on moving.” This is what I was saying about how difficult it is to communicate. The people who gave the world the name samsara had a certain idea behind it: to remind you so that you don’t go on moving like a mechanical wheel. And when they said, “Renounce samsara,” they were not saying to renounce the world, they were saying to renounce this wheel-like movement.
But it has been misunderstood, misinterpreted, and people started renouncing the world and going to the mountains and the caves and the monasteries. And perhaps they had gone to the monasteries in their past lives also! It is part of the samsara – those monasteries, those mountains, the marketplace. Whether you live with your wife or you renounce her – these are all part of the wheel.
Renouncing the wheel is a totally different phenomenon. It means, all that you have done up to now has been done out of unconsciousness. Now it is time to be mature and start doing things out of consciousness. Act with awareness; you have acted enough under the influence of unconsciousness.
This wheel of reincarnation is due to unconsciousness. Once you become conscious, you see there is no point: you have achieved success many times, but what is the point? Death comes and erases everything. It is almost like making castles in the sand – a wind comes and the castle is gone. And you start making another castle…again and again the same thing will happen.
It is of paramount importance for science not to ignore the fact of millions of people’s experience in the East. It is not a superstition. It is one of those mysteries of life of which we remain unaware. Once science starts discovering ways…. you will find a great change in your attitude toward things and your focus will change; your focus will be how to get out of this wheel. This wheel is your slavery. And to get out of this slavery has been the only longing of seekers of truth and freedom.
Once you have realized that your being can remain in the universe without any body, any form – it can be formless and still there, spread all over existence – all your efforts will be how to attain that great freedom. In the East we have called the ultimate experience of such people moksha, which means absolute freedom. Freedom from the body, freedom from the mind, freedom from any kind of chains around you, freedom from form – just a pure consciousness. Still it has an individuality, an invisible center which knows, “I am.” In fact, “for the first time I am in my true essence.”
Deja vu is an authentic experience, but it is only a fragment of a far greater phenomenon – reincarnation.

Little Hymie was taken to a seance by his mother. The medium asked him whom he would like to speak to. “My granddad,” said little Hymie. The medium went straight into a trance and soon a spooky voice could be heard in the darkened room: “Hello, Hymie,” the voice said, “this is your granddad speaking. What is it you wish to ask me?”
“What are you doing in heaven?” asked little Hymie. “You are not even dead yet!”

The poor boy is asking a truth – “Here everybody is thinking you are dead, and you are not dead yet. What are you doing?” But nobody ever dies. Death is the greatest fallacy that man has created. It does not exist, it only appears so.

After Paddy had jumped a red light and smashed into another car, he dashed over to the other vehicle to discover that the driver was a priest. “Good God, man,” said the badly shaken priest, “you almost killed me!”
“I am really sorry for that,” said Paddy, taking a bottle from his pocket. “Drink some of this whiskey for your nerves,” offered Paddy.
The grateful priest gulped down some of the whiskey, and then started shouting again, “What do you think you were doing?” he asked. “I am lucky to be alive!”
“Oh, Father,” said, Paddy, “I am sorry. You will feel a lot better after you have drunk some more of this.”
The priest had a few more stiff shots and then asked, “Why don’t you have a drink?”
“I don’t drink, thank you Father,” said Paddy. “I will just sit here and wait for the police.”

That is the difference between a man of awareness and unconsciousness. Now he is in a good position: the police are going to catch the priest for being drunk and driving!
Either you can exist as an unconscious being – you have existed that way from the very beginning – or you can exist as a conscious being. As a conscious being, all your actions are bound to change. Your life will have a different aroma. Your actions will have different goals. And everything put together, you will have only one dimension: how to get free from unconscious actions, unconscious imprisonment; how to be absolutely conscious and move out of all chains.
Meditation will be nothing then but a methodology to prepare the ground for you to jump from unconsciousness into consciousness. And that is the greatest quantum leap.
Buddha is not dead; neither is Jesus nor Zarathustra nor Lao Tzu nor Nanak. Anybody who has lived with full consciousness goes on living without any form. Because there is no form, there is no disease; because there is no form, there is no death; because there is no form, there is no old age. A consciousness without form is simply always fresh, young, free, and the whole universe is available to it. Its empire is great.
Once Gautam Buddha was asked, “You say again and again that if you become absolutely conscious you will not be born again into the body and your empire will be the whole existence. But what about the many people who become enlightened, have already become enlightened? How can I alone be the master of the whole empire?”
The question seems to be logical, but it is not existential. And Gautam Buddha laughed – he has laughed very rarely; not more than three or four times in his whole life. He said, “I can understand your logic but I will tell you one thing…I will give you an example, not a counter-argument. In a dark house you can burn one candle, and the whole house will be full of light. You can burn another candle – do you think the light of two candles is going to be in conflict? The second candle will also fill the whole house with its light. You can burn a third candle; you can go on burning candles after candles.
“They will remain individual in their flames, but as far as their radiated light is concerned, they will all possess the whole room. There will be no division. It is not that this is my territory and that is your territory. And the light is not a thing, so a thousand candles can have their light filling the whole house without any conflict.”
He was right. There is no way to counter-argue, but his example is perfect. That’s exactly the situation:
Once you are free of form, you will be spread all over the universe. Millions of other enlightened people are filling the whole universe with their light, with their consciousness; at their center they will have a flame of their own. But their radiation will have no boundaries.
The lights don’t conflict, they are not things. The same space can be occupied by many lights, without any struggle, without any quarrel. And consciousness is a light.